
1. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 30;6:23771. doi: 10.1038/srep23771.

Intracellular osteopontin stabilizes TRAF3 to positively regulate innate
antiviral response.

Zhao K(1), Zhang M(2), Zhang L(1), Wang P(1), Song G(1), Liu B(1), Wu H(1), Yin
Z(3), Gao C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology &Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity of Shandong
Province, Shandong University the School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250012,
China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, 
Chinese Ministry of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Qilu Hospital,
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, China. (3)Biomedical Translational 
Research Institute, Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

Osteopontin (OPN) is a multifunctional protein involved in both innate immunity
and adaptive immunity. However, the function of OPN, especially the intracellular
form OPN (iOPN) on innate antiviral immune response remains elusive. Here, we
demonstrated that iOPN is an essential positive regulator to protect the host
from virus infection. OPN deficiency or knockdown significantly attenuated
virus-induced IRF3 activation, IFN-ß production and antiviral response.
Consistently, OPN-deficient mice were more susceptible to VSV infection than WT
mice. Mechanistically, iOPN was found to interact with tumor necrosis factor
receptor (TNFR)-associated factor 3 (TRAF3) and inhibit Triad3A-mediated
K48-linked polyubiquitination and degradation of TRAF3 through the C-terminal
fragment of iOPN. Therefore, our findings delineated a new function for iOPN to
act as a positive regulator in innate antiviral immunity through stabilization of
TRAF3.

PMID: 27026194  [PubMed - in process]


2. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 29;11(3):e0152416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152416.
eCollection 2016.

Immunobiotic Bifidobacteria Strains Modulate Rotavirus Immune Response in Porcine
Intestinal Epitheliocytes via Pattern Recognition Receptor Signaling.

Ishizuka T(1), Kanmani P(1,)(2), Kobayashi H(1,)(2), Miyazaki A(3), Soma J(4),
Suda Y(5), Aso H(2,)(6), Nochi T(6,)(7), Iwabuchi N(8), Xiao JZ(8), Saito T(1),
Villena J(1,)(9), Kitazawa H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Food and Feed Immunology Group, Laboratory of Animal Products Chemistry,
Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Livestock Immunology Unit, International Education and Research Center for
Food and Agricultural Immunology (CFAI), Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. (3)Viral Diseases and Epidemiology Research
Division, National Institute of Animal Health, NARO, Tsukuba, Japan. (4)Research 
and Development Section, Institute of Animal Health, JA Zen-noh (National
Federation of Agricultural Cooperative Associations), Chiba, Japan. (5)Department
of Food, Agriculture and Environment, Miyagi University, Sendai, Japan. (6)Cell
Biology Laboratory, Graduate School of Agricultural Science, Tohoku University,
Sendai, Japan. (7)Infection Immunology Unit, International Education and Research
Center for Food Agricultural Immunology (CFAI), Graduate School of Agricultural
Science, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. (8)Food Science and Technology
Institute, Morinaga Milk Industry Co. Ltd, Zama, Kanagawa, Japan. (9)Laboratory
of Immunobiotechnology, Reference Centre for Lactobacilli (CERELA-CONICET),
Tucuman, Argentina.

In this work, we aimed to characterize the antiviral response of an originally
established porcine intestinal epithelial cell line (PIE cells) by evaluating the
molecular innate immune response to rotavirus (RVs). In addition, we aimed to
select immunomodulatory bacteria with antiviral capabilities. PIE cells were
inoculated with RVs isolated from different host species and the infective titers
and the molecular innate immune response were evaluated. In addition, the
protection against RVs infection and the modulation of immune response by
different lactic acid bacteria (LAB) strains was studied. The RVs strains OSU
(porcine) and UK (bovine) effectively infected PIE cells. Our results also showed
that RVs infection in PIE cells triggered TLR3-, RIG-I- and MDA-5-mediated immune
responses with activation of IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B, induction of IFN-ß and up-regulation
of the interferon stimulated genes MxA and RNase L. Among the LAB strains tested,
Bifidobacterium infantis MCC12 and B. breve MCC1274 significantly reduced RVs
titers in infected PIE cells. The beneficial effects of both bifidobacteria were 
associated with reduction of A20 expression, and improvements of IRF-3
activation, IFN-ß production, and MxA and RNase L expressions. These results
indicate the value of PIE cells for studying RVs molecular innate immune response
in pigs and for the selection of beneficial bacteria with antiviral capabilities.

PMID: 27023883  [PubMed - in process]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8246. [Epub ahead of print]

NF-<U+03BA>B functions as a molecular link between tumor cells and Th1/Tc1 T cells in
the tumor microenvironment to exert radiation-mediated tumor suppression.

Simon PS(1,)(2,)(3), Bardhan K(1), Chen MR(1), Paschall AV(1,)(2,)(3), Lu
C(1,)(3), Bollag RJ(2), Kong FC(4,)(2), Jin J(4,)(2), Kong FM(4,)(2), Waller
JL(5), Pollock RE(6), Liu K(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical College of Georgia, 
Augusta, GA, USA. (2)Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA.
(3)Charlie Norwood VA Medical Center, Augusta, GA, USA. (4)Radiation Oncology,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA, USA. (5)Biostatistics and Epidemiology, 
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA, USA. (6)Ohio State University Medical
Center, Columbia, OH, USA.

Radiation modulates both tumor cells and immune cells in the tumor
microenvironment to exert its anti-tumor activity; however, the molecular
connection between tumor cells and immune cells that mediates radiation-exerted
tumor suppression activity in the tumor microenvironment is largely unknown. We
report here that radiation induces rapid activation of the p65/p50 and p50/p50
NF-<U+03BA>B complexes in human soft tissue sarcoma (STS) cells. Radiation-activated
p65/p50 and p50/p50 bind to the TNFa promoter to activate its transcription in
STS cells. Radiation-induced TNFa induces tumor cell death in an autocrine
manner. A sublethal dose of Smac mimetic BV6 induces cIAP1 and cIAP2 degradation 
to increase tumor cell sensitivity to radiation-induced cell death in vitro and
to enhance radiation-mediated suppression of STS xenografts in vivo. Inhibition
of caspases, RIP1, or RIP3 blocks radiation/TNFa-induced cell death, whereas
inhibition of RIP1 blocks TNFa-induced caspase activation, suggesting that
caspases and RIP1 act sequentially to mediate the non-compensatory cell death
pathways. Furthermore, we determined in a syngeneic sarcoma mouse model that
radiation up-regulates IRF3, IFNß, and the T cell chemokines CCL2 and CCL5 in the
tumor microenvironment, which are associated with activation and increased
infiltration of Th1/Tc1 T cells in the tumor microenvironment. Moreover,
tumor-infiltrating T cells are in their active form since both the perforin and
FasL pathways are activated in irradiated tumor tissues. Consequently, combined
BV6 and radiation completely suppressed tumor growth in vivo. Therefore,
radiation-induced NF-<U+03BA>B functions as a molecular link between tumor cells and
immune cells in the tumor microenvironment for radiation-mediated tumor
suppression.

PMID: 27014915  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Mar 21;52:258-262. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.03.038.
[Epub ahead of print]

Infectious salmon anemia virus segment 7 ORF1 and segment 8 ORF2 proteins inhibit
IRF mediated activation of the Atlantic salmon IFNa1 promoter.

Li C(1), Greiner-Tollersrud L(1), Robertsen B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian College of Fishery Science, University of Tromsø, The Arctic
University of Norway, N-9037, Tromsø, Norway. (2)Norwegian College of Fishery
Science, University of Tromsø, The Arctic University of Norway, N-9037, Tromsø,
Norway. Electronic address: borre.robertsen@uit.no.

Infectious salmon anemia virus (ISAV) is an orthomyxovirus, which may cause
multisystemic disease and high mortality of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L). This
suggests that ISAV encodes proteins that antagonize the type I interferon (IFN-I)
system, which is of crucial importance in innate antiviral immunity. To find out 
how ISAV might inhibit IFN-I synthesis, we have here studied whether the two ISAV
proteins s7ORF1 and s8ORF2 might interfere with activation of the IFNa1 promoter 
mediated by overexpression of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) or by the IFN 
promoter activation protein IPS-1. The IRF tested were IRF1, IRF3, IRF7A and
IRF7B. Promoter activation was measured using a luciferase reporter assay where
Atlantic salmon TO cells were co-transfected with the IFNa1 promoter reporter
plasmid together with an IRF plasmid and the s7ORF1 or the s8ORF2 construct or a 
control plasmid. The results showed that s7ORF1 significantly inhibited IRF3 and 
IRF7B induced IFN promoter activity, while s8ORF2 significantly inhibited IRF1
and IRF3 induced promoter activity. Neither s7ORF1 nor s8ORF2 inhibited IPS-1
mediated promoter activation. Immunoprecipitation data suggest that both s7ORF1
and s8ORF2 can bind to all four IRFs. Taken together, this study thus shows that 
the ISAV proteins s7ORF1 and s8ORF2 antagonizes IFN-I transcription activation
mediated by the IRFs. As such this work provides further insight into the
pathogenic properties of ISAV.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27012395  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Andrology. 2016 Mar 24. doi: 10.1111/andr.12162. [Epub ahead of print]

Nandrolone decanoate and resistance exercise training favor the occurrence of
lesions and activate the inflammatory response in the ventral prostate.

Gomes FC(1), Chuffa LG(1), Scarano WR(2), Pinheiro PF(1), Fávaro WJ(2,)(3),
Domeniconi RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biosciences, Univ Estadual Paulista
(UNESP), Botucatu, SP, Brazil. (2)Department of Morphology, Institute of
Biosciences, Univ Estadual Paulista (UNESP), Botucatu, SP, Brazil. (3)Department 
of Structural and Functional Biology, Institute of Biology, University of
Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP, Brazil.

Age is a key factor in the development of prostatic lesions. An increase in
reactive oxygen species levels occurs during aging. Furthermore, the
indiscriminate use of anabolic androgenic steroids and physical exercise alter
the availability of hormones and may promote the appearance of lesions. This
study examined whether the use of nandrolone decanoate (ND), associated or not
with resistance exercise training, affects the pathways related to the
inflammatory response in the ventral prostate of adult and aged rats.
Sprague-Dawley rats were distributed into eight experimental groups: sedentary
with ND, sedentary without ND, exercise with ND, and exercise without ND. The
animals performed resistance exercise training and received ND two times/week
(5 mg/kg, i.m.) for 8 weeks. Adult rats were killed immediately following
treatment completion, and aged rats remained untreated until reaching 300 days of
age. The adult animals that received ND and performed resistance exercise
training showed a higher occurrence of lesions with TLR4 activation. Marked IL-6 
expression occurred in the group that performed resistance exercise training. The
group exposed to ND showed overexpression of TLR2, TLR4, NOX1, Nrf2, TNF-a, and
P38MAPK. The animals that received ND and performed training showed increase
levels of NF<U+03BA>B, IRF3, IL-6, TNF-a, and NOX1. TLR2 and TLR4 showed no upregulation
in the aged animals. The groups exercise + ND showed lesions in the adult stage
and after aging, followed by molecular alterations. We concluded that nandrolone 
decanoate and resistance exercise training can promote the onset of prostatic
tumors in the adult stage, and during aging, activating pathways involved in the 
inflammatory response.

© 2016 American Society of Andrology and European Academy of Andrology.

PMID: 27011054  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 23;11(3):e0152177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152177.
eCollection 2016.

Differential Regulation of TLR Signaling on the Induction of Antiviral
Interferons in Human Intestinal Epithelial Cells Infected with Enterovirus 71.

Wang C(1,)(2), Ji L(1,)(2), Yuan X(1,)(2), Jin Y(1,)(2), Cardona CJ(3), Xing
Z(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical School, Jiangsu Provincial Key Laboratory of Medicine, and the State
Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China. 
(2)Nanjing Children's Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Veterinary Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Minnesota at Twin Cities, Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States of
America.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) causes hand-foot-and-mouth disease, which can lead to fatal
neurological complications in young children and infants. Few gastrointestinal
symptoms are observed clinically, suggesting the presence of a unique immunity to
EV71 in the gut. We reported a robust induction of interferons (IFNs) in human
intestinal epithelial cells (HT-29), which was suppressed in other types such as 
RD and HeLa cells. The underlying mechanism for the apparent difference remains
obscure. In this study we report that in EV71-infected HT-29 cells, TLR/TRIF
signaling was essential to IFN induction; viral replication increased and the
induction of IFN-a, -ß, -<U+03C9>, -<U+03BA>, and -e decreased markedly in TRIF-silenced HT-29 
cells. Importantly, TRIF was degraded by viral 3Cpro in RD cells, but resisted
cleavage, and IRF3 was activated and translocated into the nucleus in HT-29
cells. Taken together, our data suggest that IFNs were induced differentially in 
human HT-29 cells through an intact TLR/TRIF signaling, which differs from other 
cell types and may be implicated in viral pathogenesis in EV71 infection.

PMCID: PMC4805281
PMID: 27007979  [PubMed - in process]


7. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 21;6:23377. doi: 10.1038/srep23377.

Ubiquitin-like modifier FAT10 attenuates RIG-I mediated antiviral signaling by
segregating activated RIG-I from its signaling platform.

Nguyen NT(1), Now H(1), Kim WJ(1), Kim N(1), Yoo JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Pohang, Korea Hyoja-dong 31, Pohang, 790-784, Republic of Korea.

RIG-I is a key cytosolic RNA sensor that mediates innate immune defense against
RNA virus. Aberrant RIG-I activity leads to severe pathological states such as
autosomal dominant multi-system disorder, inflammatory myophathies and
dermatomyositis. Therefore, identification of regulators that ensure efficient
defense without harmful immune-pathology is particularly critical to deal with
RIG-I-associated diseases. Here, we presented the inflammatory inducible FAT10 as
a novel negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated inflammatory response. In various
cell lines, FAT10 protein is undetectable unless it is induced by
pro-inflammatory cytokines. FAT10 non-covalently associated with the 2CARD domain
of RIG-I, and inhibited viral RNA-induced IRF3 and NF-kB activation through
modulating the RIG-I protein solubility. We further demonstrated that FAT10 was
recruited to RIG-I-TRIM25 to form an inhibitory complex where FAT10 was
stabilized by E3 ligase TRIM25. As the result, FAT10 inhibited the antiviral
stress granules formation contains RIG-I and sequestered the active RIG-I away
from the mitochondria. Our study presented a novel mechanism to dampen RIG-I
activity. Highly accumulated FAT10 is observed in various cancers with
pro-inflammatory environment, therefore, our finding which uncovered the
suppressive effect of the accumulated FAT10 during virus-mediated inflammatory
response may also provide molecular clue to understand the carcinogenesis related
with infection and inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4800306
PMID: 26996158  [PubMed - in process]


8. Autophagy. 2016 Mar 16:0. [Epub ahead of print]

TRIM-Directed Selective Autophagy Regulates Immune Activation.

Kimura T(1), Jain A(2), Choi SW(1), Mandell MA(1), Johansen T(2), Deretic V(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology , University of New Mexico
Health Sciences Center , 915 Camino de Salud, NE, Albuquerque , NM 87131 USA.
(2)b Molecular Cancer Research Group, Institute of Medical Biology, University of
Tromsø - The Arctic University of Norway , 9037 Tromsø , Norway.

Selectivity of autophagy is achieved by target recognition; however, the number
of autophagy receptors identified so far is limited. In this study we demonstrate
that a subset of tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins mediate selective autophagy of 
key regulators of inflammatory signaling. MEFV/TRIM20, and TRIM21 act as
autophagic receptors recognizing their cognate targets and delivering them for
autophagic degradation. MEFV recognizes the inflammasome components NLRP3, CASP1 
and NLRP1, whereas TRIM21 recognizes specifically the activated, dimeric from of 
IRF3 inducing type I interferon gene expression. MEFV and TRIM21 have a second
activity, whereby they act not only as receptors but also recruit and organize
key components of autophagic machinery consisting of ULK1, BECN1, ATG16L1, and
mammalian homologs of Atg8, with a preference for GABARAP. MEFV capacity to
organize the autophagy apparatus is affected by common mutations causing familial
Mediterranean fever. These findings reveal a general mode of action of TRIMs as
autophagic receptor-regulators performing a highly-selective type of autophagy
(precision autophagy), with MEFV specializing in the suppression of inflamamsome 
and CASP1 activation engendering IL1B/interleukin-1ß production and implicated in
the form of cell death termed pyroptosis, whereas TRIM21 dampens type I
interferon responses.

PMID: 26983397  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Genom Data. 2016 Feb 1;7:290-2. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2016.01.020. eCollection
2016.

Transcriptional analysis of antiviral small molecule therapeutics as agonists of 
the RLR pathway.

Green RR(1), Wilkins C(1), Pattabhi S(2), Dong R(1), Loo Y(1), Gale M Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, and the Center for Innate Immunity and Immune
Disease (CIIID), University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (2)Department of
Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

The recognition of pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by pattern
recognition receptors (PRR) during viral infection initiates the induction of
antiviral signaling pathways, including activation of the Interferon Regulator
Factor 3 (IRF3). We identified small molecule compounds that activate IRF3
through MAVS, thereby inhibiting infection by viruses of the families
Flaviviridae (West Nile virus, dengue virus and hepatitis C virus), Filoviridae
(Ebola virus), Orthomyxoviridae (influenza A virus), Arenaviridae (Lassa virus)
and Paramyxoviridae (respiratory syncytial virus, Nipah virus) (1). In this
study, we tested a lead compound along with medicinal chemistry-derived analogs
to compare the gene transcriptional profiles induced by these molecules to that
of other known MAVS-dependent IRF3 agonists. Transcriptional analysis of these
small molecules revealed the induction of specific antiviral genes and identified
a novel module of host driven immune regulated genes that suppress infection of a
range of RNA viruses. Microarray data can be found in Gene Expression Omnibus
(GSE74047).

PMCID: PMC4778670
PMID: 26981429  [PubMed]


10. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Mar 12;52:248-257. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.03.011.
[Epub ahead of print]

Comparative analysis of the small RNA transcriptomes of miiuy croaker revealed
microRNA-mediated regulation of TLR signaling pathway response to Vibrio
anguillarum infection.

Xu G(1), Han J(1), Xu T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Biogenetics & Immune Evolution, College of Marine Science, 
Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan, 316022, China. (2)Laboratory of Fish
Biogenetics & Immune Evolution, College of Marine Science, Zhejiang Ocean
University, Zhoushan, 316022, China. Electronic address: tianjunxu@163.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are an abundant class of endogenous noncoding small RNAs
(sRNAs) that are partially complementary to their target messenger RNA (mRNA),
which post-transcriptionally regulate various biological processes by repressing 
mRNA translation or inducing mRNA degradation. MiRNAs have been demonstrated to
play crucial roles in the host response to infection by diverse pathogens. As an 
important bacterial pathogen, Vibrio anguillarum has been caused great economic
losses in miiuy croaker aquaculture. To identify immune-related miRNAs of miiuy
croaker in response to V. anguillarum infection, we constructed two sRNA
libraries with or without bacterial infection. High-throughput deep sequencing
and subsequent bioinformatic analysis identified 241 conserved and 137 novel
miRNA precursors in miiuy croaker based on its whole genome sequences, encoding
293 and 124 mature miRNAs, respectively. Then we compared the expression patterns
of miRNAs in the two libraries. There were significant differences in the
expression of 12 miRNAs between the infection group (IG) and control group (CG). 
Further, the expressions of six miRNAs were validated by real-time quantitative
PCR. The target gene prediction and function analysis were conducted for the 12
differential miRNAs. This analysis revealed that these miRNAs participated in the
regulation multiple immune-related signaling pathways. Transcription factors in
TLR signaling, such as AP-1, IRF5, NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3, were activated by these miRNAs
via post-transcriptionally regulating the expression of TLRs and TLR-associated
signaling proteins, inducing effective host immune response to eradicate
infectious pathogens. This is the first study of the identification and
characterization of miiuy croaker miRNAs in response to V. anguillarum infection.
The comprehensive analysis of the expression of miRNAs and the target gene and
function prediction of differently expressed miRNAs may help to understand the
regulatory mechanisms of miRNA in fish during the interaction between host and
bacterial pathogens.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26980609  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Inflamm Res. 2016 Mar 8. [Epub ahead of print]

CD200Fc reduces TLR4-mediated inflammatory responses in LPS-induced rat primary
microglial cells via inhibition of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.

Jiang L(1), Xu F(1), He W(1), Chen L(1), Zhong H(1), Wu Y(1), Zeng S(2), Li L(1),
Li M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous
Region, No. 6, Taoyuan Road, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, People's Republic of
China. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, People's Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang
Autonomous Region, No. 6, Taoyuan Road, Nanning, 530021, Guangxi, People's
Republic of China. eyezsm@163.com. (3)Department of Ophthalmology, People's
Hospital of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, No. 6, Taoyuan Road, Nanning,
530021, Guangxi, People's Republic of China. eyeminli@163.com.

OBJECTIVE: Based on recent information, CD200Fc, a CD200R1 agonist, could
attenuate the inflammatory response of microglial cells in autoimmune diseases
and neuro-degeneration. However, the exact molecular mechanisms responsible for
the anti-inflammatory activity of CD200Fc in microglial cells have not been
elucidated. In the present study, we investigated the anti-inflammatory effects
and the molecular mechanisms of CD200Fc in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated
rat primary microglial cells.
METHODS: The cell viability was measured by MTT assay. The LPS-induced cytokines 
release (IL-1ß, IL-6, TNF-a, iNOS, MCP-1, and COX-2) was monitored by ELISA or
real-time PCR, while NF-<U+03BA>B-related signals (MyD88, p-TAK1, TRIF, p-TBK1, p-IRF3, 
p-I<U+03BA>B, and NF-<U+03BA>B-P65) were assessed by real-time PCR, western blot and/or
Immunofluorescent staining.
RESULTS: CD200Fc and/or LPS exerted no significant cytotoxicity on microglial
cells. LPS reduced the CD200R1 expression in microglial cells, and this effect
was attenuated by CD200Fc. In addition, CD200Fc inhibited LPS-induced expression 
of TLR4 and its adapter molecules (MyD88 and p-TAK1, TRIF, p-TBK1, and p-IRF3),
and abolished its interactions with MyD88, TAK1, and TRIF in microglial cells.
CD200Fc also attenuated LPS-induced protein expression of p-I<U+03BA>B and NF-<U+03BA>B-P65
translocation to nucleus in microglial cells. Moreover, CD200Fc suppressed the
LPS-induced release of inflammatory mediators in microglial cells, including
IL-1ß, IL-6, TNF-a, iNOS, MCP-1, and COX-2.
CONCLUSION: These results indicated that CD200Fc displayed an anti-inflammatory
effect in LPS-induced microglial cells by blocking TLR4-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B
activation.

PMID: 26956766  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Cell Rep. 2016 Mar 15;14(10):2389-401. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.02.031. Epub
2016 Mar 3.

CARMA3 Is a Host Factor Regulating the Balance of Inflammatory and Antiviral
Responses against Viral Infection.

Jiang C(1), Zhou Z(2), Quan Y(1), Zhang S(3), Wang T(1), Zhao X(3), Morrison
C(4), Heise MT(4), He W(5), Miller MS(6), Lin X(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and
Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX 77030, USA; Cancer Biology Program, The University of Texas, Graduate School
of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Institute for Immunology,
Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing 100084, China. (4)Department of
Genetics, The University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
(5)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY 10029, USA. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of 
Health Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON L8S 4K1, Canada. (7)Department
of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Cancer Biology Program, The University of Texas, 
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Institute for
Immunology, Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing 100084, China.
Electronic address: xllin@mdanderson.org.

Host response to RNA virus infection is sensed by RNA sensors such as RIG-I,
which induces MAVS-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 activation to promote inflammatory and
antiviral responses, respectively. Here, we have found that CARMA3, a scaffold
protein previously shown to mediate NF-<U+03BA>B activation induced by GPCR and EGFR,
positively regulates MAVS-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation. However, our data suggest
that CARMA3 sequesters MAVS from forming high-molecular-weight aggregates,
thereby suppressing TBK1/IRF3 activation. Interestingly, following NF-<U+03BA>B
activation upon virus infection, CARMA3 is targeted for proteasome-dependent
degradation, which releases MAVS to activate IRF3. When challenged with vesicular
stomatitis virus or influenza A virus, CARMA3-deficient mice showed reduced
disease symptoms compared to those of wild-type mice as a result of less
inflammation and a stronger ability to clear infected virus. Altogether, our
results reveal the role of CARMA3 in regulating the balance of host antiviral and
pro-inflammatory responses against RNA virus infection.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26947079  [PubMed - in process]


13. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Mar 3;12(3):e1005489. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005489.
eCollection 2016.

PKR Transduces MDA5-Dependent Signals for Type I IFN Induction.

Pham AM(1), Santa Maria FG(1), Lahiri T(1), Friedman E(1), Marié IJ(1), Levy
DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology and Microbiology and NYU Cancer Institute, NYU School
of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.

Sensing invading pathogens early in infection is critical for establishing host
defense. Two cytosolic RIG-like RNA helicases, RIG-I and MDA5, are key to type I 
interferon (IFN) induction in response to viral infection. Mounting evidence
suggests that another viral RNA sensor, protein kinase R (PKR), may also be
critical for IFN induction during infection, although its exact contribution and 
mechanism of action are not completely understood. Using PKR-deficient cells, we 
found that PKR was required for type I IFN induction in response to infection by 
vaccinia virus lacking the PKR antagonist E3L (VV<U+0394>E3L), but not by Sendai virus
or influenza A virus lacking the IFN-antagonist NS1 (Flu<U+0394>NS1). IFN induction
required the catalytic activity of PKR, but not the phosphorylation of its
principal substrate, eIF2a, or the resulting inhibition of host translation. In
the absence of PKR, IRF3 nuclear translocation was impaired in response to MDA5
activators, VV<U+0394>E3L and encephalomyocarditis virus, but not during infection with 
a RIG-I-activating virus. Interestingly, PKR interacted with both RIG-I and MDA5;
however, PKR was only required for MDA5-mediated, but not RIG-I-mediated, IFN
production. Using an artificially activated form of PKR, we showed that PKR
activity alone was sufficient for IFN induction. This effect required MAVS and
correlated with IRF3 activation, but no longer required MDA5. Nonetheless, PKR
activation during viral infection was enhanced by MDA5, as virus-stimulated
catalytic activity was impaired in MDA5-null cells. Taken together, our data
describe a critical and non-redundant role for PKR following MDA5, but not RIG-I,
activation to mediate MAVS-dependent induction of type I IFN through a
kinase-dependent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4777437
PMID: 26939124  [PubMed - in process]


14. Cell Res. 2016 Feb 26. doi: 10.1038/cr.2016.27. [Epub ahead of print]

TRIM9 short isoform preferentially promotes DNA and RNA virus-induced production 
of type I interferon by recruiting GSK3ß to TBK1.

Qin Y(1), Liu Q(1), Tian S(1), Xie W(2), Cui J(1,)(3), Wang RF(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, State Key
Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (2)Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (3)Collaborative Innovation Center of
Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (4)Houston 
Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (5)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University,
New York, NY 10065, USA. (6)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, College of
Medicine, Texas A & M University, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Type I interferon (IFN) is an important component of antiviral innate immune
signaling mediated by viral DNA and RNA recognition by the DNA sensor cGAS and
RNA sensors RIG-I and MDA5. Activation of these DNA and RNA sensors leads to the 
recruitment of STING and MAVS, respectively, and converges on TANK-binding kinase
1 (TBK1) signaling for subsequent phosphorylation of IFN regulatory factor 3
(IRF3). However, the mechanisms that control TBK1 activation are still poorly
defined. Here, we identify tripartite motif 9 short isoform (TRIM9s) as a
positive regulator in type I IFN signaling. Upon viral infection, TRIM9s
undergoes Lys-63-linked auto-polyubiquitination and serves as a platform to
bridge GSK3ß to TBK1, leading to the activation of IRF3 signaling. Interestingly,
we found that TRIM9s selectively inhibits the production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, but enhances the expression of type I IFNs as well as IFN-stimulated
genes, in response to viral infection. Our findings reveal novel dual functions
of TRIM9s in antiviral immunity, which serve to balance pro-inflammatory response
and production of type I IFNs.Cell Research advance online publication 26
February 2016; doi:10.1038/cr.2016.27.

PMID: 26915459  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. J Virol. 2016 Feb 24. pii: JVI.02843-15. [Epub ahead of print]

The role of N-terminus-truncated NS1 proteins of influenza A virus in inhibiting 
IRF3 activation.

Kuo RL(1), Li LH(2), Lin SJ(3), Li ZH(2), Chen GW(4), Chang CK(5), Wang YR(2),
Tam EH(2), Gong YN(4), Krug RM(6), Shih SR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Emerging Viral Infections, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan Department of Biotechnology and Laboratory Science,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan Graduate Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan 
rlkuo@mail.cgu.edu.tw rkrug@austin.utexas.edu. (2)Department of Biotechnology and
Laboratory Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. 
(3)Research Center for Emerging Viral Infections, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan Department of Biotechnology and Laboratory Science,
College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan Graduate Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(4)Research Center for Emerging Viral Infections, College of Medicine, Chang Gung
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan Department of Computer Science and Information
Engineering, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, College of
Engineering, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan. (5)Graduate Institute of
Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Infectious Diseases, Institute
for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Texas 78712,
USA. (7)Research Center for Emerging Viral Infections, College of Medicine, Chang
Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan Department of Biotechnology and Laboratory
Science, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan Graduate
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan Clinical Virology Laboratory, Linkou Chang Gung Memorial
Hospital, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

The NS1 protein encoded by influenza A virus antagonizes the interferon response 
through various mechanisms, including blocking cellular mRNA maturation by
binding the cellular CPSF30 3' end processing factor, and/or suppressing
activation of IRF3. In the present study, we identified two truncated NS1
proteins that are translated from internal AUGs at positions 235 and 241 of the
NS1 open reading frame. We analyzed the cellular localization and function of the
N-truncated NS1 proteins encoded by two influenza A virus strains, Udorn/72/H3N2 
(Ud) and Puerto Rico/8/34/H1N1 (PR8). The NS1 protein of PR8, but not Ud,
inhibits activation of IRF3, whereas the NS1 protein of Ud, but not PR8, binds
CPSF30. The truncated PR8 NS1 proteins are localized in the cytoplasm, whereas
the full-length PR8 NS1 protein is localized in the nucleus. Infection of cells
with a PR8 virus expressing a NS1 protein containing mutations of the two
in-frame AUGs results in both the absence of truncated NS1 proteins and reduced
inhibition of activation of IRF3 and IFN-ß transcription. Expression of the
truncated PR8 NS1 protein by itself enhances the inhibition of the activation of 
IRF3 and IFN-ß transcription in Ud virus- infected cells. These results
demonstrate that truncated PR8 NS1 proteins contribute to the inhibition of
activation of this innate immune response. In contrast, the N-truncated NS1
proteins of the Ud strain, like the full-length NS1 protein, are localized in the
nucleus, and mutation of the two in-frame AUGs has no effect on the activation of
IRF3 and IFN-ß transcription.IMPORTANCE: Influenza A virus causes pandemics and
annual epidemics in the human population. The viral NS1 protein plays a critical 
role in suppressing type I interferon expression. In the present study, we
identified two novel truncated NS1 proteins that are translated from the second
and third in-frame AUG codons in the NS1 open reading frame. The N-terminally
truncated NS1 encoded by the H1N1 PR8 strain of influenza virus that suppresses
IRF3 activation is localized primarily in the cytoplasm. We demonstrate that this
truncated NS1 protein by itself enhances this suppression, demonstrating that
some strains of influenza A virus express truncated forms of the NS1 protein that
function in the inhibition of cytoplasmic antiviral events.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26912617  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. J Diabetes Complications. 2016 Jan 22. pii: S1056-8727(16)00016-7. doi:
10.1016/j.jdiacomp.2016.01.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Toll-like receptors 2 and 4 mediate hyperglycemia induced macrovascular aortic
endothelial cell inflammation and perturbation of the endothelial glycocalyx.

Pahwa R(1), Nallasamy P(1), Jialal I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Atherosclerosis and Metabolic Research, Department of Pathology 
and Internal, Medicine, University of California Davis Medical Center,
Sacramento, CA, United States. (2)Laboratory of Atherosclerosis and Metabolic
Research, Department of Pathology and Internal, Medicine, University of
California Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, CA, United States; Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center, Mather, CA, United States. Electronic address:
ijialal@ucdavis.edu.

OBJECTIVES: Hyperglycemia-induced inflammation is central to the vascular
complications in diabetes. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are key players in
regulating inflammatory responses. There are sparse data on the role of TLR2 and 
TLR4 in regulating human macrovascular aortic endothelial cells (HMAECs)
inflammation and glycocalyx dysfunction under hyperglycemia. We examined the role
of TLR2/4 in the above dysfunctions in HMAEC under high glucose (HG) conditions.
METHODS: HMAECs were treated with high or normal glucose and TLR-2, TLR-4, MyD88,
IRF3, TRIF, nuclear NF-<U+03BA>B p65, IL-8, IL-1ß, TNF-a, MCP-1, ICAM-1, sVCAM-1,
monocyte adhesion to HMAECs, heparan sulfate and hyaluronic acid were measured.
RESULTS: HG upregulated TLR2 and TLR4 mRNA and protein and increased both MyD88
and non-MyD88 pathways, NF-<U+03BA>B p65, inflammatory biomediators, and monocyte
adhesion to HMAECs. Heparan sulfate protein expression was reduced and hyaluronic
acid secretion was increased on HG exposure. Inhibition of TLR2 and TLR4
signaling by inhibitory peptides and knockdown of TLR-2 and TLR-4 gene expression
by siRNA attenuated HG induced inflammation, leukocyte adhesion and glycocalyx
dysfunction. An increase in ROS paralleled the increase in TLR-2/4 and
antioxidants treatment reduced TLR-2/4 expression and downstream inflammatory
biomediators.
CONCLUSION: Thus hyperglycemia induces HMAEC inflammation and glycocalyx
dysfunction through TLR-2/4 pathway activation via increased ROS.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26908090  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. PLoS Pathog. 2016 Feb 22;12(2):e1005462. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005462.
eCollection 2016.

ER Adaptor SCAP Translocates and Recruits IRF3 to Perinuclear Microsome Induced
by Cytosolic Microbial DNAs.

Chen W(1,)(2), Li S(1), Yu H(1), Liu X(1), Huang L(1), Wang Q(1), Liu H(1), Cui
Y(1), Tang Y(1), Zhang P(3), Wang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular
Cell Science, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling Network, Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Medical
Reprogramming Technology, Shenzhen Second People's Hospital, First Affiliated
Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China. (3)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Tongji University, School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

Stimulator of interferon genes (STING, also known as MITA, ERIS or MPYS) induces 
the activation of TBK1 kinase and IRF3 transcription factor, upon sensing of
microbial DNAs. How IRF3 is recruited onto the STING signalosome remains unknown.
We report here that silencing of the ER adaptor SCAP markedly impairs the
IRF3-responsive gene expression induced by STING. Scap knockdown mice are more
susceptible to HSV-1 infection. Interestingly, SCAP translocates from ER, via
Golgi, to perinuclear microsome in a STING-dependent manner. Mechanistically, the
N-terminal transmembrane domain of SCAP interacts with STING, and the C-terminal 
cytosolic domain of SCAP binds to IRF3, thus recruiting IRF3 onto STING
signalosome. Mis-localization of SCAP abolishes its antiviral function.
Collectively, this study characterizes SCAP as an essential adaptor in the STING 
signaling pathway, uncovering a critical missing link in DNAs-triggered host
antiviral responses.

PMCID: PMC4762662
PMID: 26900919  [PubMed - in process]


18. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 20. pii: gkw096. [Epub ahead of print]

A high definition look at the NF-Y regulome reveals genome-wide associations with
selected transcription factors.

Dolfini D(1), Zambelli F(2), Pedrazzoli M(1), Mantovani R(1), Pavesi G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Via
Celoria 26, 20133, Italy. (2)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi
di Milano, Milano, Via Celoria 26, 20133, Italy Istituto di Biomembrane e
Bioenergetica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Bari, Via Amendola 165/A,
70126, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi di Milano,
Milano, Via Celoria 26, 20133, Italy giulio.pavesi@unimi.it.

NF-Y is a trimeric transcription factor (TF), binding the CCAAT box element, for 
which several results suggest a pioneering role in activation of transcription.
In this work, we integrated 380 ENCODE ChIP-Seq experiments for 154 TFs and
cofactors with sequence analysis, protein-protein interactions and RNA profiling 
data, in order to identify genome-wide regulatory modules resulting from the
co-association of NF-Y with other TFs. We identified three main degrees of
co-association with NF-Y for sequence-specific TFs. In the most relevant one, we 
found TFs having a significant overlap with NF-Y in their DNA binding loci, some 
with a precise spacing of binding sites with respect to the CCAAT box, others
(FOS, Sp1/2, RFX5, IRF3, PBX3) mostly lacking their canonical binding site and
bound to arrays of well spaced CCAAT boxes. As expected, NF-Y binding also
correlates with RNA Pol II General TFs and with subunits of complexes involved in
the control of H3K4 methylations. Co-association patterns are confirmed by
protein-protein interactions, and correspond to specific functional
categorizations and expression level changes of target genes following NF-Y
inactivation. These data define genome-wide rules for the organization of
NF-Y-centered regulatory modules, supporting a model of distinct categorization
and synergy with well defined sets of TFs.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26896797  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. J Immunol. 2016 Apr 1;196(7):3117-23. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501752. Epub 2016
Feb 19.

MLN4924, a First-in-Class NEDD8-Activating Enzyme Inhibitor, Attenuates IFN-ß
Production.

Song H(1), Huai W(1), Yu Z(1), Wang W(1), Zhao J(1), Zhang L(1), Zhao W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, China. (2)Department of Immunology, Shandong University School
of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250012, China wzhao@sdu.edu.cn.

Neddylation is a posttranslational protein modification that conjugates
ubiquitin-like protein neural precursor cell-expressed developmentally
downregulated protein 8 (NEDD8) to target proteins and regulates diverse cellular
processes. MLN4924, a novel NEDD8 activating enzyme inhibitor, which has emerged 
as a promising anticancer drug, has a multifaceted function by inhibiting the
process of neddylation. However, the potential roles of MLN4924 and neddylation
in IFN-ß production remain unknown. In this study, we show that MLN4924 inhibits 
TLR3/4- and retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-induced IFN-ß expression in different 
cells, whereas NEDD8 knockdown had no effects on IFN-ß expression. The ability of
the MLN4924 to inhibit IFN-ß production was confirmed in vivo, as mice treated
with MLN4924 exhibited decreased levels of IFN-ß upon LPS or
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid stimulation. Furthermore, we show that MLN4924
inhibits IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) transcriptional activation and prevents
IRF3 binding to IFN-ß promoter. Our findings suggest that MLN4924 inhibits
TLR3/4- and retinoic acid-inducible gene-I-induced IFN-ß expression by preventing
IRF3 binding to the IFN-ß promoter, with a neddylation-independent manner.
Therefore, our results provide new insight into the mechanism of MLN4924 and may 
have significant implications for the treatment of MLN4924.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26895833  [PubMed - in process]


20. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 17;6:21888. doi: 10.1038/srep21888.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus non-structural protein 3A inhibits the interferon-ß 
signaling pathway.

Li D(1), Lei C(2), Xu Z(2), Yang F(1), Liu H(1), Zhu Z(1), Li S(2), Liu X(1), Shu
H(2), Zheng H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, National Foot and
Mouth Diseases Reference Laboratory, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou 730046, China. (2)Collaborative
Innovation Center for Viral Immunology, Medical Research Institute, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China.

Foot-and-mouth disease virus (FMDV) is the etiological agent of FMD, which
affects cloven-hoofed animals. The pathophysiology of FMDV has not been fully
understood and the evasion of host innate immune system is still unclear. Here,
the FMDV non-structural protein 3A was identified as a negative regulator of
virus-triggered IFN-ß signaling pathway. Overexpression of the FMDV 3A inhibited 
Sendai virus-triggered activation of IRF3 and the expressions of RIG-I/MDA5.
Transient transfection and co-immunoprecipitation experiments suggested that FMDV
3A interacts with RIG-I, MDA5 and VISA, which is dependent on the N-terminal 51
amino acids of 3A. Furthermore, 3A also inhibited the expressions of RIG-I, MDA5,
and VISA by disrupting their mRNA levels. These results demonstrated that 3A
inhibits the RLR-mediated IFN-ß induction and uncovered a novel mechanism by
which the FMDV 3A protein evades the host innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC4756384
PMID: 26883855  [PubMed - in process]


21. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Feb 2;7:7. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2016.00007. eCollection 2016.

Mechanisms Underlying the Anti-Inflammatory Effects of Clinacanthus nutans Lindau
Extracts: Inhibition of Cytokine Production and Toll-Like Receptor-4 Activation.

Mai CW(1), Yap KS(2), Kho MT(3), Ismail NH(4), Yusoff K(5), Shaari K(6), Chin
SY(1), Lim ES(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, International
Medical University Bukit Jalil, Malaysia. (2)Department of Life Sciences, School 
of Pharmacy, International Medical University Bukit Jalil, Malaysia. (3)School of
Postgraduate Studies and Research, International Medical University Bukit Jalil, 
Malaysia. (4)Atta-ur-Rahman Institute for Natural Products Discovery, Universiti 
Teknologi MARA Shah Alam, Malaysia. (5)Institute of Bioscience, Universiti Putra 
MalaysiaSerdang, Malaysia; Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Biotechnology
and Biomolecular Sciences, Universiti Putra MalaysiaSerdang, Malaysia.
(6)Institute of Bioscience, Universiti Putra Malaysia Serdang, Malaysia.
(7)Perdana University-Royal College of Surgeons Ireland, Perdana University
Serdang, Malaysia.

Clinacanthus nutans has had a long history of use in folk medicine in Malaysia
and Southeast Asia; mostly in the relief of inflammatory conditions. In this
study, we investigated the effects of different extracts of C. nutans upon
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced inflammation in order to identify its mechanism 
of action. Extracts of leaves and stem bark of C. nutans were prepared using
polar and non-polar solvents to produce four extracts, namely polar leaf extract 
(LP), non-polar leaf extract (LN), polar stem extract (SP), and non-polar stem
extracts (SN). The extracts were standardized by determining its total phenolic
and total flavonoid contents. Its anti-inflammatory effects were assessed on LPS 
induced nitrite release in RAW264.7 macrophages and Toll-like receptor (TLR-4)
activation in TLR-4 transfected human embryonic kidney cells (HEK-Blue(TM)-hTLR4 
cells). The levels of inflammatory cytokines (TNF-a, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-1ß, IL-6,
IL-12p40, and IL-17) in treated RAW264.7 macrophages were quantified to verify
its anti-inflammatory effects. Western blotting was used to investigate the
effect of the most potent extract (LP) on TLR-4 related inflammatory proteins
(p65, p38, ERK, JNK, IRF3) in RAW264.7 macrophages. All four extracts produced a 
significant, concentration-dependent reduction in LPS-stimulated nitric oxide,
LPS-induced TLR-4 activation in HEK-Blue(TM)-hTLR4 cells and LPS-stimulated
cytokines production in RAW264.7 macrophages. The most potent extract, LP, also
inhibited all LPS-induced TLR-4 inflammatory proteins. These results provide a
basis for understanding the mechanisms underlying the previously demonstrated
anti-inflammatory activity of C. nutans extracts.

PMCID: PMC4735445
PMID: 26869924  [PubMed]


22. Int Immunol. 2016 Feb 10. pii: dxw005. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunomodulatory drugs inhibit TLR4-induced type-1 interferon production
independently of Cereblon via suppression of the TRIF/IRF3 pathway.

Millrine D(1), Miyata H(2), Tei M(1), Dubey P(1), Nyati K(1), Nakahama T(1),
Gemechu Y(1), Ripley B(1), Kishimoto T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Regulation, IFReC Research Building, Osaka University,
3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (2)Research Institute for Microbial 
Diseases, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Immune
Regulation, IFReC Research Building, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita,
Osaka 565-0871, Japan kishimoto@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Thalidomide and its derivatives, collectively referred to as immunomodulatory
drugs (IMiDs), are effective inhibitors of inflammation and are known to inhibit 
TLR-induced TNFa production. The identification of Cereblon as the receptor for
these compounds has led to a rapid advancement in our understanding of IMiD
properties; however, there remain no studies addressing the role of Cereblon in
mediating the suppressive effect of IMiDs on TLR responses. Here, we developed
Cereblon-deficient mice using the CRISPR-Cas9 system. TLR-induced cytokine
responses were unaffected by Cereblon deficiency in vivo. Moreover, IMiD
treatment inhibited cytokine production even in the absence of Cereblon. The
IMiD-induced suppression of cytokine production therefore occurs independently of
Cereblon in mice. Further investigation revealed that IMiDs are potent inhibitors
of TLR-induced type-1 interferon production via suppression of the TRIF/IRF3
pathway. These data suggest that IMiDs may prove effective in the treatment of
disorders characterized by the ectopic production of type-1 interferon.
Significantly, these properties are mediated separately from thalidomide's
teratogenic receptor, Cereblon. Thus, certain therapeutic properties of
Thalidomide can be separated from its harmful side effects.

© The Japanese Society for Immunology. 2016. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26865412  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. J Vis Exp. 2016 Jan 24;(107). doi: 10.3791/53723.

A High Resolution Method to Monitor Phosphorylation-dependent Activation of IRF3.

Robitaille AC(1), Mariani MK(2), Fortin A(3), Grandvaux N(4).

Author information: 
(1)CRCHUM - Research center, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal,
Université de Montréal; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine,
Université de Montréal; Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal. (2)CRCHUM - 
Research center, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Université de
Montréal; Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal. (3)CRCHUM - Research
center, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Université de Montréal.
(4)CRCHUM - Research center, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal,
Université de Montréal; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine,
Université de Montréal; Faculty of Medicine, Université de Montréal;
nathalie.grandvaux@umontreal.ca.

The IRF3 transcription factor is critical for the first line of defense against
pathogens mainly through interferon ß and antiviral gene expression. A detailed
analysis of IRF3 activation is essential to understand how pathogens induce or
evade the innate antiviral response. Distinct activated forms of IRF3 can be
distinguished based on their phosphorylation and monomer vs dimer status. In vivo
discrimination between the different activated species of IRF3 can be achieved
through the separation of IRF3 phosphorylated forms based on their mobility
shifts on SDS-PAGE. Additionally, the levels of IRF3 monomer and dimer can be
monitored using non-denaturing electrophoresis. Here, we detail a procedure to
reach the highest resolution to gain the most information regarding IRF3
activation status. This is achieved through the combination of a high resolution 
SDS-PAGE and a native-PAGE coupled to immunoblots using multiple total and
phosphospecific antibodies. This experimental strategy constitutes an affordable 
and sensitive approach to acquire all the necessary information for a complete
analysis of the phosphorylation-mediated activation of IRF3.

PMID: 26862747  [PubMed - in process]


24. MBio. 2016 Feb 9;7(1). pii: e01872-15. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01872-15.

The Membrane Protein of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus Functions
as a Novel Cytosolic Pathogen-Associated Molecular Pattern To Promote Beta
Interferon Induction via a Toll-Like-Receptor-Related TRAF3-Independent
Mechanism.

Wang Y(1), Liu L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Microbiology, Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and School of Basic
Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China lliu@pumc.edu.cn.

Most of the intracellular pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) reside in either
the endolysosome or the cytoplasm to sense pathogen-derived RNAs, DNAs, or
synthetic analogs of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), such as poly(I:C). However, it 
remains elusive whether or not a pathogen-derived protein can function as a
cytosolic pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP). In this study, we
demonstrate that delivering the membrane gene of severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) into HEK293T, HEK293ET, and immobilized murine
bone marrow-derived macrophage (J2-Mf) cells significantly upregulates beta
interferon (IFN-ß) production. Both NF-<U+03BA>B and TBK1-IRF3 signaling cascades are
activated by M gene products. M protein rather than M mRNA is responsible for
M-mediated IFN-ß induction that is preferentially associated with the activation 
of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) adaptor proteins MyD88, TIRAP, and TICAM2 but not
the RIG-I signaling cascade. Blocking the secretion of M protein by brefeldin A
(BFA) failed to reverse the M-mediated IFN-ß induction. The antagonist of both
TLR2 and TLR4 did not impede M-mediated IFN-ß induction, indicating that the
driving force for the activation of IFN-ß production was generated from inside
the cells. Inhibition of TRAF3 expression by specific small interfering RNA
(siRNA) did not prevent M-mediated IFN-ß induction. SARS-CoV pseudovirus could
induce IFN-ß production in an M rather than M(V68A) dependent manner, since the
valine-to-alanine alteration at residue 68 in M protein markedly inhibited IFN-ß 
production. Overall, our study indicates for the first time that a
pathogen-derived protein is able to function as a cytosolic PAMP to stimulate
type I interferon production by activating a noncanonical TLR signaling cascade
in a TRAF3-independent manner.IMPORTANCE: Viral protein can serve as a
pathogen-associated molecular pattern (PAMP) that is usually recognized by
certain pathogen recognition receptors (PRRs) on the cell surface, such as
Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) and TLR4. In this study, we demonstrate that the
membrane (M) protein of SARS-CoV can directly promote the activation of both beta
interferon (IFN-ß) and NF-<U+03BA>B through a TLR-related signaling pathway independent 
of TRAF3. The driving force for M-mediated IFN-ß production is most likely
generated from inside the cells. M-mediated IFN-ß induction was confirmed at the 
viral infection level since a point mutation at the V68 residue of M markedly
inhibited SARS-CoV pseudovirally induced IFN-ß production. Thus, the results
indicate for the first time that SARS-CoV M protein may function as a cytosolic
PAMP to stimulate IFN-ß production by activating a TLR-related TRAF3-independent 
signaling cascade.

Copyright © 2016 Wang and Liu.

PMCID: PMC4752600
PMID: 26861016  [PubMed - in process]


25. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 10;6:20042. doi: 10.1038/srep20042.

A herbal formula comprising Rosae Multiflorae Fructus and Lonicerae Japonicae
Flos, attenuates collagen-induced arthritis and inhibits TLR4 signalling in rats.

Cheng BC(1,)(2,)(3), Yu H(1,)(2,)(3), Guo H(1,)(2,)(3), Su T(1,)(2,)(3), Fu
XQ(1,)(2,)(3), Li T(1,)(2,)(3), Cao HH(1,)(2,)(3), Tse AK(1,)(2,)(3), Wu ZZ(4),
Kwan HY(1,)(2,)(3), Yu ZL(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Consun Chinese Medicines Research Centre for Renal Diseases, Hong Kong Baptist
University, Hong Kong. (2)Centre for Cancer and Inflammation Research, School of 
Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong. (3)Institute of
Integrated Bioinfomedicine &Translational Science, HKBU Shenzhen Research
Institute and Continuing Education, Shenzhen, PRC. (4)Shenzhen Institute of
Geriatrics, Shenzhen, PRC.

RL, a traditional remedy for Rheumatoid arthritis (RA), comprises two edible
herbs, Rosae Multiflorae Fructus and Lonicerae Japonicae Flos. We have reported
that RL could inhibit the production of inflammatory mediators in immune cells.
Here we investigated the effects and the mechanism of action of RL in
collagen-induced arthritis (CIA) rats. RL significantly increased food intake and
weight gain of CIA rats without any observable adverse effect; ameliorated joint 
erythema and swelling; inhibited immune cell infiltration, bone erosion and
osteophyte formation in joints; reduced joint protein expression levels of TLR4, 
phospho-TAK1, phospho-NF-<U+03BA>B p65, phospho-c-Jun and phospho-IRF3; lowered levels
of inflammatory factors (TNF-a, IL-6, IL-1ß, IL-17A and MCP-1 in sera and TNF-a, 
IL-6, IL-1ß and IL-17A in joints); elevated serum IL-10 level; reinvigorated
activities of antioxidant SOD, CAT and GSH-Px in the liver and serum; reduced
Th17 cell proportions in splenocytes; inhibited splenocyte proliferation and
activation; and lowered serum IgG level. In conclusion, RL at nontoxic doses
inhibited TLR4 signaling and potently improved clinical conditions of CIA rats.
These findings provide further pharmacological justifications for the traditional
use of RL in RA management.

PMCID: PMC4748217
PMID: 26860973  [PubMed - in process]


26. Res Vet Sci. 2016 Feb;104:188-94. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2015.12.016. Epub 2015 Dec 
23.

Porcine circovirus type 2 induces type I interferon production via
MyD88-IKKa-IRFs signaling rather than NF-<U+03BA>B in porcine alveolar macrophages in
vitro.

Chen M(1), Han J(1), Zhang Y(1), Duan D(1), Zhang S(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Weigang 1,
Nanjing 210095, China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Weigang 1, Nanjing 210095, China. Electronic address:
shuxia@njau.edu.cn.

Type I interferon (IFN-I) plays important roles in host antiviral responses. The 
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) and NF-<U+03BA>B transcription factors are thought to
be important in the processes of viral secretion and triggering of interferon
production. Recently, studies have shown that porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2)
can induce IFN-I production in vivo and in vitro, but the mechanisms underlying
the production of PAMs infected with PCV2 remains unknown. Treatment of these
cells with BAY11-7082, an inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B activation, allowed us to study the 
secretion of IFN-a and IFN-ß in PAMs infected with PCV2. We found that IFN-a
expression was induced following virus infection of PAMs. Notably, even after
inhibitor treatment of PAMs infected with PCV2, secretion of IFN-a was
significantly higher (P<0.05) compared with the PCV2 infection alone group. Our
findings suggest that NF-<U+03BA>B plays a minor role in PCV2-induced type I interferon 
responses. To further characterize the signaling pathway that drives IFN-I
expression in PAMs in response to PCV2, we used siRNA to silence the expression
of Myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) and study the role of MyD88-IKKa-IRF
signaling in IFN-I production in PAMs induced by PCV2. Our findings show that
PCV2 induced IFN-a mRNA transcription, which is associated with the activities of
MyD88, IRF7, and IRF3. Thus, PCV2 can induce IFN-I transcription via the
MyD88-IKKa-IRF signaling axis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26850559  [PubMed - in process]


27. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2016 Feb;170:47-53. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2015.10.006. 
Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Effect of common carp (Cyprinus carpio) TLR9 overexpression on the expression of 
downstream interferon-associated immune factor mRNAs in epithelioma papulosum
cyprini cells.

Xinxian W(1), Peng J(2), Guixiang T(3), Jinjin W(2), Xiaocong Z(2), Junqiang
H(2), Xianle Y(4), Hong L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Ocean University, College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai
201306, China; Guangxi Academy of Fishery Science, Nanning 530021, China.
(2)Shenzhen Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau, Shenzhen 518045, China. 
(3)Guangxi Academy of Fishery Science, Nanning 530021, China. (4)Shanghai Ocean
University, College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai 201306, China.
Electronic address: xlyang@shou.edu.cn. (5)Shenzhen Entry-Exit Inspection and
Quarantine Bureau, Shenzhen 518045, China. Electronic address:
liuhong@szciq.gov.cn.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a class of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs)
that recognize pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and play an
important role in the antiviral response. To determine the effect of common carp 
TLR9 (CcTLR9) overexpression on the expression of down-stream interferon
associated immune factors in epithelioma papulosum cyprini (EPC) cells, may
provide useful information for the further investigation on the anti-virus effect
mediated by TLR9 in fish. In this study, we constructed an overexpression vector,
pEGFP-N1-CcTLR9, by cloning the CcTLR9 gene and inserting it into an expression
vector pEGFP-N1. Both plasmids DNA of pEGFP-N1 and pEGFP-N1-CcTLR9 were
transfected into EPC cells, and the expression of IRF3, IRF7, ISG15, Mx1, PKR and
Viperin mRNA at 0, 6, 12, 24, 48 and 72h post-transfection were determined by
real-time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR). Overexpression of the CcTLR9 gene in EPC
cells upregulates the expression of IRF3, IRF7, ISG15, Mx1, PKR, and Viperin
mRNA, and this was more significant for Viperin, ISG15, and IRF7, and least
significant for PKR. Thus, fish TLR9 activates IRF7 signaling to induce I-IFN
secretion and the subsequent upregulation of IFN-stimulated genes.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26848048  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Viral Hepat. 2016 Feb 1. doi: 10.1111/jvh.12508. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatic expression of proteasome subunit alpha type-6 is upregulated during viral
hepatitis and putatively regulates the expression of ISG15 ubiquitin-like
modifier, a proviral host gene in hepatitis C virus infection.

Broering R(1), Trippler M(1), Werner M(1), Real CI(1), Megger DA(2), Bracht T(2),
Schweinsberg V(2), Sitek B(2), Eisenacher M(2), Meyer HE(2,)(3), Baba HA(4),
Weber F(5), Hoffmann AC(6), Gerken G(1), Schlaak JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital, University
of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (2)Medizinisches Proteom-Center,
Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Bochum, Germany. (3)Leibniz Institute for Analytical
Sciences - ISAS, Dortmund, Germany. (4)Department of Pathology and
Neuropathology, University Hospital of Essen, Essen, Germany. (5)Department of
General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, University Hospital of Essen,
Essen, Germany. (6)Department of Medicine (Cancer Research), Molecular Oncology
Risk-Profile Evaluation, University Hospital of Essen, Essen, Germany.

The interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) plays an important role in the
pathogenesis of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. ISG15-regulated proteins have 
previously been identified that putatively affect this proviral interaction. The 
present observational study aimed to elucidate the relation between ISG15 and
these host factors during HCV infection. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses
were performed using liver samples of HCV-infected (n = 54) and uninfected (n =
10) or HBV-infected controls (n = 23). Primary human hepatocytes (PHH) were
treated with Toll-like receptor ligands, interferons and kinase inhibitors.
Expression of ISG15 and proteasome subunit alpha type-6 (PSMA6) was suppressed in
subgenomic HCV replicon cell lines using specific siRNAs. Comparison of hepatic
expression patterns revealed significantly increased signals for ISG15, IFIT1,
HNRNPK and PSMA6 on the protein level as well as ISG15, IFIT1 and PSMA6 on the
mRNA level in HCV-infected patients. In contrast to interferon-stimulated genes, 
PSMA6 expression occurred independent of HCV load and genotype. In PHH, the
expression of ISG15 and PSMA6 was distinctly induced by poly(I:C), depending on
IRF3 activation or PI3K/AKT signalling, respectively. Suppression of PSMA6 in HCV
replicon cells led to significant induction of ISG15 expression, thus combined
knock-down of both genes abrogated the antiviral effect induced by the separate
suppression of ISG15. These data indicate that hepatic expression of PSMA6, which
is upregulated during viral hepatitis, likely depends on TLR3 activation. PSMA6
affects the expression of immunoregulatory ISG15, a proviral factor in the
pathogenesis of HCV infection. Therefore, the proteasome might be involved in the
enigmatic interaction between ISG15 and HCV.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26833585  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 2;6:20295. doi: 10.1038/srep20295.

Bacterial Muramyl Dipeptide (MDP) Restricts Human Cytomegalovirus Replication via
an IFN-ß-Dependent Pathway.

Kapoor A(1), Fan YH(1), Arav-Boger R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Diseases, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

We recently reported that induction of NOD2 by human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
resulted in virus inhibition and upregulation of antiviral and inflammatory
cytokines. Here we investigated the effects of muramyl dipeptide (MDP), a
bacterial cell wall component that activates NOD2, on HCMV replication and
antiviral responses. HCMV infection of human foreskin fibroblasts induced NOD2,
the downstream receptor-interacting serine/threonine-protein kinase 2 (RIPK2),
resulting in phosphorylation of TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). MDP treatment following infection at low multiplicity
(MOI<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.1 PFU/cell) inhibited HCMV in a dose-dependent manner and further
induced phosphorylation of TBK1, IRF3 and expression of IFN-ß. None of these
effects of MDP were observed following infection at multiplicity of 1. In
infected NOD2 knocked-down cells MDP did not induce IFN-ß, irrespective of MOI.
Treatment with MDP before infection also inhibited HCMV, an effect augmented with
treatment duration. Treatment with an IFN-ß receptor blocking antibody or
knockdown of IFN-ß significantly attenuated the inhibitory effect of MDP on HCMV.
MDP treatment before or after infection with herpesvirus 1 did not inhibit its
replication. Summarized, NOD2 activation exerts anti-HCMV activities
predominantly via IFN-ß. Since MDP is a bacterial cell wall component, ongoing
microbial exposure may influence HCMV replication.

PMCID: PMC4735818
PMID: 26830977  [PubMed - in process]


30. Nat Immunol. 2016 Apr;17(4):369-78. doi: 10.1038/ni.3356. Epub 2016 Feb 1.

Glutamylation of the DNA sensor cGAS regulates its binding and synthase activity 
in antiviral immunity.

Xia P(1), Ye B(1), Wang S(1), Zhu X(2), Du Y(1), Xiong Z(1,)(3), Tian Y(4,)(5),
Fan Z(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity of the Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (2)Animal
Research Center, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China. (3)University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. (4)Key
Laboratory of RNA Biology, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, China. (5)Beijing Key Laboratory of Noncoding RNA, Institute of
Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) senses cytosolic DNA during viral infection and
catalyzes synthesis of the dinucleotide cGAMP, which activates the adaptor STING 
to initiate antiviral responses. Here we found that deficiency in the
carboxypeptidase CCP5 or CCP6 led to susceptibility to DNA viruses. CCP5 and CCP6
were required for activation of the transcription factor IRF3 and interferons.
Polyglutamylation of cGAS by the enzyme TTLL6 impeded its DNA-binding ability,
whereas TTLL4-mediated monoglutamylation of cGAS blocked its synthase activity.
Conversely, CCP6 removed the polyglutamylation of cGAS, whereas CCP5 hydrolyzed
the monoglutamylation of cGAS, which together led to the activation of cGAS.
Therefore, glutamylation and deglutamylation of cGAS tightly modulate immune
responses to infection with DNA viruses.

PMID: 26829768  [PubMed - in process]


31. Cell Signal. 2016 May;28(5):335-47. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2016.01.012. Epub 2016
Jan 29.

RIG-I inhibits the MAPK-dependent proliferation of BRAF mutant melanoma cells via
MKP-1.

Szabo A(1), Fekete T(2), Koncz G(3), Kumar BV(2), Pazmandi K(2), Foldvari Z(2),
Hegedus B(4), Garay T(4), Bacsi A(3), Rajnavolgyi E(3), Lanyi A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen,
Debrecen, Hungary; Sapientia Hungarian University of Transylvania, Department of 
Bioengineering, Miercurea-Ciuc, Romania. Electronic address:
szattila@med.unideb.hu. (2)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary. (3)Department of Immunology, Faculty
of Medicine, University of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary; Sapientia Hungarian
University of Transylvania, Department of Bioengineering, Miercurea-Ciuc,
Romania. (4)2nd Institute of Pathology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary;
MTA-SE Molecular Oncology Research Group, Hungarian Academy of Sciences,
Budapest, Hungary.

BACKGROUND: BRAF-mutant melanoma is characterized by aggressive metastatic
potential and therapeutic resistance. The innate immune receptor RIG-I has
emerged as a potential target in melanoma therapies but the contributing pathways
involved in anti-cancer activity are poorly characterized.
METHODS: Baseline and ATRA-induced expression of RIG-I in nine (3 wild type and 6
BRAF-mutant) melanoma cell lines was measured with Q-PCR and Western blot.
Ligand-specific stimulation of RIG-I was detected by Q-PCR and ELISA. Activation 
of the RIG-I-coupled IRF3, NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPK pathways was tested with protein array 
and Western blot. Cell proliferation and apoptosis was monitored by flow
cytometry and cell counting. Down modulation of MKP-1 expression in melanoma
cells was performed by specific siRNA.
RESULTS: Short-term ATRA pre-treatment increases the expression of RIG-I in
BRAF-mutant melanoma cells. Specific activation of RIG-I by 5'ppp-dsRNA leads to 
increased activity of the IRF3-IFNß pathway but does not influence NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling. RIG-I mediates the targeted dephosphorylation of several MAPKs (p38,
RSK1, GSK-3a/ß, HSP27) via the endogenous regulator MKP-1 resulting in decreased 
melanoma cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: RIG-I has the potential to exert anticancer activity in BRAF-mutant
melanoma via controlling IFNß production and MAPK signaling. This is the first
study showing that RIG-I activation results in MKP-1-mediated inhibition of cell 
proliferation via controlling the p38-HSP27, c-Jun and rpS6 pathways thus
identifying RIG-I and MKP-1 as novel and promising therapeutical targets.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26829212  [PubMed - in process]


32. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2016 Jan;169:54-62. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2015.12.005. 
Epub 2015 Dec 14.

The function of feline stimulator of interferon gene (STING) is evolutionarily
conserved.

Zhang X(1), Wu H(1), Liu C(1), Sun X(2), Zu S(2), Tian J(3), Qu L(4), Li S(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, P. R. China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, P. R. China; College
of Veterinary Medicine, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, P. R. China.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, P. R. China.
Electronic address: tj6049345@126.com. (4)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin, P. R. China. Electronic address: qld@hvri.ac.cn.
(5)College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510642, People's Republic of China; Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Prevention and Control for Severe Clinical Animal
Diseases, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, 510642, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: shoujunli@scau.edu.cn.

Stimulator of interferon gene (STING) mediates the induction of type I IFN
responses. In this study, feline STING was cloned. Full-length STING contains
1134bp and encodes a 377 amino acid product that shares the highest similarity
with bovine STING. STING is primarily expressed in the spleen, lungs and lymph
nodes. An examination of its cellular localization indicated that STING is
localized in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and contains two ER retention motifs,
RPR and KKNF. Overexpressing STING induced the IFN response via the IRF3, NF-<U+03BA>B
and AP-1 pathways. Moreover, the C-terminus of STING was required for the
activation of IRF3 and AP-1. Knockdown of STING impaired the IFN-ß response
triggered by poly(dA:dT), poly(I:C) or SeV. Finally, STING activated the ISRE
promoter and increased the expression of ISG15 and viperin. Collectively, our
findings indicate that STING is involved in the regulation of the IFN-ß pathway
in felines.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26827839  [PubMed - in process]


33. J Virol. 2016 Mar 28;90(8):3849-59. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02377-15. Print 2016 Apr 15.

Primary B Lymphocytes Infected with Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus Can
Be Expanded In Vitro and Are Recognized by LANA-Specific CD4+ T Cells.

Nicol SM(1), Sabbah S(2), Brulois KF(3), Jung JU(3), Bell AI(4), Hislop AD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham,
Birmingham, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Immunobiology, King's College
London, London, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California, USA. (4)Institute of Cancer and Genomic Sciences, University
of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. (5)Institute of Immunology and
Immunotherapy, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom
a.d.hislop@bham.ac.uk.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) has tropism for B lymphocytes, in 
which it establishes latency, and can also cause lymphoproliferative disorders of
these cells manifesting as primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) and multicentric
Castleman disease (MCD). T cell immunity is vital for the control of KSHV
infection and disease; however, few models of B lymphocyte infection exist to
study immune recognition of such cells. Here, we developed a model of B
lymphocyte infection with KSHV in which infected tonsillar B lymphocytes were
expanded by providing mitogenic stimuli and then challenged with KSHV-specific
CD4(+)T cells. The infected cells expressed viral proteins found in PELs, namely,
LANA and viral IRF3 (vIRF3), albeit at lower levels, with similar patterns of
gene expression for the major latency, viral interleukin 6 (vIL-6), and vIRF3
transcripts. Despite low-level expression of open reading frame 50 (ORF50),
transcripts for the immune evasion genes K3 and K5 were detected, with some
downregulation of cell surface-expressed CD86 and ICAM. The vast majority of
infected lymphocytes expressed IgM heavy chains with Ig<U+03BB> light chains,
recapitulating the features seen in infected cells in MCD. We assessed the
ability of the infected lymphocytes to be targeted by a panel of major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II-matched CD4(+)T cells and found that
LANA-specific T cells restricted to different epitopes recognized these infected 
cells. Given that at least some KSHV latent antigens are thought to be poor
targets for CD8(+)T cells, we suggest that CD4(+)T cells are potentially
important effectors for thein vivocontrol of KSHV-infected B
lymphocytes.IMPORTANCE: KSHV establishes a latent reservoir within B lymphocytes,
but few models exist to study KSHV-infected B cells other than the transformed
PEL cell lines, which have likely accrued mutations during the transformation
process. We developed a model of KSHV-infected primary B lymphocytes that
recapitulates features seen in PEL and MCD by gene expression and cell phenotype 
analysis, allowing the study of T cell recognition of these cells. Challenge of
KSHV-infected B cells with CD4(+)T cells specific for LANA, a protein expressed
in all KSHV-infected cells and malignanciesin vivo, showed that these effectors
could efficiently recognize such targets. Given that the virus expresses immune
evasion genes or uses proteins with intrinsic properties, such as LANA, that
minimize epitope recognition by CD8(+)T cells, CD4(+)T cell immunity to KSHV may 
be important for maintaining the virus-host balance.

Copyright © 2016 Nicol et al.

PMID: 26819313  [PubMed - in process]


34. J Virol. 2016 Mar 28;90(8):3902-12. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00129-16. Print 2016 Apr 15.

Suppression of Type I Interferon Production by Human T-Cell Leukemia Virus Type 1
Oncoprotein Tax through Inhibition of IRF3 Phosphorylation.

Yuen CK(1), Chan CP(2), Fung SY(2), Wang PH(2), Wong WM(1), Tang HM(2), Yuen
KS(2), Chan CP(2), Jin DY(3), Kok KH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. 
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,
Hong Kong dyjin@hku.hk khkok@hku.hk. (4)Department of Microbiology, The
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong dyjin@hku.hk khkok@hku.hk.

Infection with human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is associated with
adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) and tropical spastic paraparesis. Type I interferons 
(IFNs) are key effectors of the innate antiviral response, and IFN-a combined
with the nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor zidovudine is considered the 
standard first-line therapy for ATL. HTLV-1 oncoprotein Tax is known to suppress 
innate IFN production and response but the underlying mechanisms remain to be
fully established. In this study, we report on the suppression of type I IFN
production by HTLV-1 Tax through interaction with and inhibition of TBK1 kinase
that phosphorylates IRF3. Induced transcription of IFN-ß was severely impaired in
HTLV-1-transformed ATL cells and freshly infected T lymphocytes. The ability to
suppress IRF3 activation was ascribed to Tax. The expression of Tax alone
sufficiently repressed the induction of IFN production by RIG-I plus PACT, cGAMP 
synthase plus STING, TBK1, IKKe, IRF3, and IRF7, but not by IRF3-5D, a
dominant-active phosphomimetic mutant. This suggests that Tax perturbs IFN
production at the step of IRF3 phosphorylation. Tax mutants deficient for CREB or
NF-<U+03BA>B activation were fully competent in the suppression of IFN production.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the association of Tax with TBK1,
IKKe, STING, and IRF3.In vitrokinase assay indicated an inhibitory effect of Tax 
on TBK1-mediated phosphorylation of IRF3. Taken together, our findings suggested 
a new mechanism by which HTLV-1 oncoprotein Tax circumvents the production of
type I IFNs in infected cells. Our findings have implications in therapeutic
intervention of ATL.IMPORTANCE: Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is
the cause of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), an aggressive and fatal blood cancer,
as well as another chronic disabling disease of the spinal cord. Treatments are
unsatisfactory, and options are limited. A combination of antiviral cellular
protein alpha interferon and zidovudine, which is an inhibitor of a viral enzyme 
called reverse transcriptase, has been recommended as the standard first-line
therapy for ATL. Exactly how HTLV-1 interacts with the cellular machinery for
interferon production and action is not well understood. Our work sheds light on 
the mechanism of action for the inhibition of interferon production by an HTLV-1 
oncogenic protein called Tax. Our findings might help to improve interferon-based
anti-HTLV-1 and anti-ATL therapy.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26819312  [PubMed - in process]


35. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 23;113(8):E1034-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1516812113. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

Cytoplasmic isoforms of Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus LANA recruit and antagonize
the innate immune DNA sensor cGAS.

Zhang G(1), Chan B(2), Samarina N(1), Abere B(1), Weidner-Glunde M(1), Buch A(1),
Pich A(3), Brinkmann MM(4), Schulz TF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany;
(2)Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany;
(3)Institute of Toxicology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(4)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany;
Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany;
(5)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany;
schulz.thomas@mh-hannover.de.

The latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA) of Kaposi sarcoma herpesvirus
(KSHV) is mainly localized and functions in the nucleus of latently infected
cells, playing a pivotal role in the replication and maintenance of latent viral 
episomal DNA. In addition, N-terminally truncated cytoplasmic isoforms of LANA,
resulting from internal translation initiation, have been reported, but their
function is unknown. Using coimmunoprecipitation and MS, we found the cGMP-AMP
synthase (cGAS), an innate immune DNA sensor, to be a cellular interaction
partner of cytoplasmic LANA isoforms. By directly binding to cGAS, LANA, and
particularly, a cytoplasmic isoform, inhibit the cGAS-STING-dependent
phosphorylation of TBK1 and IRF3 and thereby antagonize the cGAS-mediated
restriction of KSHV lytic replication. We hypothesize that cytoplasmic forms of
LANA, whose expression increases during lytic replication, inhibit cGAS to
promote the reactivation of the KSHV from latency. This observation points to a
novel function of the cytoplasmic isoforms of LANA during lytic replication and
extends the function of LANA from its role during latency to the lytic
replication cycle.

PMCID: PMC4776510 [Available on 2016-08-23]
PMID: 26811480  [PubMed - in process]


36. Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Jan 25;36(7):1136-51. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00744-15.

Fas-Associated Factor 1 Negatively Regulates the Antiviral Immune Response by
Inhibiting Translocation of Interferon Regulatory Factor 3 to the Nucleus.

Song S(1), Lee JJ(1), Kim HJ(1), Lee JY(1), Chang J(1), Lee KJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans
University, Seoul, South Korea. (2)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea kjl@ewha.ac.kr.

This study is designed to examine the cellular functions of human Fas-associated 
factor 1 (FAF1) containing multiple ubiquitin-related domains. Microarray
analyses revealed that interferon-stimulated genes related to the antiviral
response are significantly increased in FAF1-knockdown HeLa cells. Silencing FAF1
enhanced the poly(I·C)- and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV)-induced production 
of type I interferons (IFNs), the target genes of interferon regulator factor 3
(IRF3). IRF3 is a key transcription factor in IFN-ß signaling responsible for the
host innate immune response. This study also found that FAF1 and IRF3 physically 
associate with IPO5/importin-ß3 and that overexpression of FAF1 reduces the
interaction between IRF3 and IPO5/importin-ß3. These findings suggest that FAF1
negatively regulates IRF3-mediated IFN-ß production and the antiviral innate
immune response by regulating nuclear translocation of IRF3. We conclude that
FAF1 plays a novel role in negatively regulating virus-induced IFN-ß production
and the antiviral response by inhibiting the translocation of active,
phosphorylated IRF3 from the cytosol to the nucleus.

Copyright © 2016 Song et al.

PMID: 26811330  [PubMed - in process]


37. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Feb 12;470(3):650-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2016.01.087. Epub 2016 Jan 18.

Activation of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt pathway by viral interferon
regulatory factor 2 of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

Kim Y(1), Cha S(1), Seo T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Dongguk University-Seoul, Goyang, 10326, South
Korea. (2)Department of Life Science, Dongguk University-Seoul, Goyang, 10326,
South Korea. Electronic address: tseo@dongguk.edu.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus encodes several genes with sequence
homology to cellular interferon regulatory factors. Among these, vIRF2 encoded by
ORF K11.1 (short form) or K11 (full-length) participates in caspase-3-mediated
inactivation of cellular IRF3 and slightly inhibits caspase-3 activity. Here, we 
have demonstrated that vIRF2 attenuates the transcriptional activity of forkhead 
box O3A protein via activation of the PI3K/Akt phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/Akt 
pathway, inhibiting FOXO3A-mediated caspase-3 cleavage. Based on the collective
findings, we suggest that vIRF2 acts as an activator in PI3K/Akt pathway.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26797279  [PubMed - in process]


38. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 22;6:19651. doi: 10.1038/srep19651.

Two Genetic Variations in the IRF8 region are associated with Behçet's disease in
Han Chinese.

Jiang Y(1), Wang H(2), Yu H(1), Li L(1), Xu D(1), Hou S(1), Kijlstra A(3), Yang
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, P R China.
(2)Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Visual
Science, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, P R
China. (3)University Eye Clinic Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Several modulatory factors in the TLR signaling pathway including IRF3, IRF7,
IRF8, TRIM20, MYD88 and NF-<U+03BA>B1 have been associated with autoimmune disease. In
this study, we investigated the association of 13 SNPs for these genes with
Behçet's disease (BD) and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome using a polymerase 
chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay.
Haplotype and linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis were performed by
Haploview4.2. IRF8 mRNA expression and cytokine production was tested by
real-time PCR and ELISA. Two SNPs near IRF8 were associated with BD (for
rs17445836 GG genotype, Pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.56<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.044; for rs11642873 AA
genotype, Pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.24<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.776). No significant association was found
for the 13 SNPs tested with VKH syndrome. Haplotype analysis of the two positive 
SNPs revealed that the AG haplotype was significantly increased in BD patients
(Pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.60<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.646). Functional studies revealed an increased mRNA
expression of IRF8 and IFN-<U+03B3> production and a decreased production of IL-10 in
rs17445836 carriers with the GG genotype. Increased expression of IRF8 as well as
IFN-<U+03B3> production and a decreased production of IL-10 were found in individuals
carrying the rs11642873/AA genotype. In conclusion, this study indicates that
IRF8 may contribute to the genetic susceptibility of BD by regulating IRF8
expression and cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC4726413
PMID: 26794091  [PubMed - in process]


39. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Mar;50:34-42. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.01.012. Epub
2016 Jan 13.

Positive Darwinian selection within interferon regulatory factor genes of
Gymnocypris przewalskii (Cyprinidae) on the Tibetan Plateau.

Tong C(1), Tian F(2), Tang Y(1), Feng C(1), Guan L(3), Zhang C(2), Zhao K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau Biota, Northwest
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China;
Laboratory of Plateau Fish Evolutionary and Functional Genomics, Northwest
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau Biota, Northwest Institute of
Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China; Laboratory
of Plateau Fish Evolutionary and Functional Genomics, Northwest Institute of
Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China.
(3)Department of Life Science and Technology, Xinxiang Medical University,
Xinxiang, 453003, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau
Biota, Northwest Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Xining, 810001, China; Laboratory of Plateau Fish Evolutionary and Functional
Genomics, Northwest Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Xining, 810001, China. Electronic address: zhaokai@nwipb.cas.cn.

Tibetan Plateau (TP) had experienced phased uplift, resulting in inhospitable
environment of low temperature, hypoxia and high ultraviolet radiation for
Tibetan wildlife. Many organisms can well adapt to TP, it is of ecological and
evolutionary interest to untangle how organisms adapt to extreme environment on
TP through evolution. Previous studies mainly focused on hypoxia and metabolism
related genes, but we know little about the evolutionary history of immune genes 
in Tibetan wildlife. In this study, we first identified 10 interferon regulatory 
factor (IRF) genes from Tibetan naked carp Gymnocypris przewalskii. Within this
gene family, IRF3, IRF5, IRF7 and IRF8 contained positive selection sites.
Evidences indicated that positive selection may lead to IRF genes functional
alternations, presumably driving genes towards adaptation to the environmental
changes. Taken together, our results suggested 4 candidate genes as interesting
targets for further experimental confirmation of their functional variations and 
contributions to high altitude adaptation in Tibet fish.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774494  [PubMed - in process]


40. Virology. 2016 Feb;489:252-68. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.12.010. Epub 2016 Jan
14.

Suppression of type I interferon production by porcine epidemic diarrhea virus
and degradation of CREB-binding protein by nsp1.

Zhang Q(1), Shi K(1), Yoo D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana
61802, IL, USA. (2)Department of Pathobiology, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana 61802, IL, USA. Electronic address: dyoo@illinois.edu.

Type I interferons (IFN-a/ß) are the major components of the innate immune
response of hosts, and in turn many viruses have evolved to modulate the host
response during infection. We found that the IFN-ß production was significantly
suppressed during PEDV infection in cells. To identify viral IFN antagonists and 
to study their suppressive function, viral coding sequences for the entire
structural and nonstructural proteins were cloned and expressed. Of 16 PEDV
nonstructural proteins (nsps), nsp1, nsp3, nsp7, nsp14, nsp15 and nsp16 were
found to inhibit the IFN-ß and IRF3 promoter activities. The sole accessory
protein ORF3, structure protein envelope (E), membrane (M), and nucleocapsid (N) 
protein were also shown to inhibit such activities. PEDV nsp1 did not interfere
the IRF3 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation but interrupted the
enhanceosome assembly of IRF3 and CREB-binding protein (CBP) by degrading CBP. A 
further study showed that the CBP degradation by nsp1 was proteasome-dependent.
Our data demonstrate that PEDV modulates the host innate immune responses by
degrading CBP and suppressing ISGs expression.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26773386  [PubMed - in process]


41. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 12;6:19049. doi: 10.1038/srep19049.

Antitumor Activity of cGAMP via Stimulation of cGAS-cGAMP-STING-IRF3 Mediated
Innate Immune Response.

Li T(1), Cheng H(2), Yuan H(2), Xu Q(2), Shu C(3), Zhang Y(1), Xu P(2), Tan J(3),
Rui Y(1), Li P(3), Tan X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, 200433, China. (2)Department of Chemistry &Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Chemical Biology for Protein Research and Institutes of Biomedical 
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, China. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843,
USA.

Immunotherapy is one of the key strategies for cancer treatment. The
cGAS-cGAMP-STING-IRF3 pathway of cytosolic DNA sensing plays a pivotal role in
antiviral defense. We report that the STING activator cGAMP possesses significant
antitumor activity in mice by triggering the STING-dependent pathway directly.
cGAMP enhances innate immune responses by inducing production of cytokines such
as interferon-ß, interferon-<U+03B3>, and stimulating dendritic cells activation, which 
induces the cross-priming of CD8(+) T cells. The antitumor mechanism of cGAMP was
verified by STING and IRF3, which were up-regulated upon cGAMP treatment.
STING-deficiency dramatically reduced the antitumor effect of cGAMP. Furthermore,
cGAMP improved the antitumor activity of 5-FU, and clearly reduced the toxicity
of 5-FU. These results demonstrated that cGAMP is a novel antitumor agent and has
potential applications in cancer immunotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4709567
PMID: 26754564  [PubMed - in process]


42. J Virol. 2015 Dec 30;90(6):3018-27. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02642-15.

Membrane Perturbation-Associated Ca2+ Signaling and Incoming Genome Sensing Are
Required for the Host Response to Low-Level Enveloped Virus Particle Entry.

Hare DN(1), Collins SE(1), Mukherjee S(2), Loo YM(3), Gale M Jr(3), Janssen
LJ(2), Mossman KL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada. (2)Firestone Institute for Respiratory Health, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Immunology, Center for
Innate Immunity and Immune Disease, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA. (4)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine,
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada Department of Biochemistry and
Biomedical Sciences, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
mossk@mcmaster.ca.

The type I interferon (IFN) response is an important aspect of innate antiviral
defense, and the transcription factor IRF3 plays an important role in its
induction. Membrane perturbation during fusion, a necessary step for enveloped
virus particle entry, appears sufficient to induce transcription of a subset of
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) in an IRF3-dependent, IFN-independent fashion. IRF3
is emerging as a central node in host cell stress responses, although it remains 
unclear how different forms of stress activate IRF3. Here, we investigated the
minimum number of Sendai virus (SeV) and human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) particles
required to activate IRF3 and trigger an antiviral response. We found that Ca(2+)
signaling associated with membrane perturbation and recognition of incoming viral
genomes by cytosolic nucleic acid receptors are required to activate IRF3 in
response to fewer than 13 particles of SeV and 84 particles of HCMV per cell.
Moreover, it appears that Ca(2+) signaling is important for activation of STING
and IRF3 following HCMV particle entry, suggesting that Ca(2+) signaling
sensitizes cells to recognize genomes within incoming virus particles. To our
knowledge, this is the first evidence that cytosolic nucleic acid sensors
recognize genomes within incoming virus particles prior to virus replication.
These studies highlight the exquisite sensitivity of the cellular response to
low-level stimuli and suggest that virus particle entry is sensed as a stress
signal.IMPORTANCE: The mechanism by which replicating viruses trigger IRF3
activation and type I IFN induction through the generation and accumulation of
viral pathogen-associated molecular patterns has been well characterized.
However, the mechanism by which enveloped virus particle entry mediates a stress 
response, leading to IRF3 activation and the IFN-independent response, remained
elusive. Here, we find that Ca(2+) signaling associated with membrane
perturbation appears to sensitize cells to recognize genomes within incoming
virus particles. To our knowledge, this is the first study to show that cytosolic
receptors recognize genomes within incoming virus particles prior to virus
replication. These findings not only highlight the sensitivity of cellular
responses to low-level virus particle stimulation, but provide important insights
into how nonreplicating virus vectors or synthetic lipid-based carriers used as
clinical delivery vehicles activate innate immune responses.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26719279  [PubMed - in process]


43. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 1;196(3):1199-208. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501045. Epub 2015
Dec 23.

Bacterial E3 Ubiquitin Ligase IpaH4.5 of Shigella flexneri Targets TBK1 To Dampen
the Host Antibacterial Response.

Zheng Z(1), Wei C(1), Guan K(1), Yuan Y(2), Zhang Y(1), Ma S(1), Cao Y(1), Wang
F(3), Zhong H(1), He X(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Biotechnology, Beijing 100850, People's Republic of China; (2)Central Laboratory 
of Binhu Hospital, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University,
Hefei 230601, People's Republic of China; and. (3)Center for Hospital Infection
Control, The 309th Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Beijing 100091, 
People's Republic of China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, 
Beijing Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing 100850, People's Republic of China;
hexiang_spring@yahoo.com.

IFN regulatory factors play a pivotal role in many cellular processes, including 
inflammatory and immune responses. Their activation is tightly regulated by
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). In response to microbial components, TBK1 activates
IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and cytokine expression. In this article, we show 
that TBK1 is a novel target of the IpaH4.5 protein, a Shigella type III effector 
possessing E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. Remarkably, IpaH4.5 interacts with TBK1 
and promotes its K48-linked polyubiquitylation. Consequently, polyubiquitylated
TBK1 undergoes proteasome-dependent degradation, which perturbs the
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and activation of IRF3. Because IRF3 and 
TBK1 are required for restricting Shigella growth, we propose that the
polyubiquitylation and degradation of TBK1 during Shigella infection are new
bacterial strategies to modulate the host antibacterial responses.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26700764  [PubMed - in process]


44. Microbiol Immunol. 2016 Feb;60(2):121-31. doi: 10.1111/1348-0421.12354.

Expression of PD-1/LAG-3 and cytokine production by CD4(+) T cells during
infection with Plasmodium parasites.

Doe HT(1), Kimura D(1), Miyakoda M(1), Kimura K(1), Akbari M(1), Yui K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki University, 1-12-4, Sakamoto,
Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

CD4(+) T cells play critical roles in protection against the blood stage of
malarial infection; however, their uncontrolled activation can be harmful to the 
host. In this study, in which rodent models of Plasmodium parasites were used,
the expression of inhibitory receptors on activated CD4(+) T cells and their
cytokine production was compared with their expression in a bacterial and another
protozoan infection. CD4(+) T cells from mice infected with P. yoelii 17XL, P
yoelii 17XNL, P. chabaudi, P. vinckei and P. berghei expressed the inhibitory
receptors, PD-1 and LAG-3, as early as 6 days after infection, whereas those from
either Listeria monocytogenes- or Leishmania major-infected mice did not. In
response to T-cell receptor stimulation, CD4(+) T cells from mice infected with
all the pathogens under study produced high concentrations of IFN-<U+03B3>. IL-2
production was reduced in mice infected with Plasmodium species, but not in those
infected with Listeria or Leishmania. In vitro blockade of the interaction
between PD-1 and its ligands resulted in increased IFN-<U+03B3> production in response
to Plasmodium antigens, implying that PD-1 expressed on activated CD4(+) T cells 
actively inhibits T cell immune responses. Studies using Myd88(-/-) , Trif(-/-)
and Irf3(-/-) mice showed that induction of these CD4(+) T cells and their
ability to produce cytokines is largely independent of TLR signaling. These
studies suggest that expression of the inhibitory receptors PD-1 and LAG-3 on
CD4(+) T cells and their reduced IL-2 production are common characteristic
features of Plasmodium infection.

© 2015 The Societies and John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd.

PMID: 26696540  [PubMed - in process]


45. Nat Immunol. 2016 Mar;17(3):241-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.3311. Epub 2015 Dec 21.

The tumor suppressor PTEN has a critical role in antiviral innate immunity.

Li S(1), Zhu M(1), Pan R(1), Fang T(1), Cao YY(1), Chen S(2), Zhao X(1), Lei
CQ(1), Guo L(1), Chen Y(1), Li CM(3), Jokitalo E(3), Yin Y(4), Shu HB(1), Guo
D(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and Modern Virology Research Center, College 
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. (2)Medical Research Institute, 
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. (3)Institute of
Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department of
Pathology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science
Center, Beijing, China.

The gene encoding PTEN is one of the most frequently mutated tumor
suppressor-encoding genes in human cancer. While PTEN's function in tumor
suppression is well established, its relationship to anti-microbial immunity
remains unknown. Here we found a pivotal role for PTEN in the induction of type I
interferon, the hallmark of antiviral innate immunity, that was independent of
the pathway of the kinases PI(3)K and Akt. PTEN controlled the import of IRF3, a 
master transcription factor responsible for IFN-ß production, into the nucleus.
We further identified a PTEN-controlled negative phosphorylation site at Ser97 of
IRF3 and found that release from this negative regulation via the phosphatase
activity of PTEN was essential for the activation of IRF3 and its import into the
nucleus. Our study identifies crosstalk between PTEN and IRF3 in tumor
suppression and innate immunity.

PMID: 26692175  [PubMed - in process]


46. Viral Immunol. 2016 Jan-Feb;29(1):49-63. doi: 10.1089/vim.2015.0076. Epub 2015
Dec 18.

Roles for Transcription Factors Sp1, NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF3, and IRF7 in Expression of the
Human IFNL4 Gene.

Chinnaswamy S(1), Bhushan A(1), Behera AK(2), Ghosh S(1), Rampurkar V(1), Chandra
V(1), Pandit B(1), Kundu TK(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 National Institute of Biomedical Genomics , Kalyani, West Bengal, India .
(2)2 Transcription and Disease Laboratory, Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit,
Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research , Bangalore, India .

The expression of a biologically active human IFN<U+03BB>4 depends on the presence of a 
frameshift deletion polymorphism within the first exon of the interferon lambda 4
(IFNL4) gene. In this report, we use the lung carcinoma-derived cell line, A549, 
which is genetically viable to express a functional IFN<U+03BB>4, to address
transcriptional requirements of the IFNL4 gene. We show that the GC-rich
DNA-binding transcription factor (TF) specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is recruited to
the IFNL4 promoter and has a role in induction of gene expression upon
stimulation with viral RNA mimic poly(I:C). By using RNAi and overexpression
strategies, we also show key roles in IFNL4 gene expression for the
virus-inducible TFs, nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B
cells (NF-<U+03BA>B), IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), and IRF7. Interestingly, we also
observe that overexpression of IFN<U+03BB>4 influences IFNL4 promoter activity, which
may further be dependent on the retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I)-like
receptor pathway. Together, our work for the first time reports on the functional
characterization of the human IFNL4 promoter.

PMID: 26684959  [PubMed - in process]


47. J Virol. 2015 Dec 16;90(5):2372-87. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02202-15.

Targeting Innate Immunity for Antiviral Therapy through Small Molecule Agonists
of the RLR Pathway.

Pattabhi S(1), Wilkins CR(2), Dong R(3), Knoll ML(2), Posakony J(4), Kaiser S(4),
Mire CE(5), Wang ML(4), Ireton RC(2), Geisbert TW(5), Bedard KM(4), Iadonato
SP(6), Loo YM(7), Gale M Jr(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA. (2)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
USA Center for Innate Immunity and Immune Disease, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA. (3)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA. (4)Kineta, Inc., Seattle, Washington, USA.
(5)University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston National
Laboratory, Galveston, Texas, USA. (6)Center for Innate Immunity and Immune
Disease, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA Kineta, Inc.,
Seattle, Washington, USA. (7)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA Center for Innate Immunity and Immune Disease,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA looy@uw.edu mgale@uw.edu.
(8)Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA 
Center for Innate Immunity and Immune Disease, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington, USA looy@uw.edu mgale@uw.edu.

The cellular response to virus infection is initiated when pathogen recognition
receptors (PRR) engage viral pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs). This
process results in induction of downstream signaling pathways that activate the
transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). IRF3 plays a critical
role in antiviral immunity to drive the expression of innate immune response
genes, including those encoding antiviral factors, type 1 interferon, and immune 
modulatory cytokines, that act in concert to restrict virus replication. Thus,
small molecule agonists that can promote IRF3 activation and induce innate immune
gene expression could serve as antivirals to induce tissue-wide innate immunity
for effective control of virus infection. We identified small molecule compounds 
that activate IRF3 to differentially induce discrete subsets of antiviral genes. 
We tested a lead compound and derivatives for the ability to suppress infections 
caused by a broad range of RNA viruses. Compound administration significantly
decreased the viral RNA load in cultured cells that were infected with viruses of
the family Flaviviridae, including West Nile virus, dengue virus, and hepatitis C
virus, as well as viruses of the families Filoviridae (Ebola virus),
Orthomyxoviridae (influenza A virus), Arenaviridae (Lassa virus), and
Paramyxoviridae (respiratory syncytial virus, Nipah virus) to suppress infectious
virus production. Knockdown studies mapped this response to the RIG-I-like
receptor pathway. This work identifies a novel class of host-directed immune
modulatory molecules that activate IRF3 to promote host antiviral responses to
broadly suppress infections caused by RNA viruses of distinct genera.IMPORTANCE: 
Incidences of emerging and reemerging RNA viruses highlight a desperate need for 
broad-spectrum antiviral agents that can effectively control infections caused by
viruses of distinct genera. We identified small molecule compounds that can
selectively activate IRF3 for the purpose of identifying drug-like molecules that
can be developed for the treatment of viral infections. Here, we report the
discovery of a hydroxyquinoline family of small molecules that can activate IRF3 
to promote cellular antiviral responses. These molecules can prophylactically or 
therapeutically control infection in cell culture by pathogenic RNA viruses,
including West Nile virus, dengue virus, hepatitis C virus, influenza A virus,
respiratory syncytial virus, Nipah virus, Lassa virus, and Ebola virus. Our study
thus identifies a class of small molecules with a novel mechanism to enhance host
immune responses for antiviral activity against a variety of RNA viruses that
pose a significant health care burden and/or that are known to cause infections
with high case fatality rates.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26676770  [PubMed - in process]


48. J Virol. 2015 Dec 9;90(4):2064-76. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02966-15.

Sensing of HIV-1 Infection in Tzm-bl Cells with Reconstituted Expression of
STING.

Trotard M(1), Tsopoulidis N(1), Tibroni N(2), Willemsen J(3), Binder M(3),
Ruggieri A(4), Fackler OT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Integrative Virology, University Hospital
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Department of Infectious Diseases,
Integrative Virology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany German 
Center for Infection Research, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg. Germany.
(3)Research Group Dynamics of Early Viral Infection and the Innate Antiviral
Response, Division Virus-Associated Carcinogenesis, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular
Virology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of
Infectious Diseases, Integrative Virology, University Hospital Heidelberg,
Heidelberg, Germany German Center for Infection Research, Heidelberg University, 
Heidelberg. Germany oliver.fackler@med.uni-heidelberg.de.

Production of proinflammatory cytokines indicative of potent recognition by the
host innate immune system has long been recognized as a hallmark of the acute
phase of HIV-1 infection. The first components of the machinery by which primary 
HIV target cells sense infection have recently been described; however, the
mechanistic dissection of innate immune recognition and viral evasion would be
facilitated by an easily accessible cell line model. Here we describe that
reconstituted expression of the innate signaling adaptor STING enhanced the
ability of the well-established HIV reporter cell line Tzm-bl to sense HIV
infection and to convert this information into nuclear translocation of IRF3 as
well as expression of cytokine mRNA. STING-dependent immune sensing of HIV-1
required virus entry and reverse transcription but not genome integration.
Particularly efficient recognition was observed for an HIV-1 variant lacking
expression of the accessory protein Vpr, suggesting a role of the viral protein
in circumventing STING-mediated immune signaling. Vpr as well as STING
significantly impacted the magnitude and breadth of the cytokine mRNA expression 
profile induced upon HIV-1 infection. However, cytoplasmic DNA sensing did not
result in detectable cytokine secretion in this cell system, and innate immune
recognition did not affect infection rates. Despite these deficits in eliciting
antiviral effector functions, these results establish Tzm-bl STING and Tzm-bl
STING IRF3.GFP cells as useful tools for studies aimed at dissecting mechanisms
and regulation of early innate immune recognition of HIV infection.IMPORTANCE:
Cell-autonomous immune recognition of HIV infection was recently established as
an important aspect by which the host immune system attempts to fend off HIV-1
infection. Mechanistic studies on host cell recognition and viral evasion are
hampered by the resistance of many primary HIV target cells to detailed
experimental manipulation. We describe here that expression of the signaling
adaptor STING renders the well-established HIV reporter cell line Tzm-bl
competent for innate recognition of HIV infection. Key characteristics reflected 
in this cell model include nuclear translocation of IRF3, expression of a broad
range of cytokine mRNAs, and an antagonistic activity of the HIV-1 protein Vpr.
These results establish Tzm-bl STING and Tzm-bl STING IRF3.GFP cells as a useful 
tool for studies of innate recognition of HIV infection.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4733976 [Available on 2016-07-28]
PMID: 26656698  [PubMed - in process]


49. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Dec 8;11(12):e1005324. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005324.
eCollection 2015.

Characterization of a Novel Human-Specific STING Agonist that Elicits Antiviral
Activity Against Emerging Alphaviruses.

Sali TM(1), Pryke KM(1), Abraham J(1), Liu A(1), Archer I(1,)(2), Broeckel
R(1,)(2), Staverosky JA(1), Smith JL(1), Al-Shammari A(1,)(3), Amsler L(1,)(2),
Sheridan K(4), Nilsen A(4), Streblow DN(1,)(2), DeFilippis VR(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health and Science University,
Portland, Oregon, United States of America. (2)Department of Molecular
Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland,
Oregon, United States of America. (3)Iraqi Centre for Cancer and Medical Genetics
Research, Baghdad, Iraq. (4)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon,
United States of America.

Pharmacologic stimulation of innate immune processes represents an attractive
strategy to achieve multiple therapeutic outcomes including inhibition of virus
replication, boosting antitumor immunity, and enhancing vaccine immunogenicity.
In light of this we sought to identify small molecules capable of activating the 
type I interferon (IFN) response by way of the transcription factor IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). A high throughput in vitro screen yielded
4-(2-chloro-6-fluorobenzyl)-N-(furan-2-ylmethyl)-3-oxo-3,4-dihydro-2H-benzo[b][1,
4]thiazine-6-carboxamide (referred to herein as G10), which was found to trigger 
IRF3/IFN-associated transcription in human fibroblasts. Further examination of
the cellular response to this molecule revealed expression of multiple
IRF3-dependent antiviral effector genes as well as type I and III IFN subtypes.
This led to the establishment of a cellular state that prevented replication of
emerging Alphavirus species including Chikungunya virus, Venezuelan Equine
Encephalitis virus, and Sindbis virus. To define cellular proteins essential to
elicitation of the antiviral activity by the compound we employed a reverse
genetics approach that utilized genome editing via CRISPR/Cas9 technology. This
allowed the identification of IRF3, the IRF3-activating adaptor molecule STING,
and the IFN-associated transcription factor STAT1 as required for observed gene
induction and antiviral effects. Biochemical analysis indicates that G10 does not
bind to STING directly, however. Thus the compound may represent the first
synthetic small molecule characterized as an indirect activator of human
STING-dependent phenotypes. In vivo stimulation of STING-dependent activity by an
unrelated small molecule in a mouse model of Chikungunya virus infection blocked 
viremia demonstrating that pharmacologic activation of this signaling pathway may
represent a feasible strategy for combating emerging Alphaviruses.

PMCID: PMC4672893
PMID: 26646986  [PubMed - in process]


50. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 3;5:17554. doi: 10.1038/srep17554.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus ORF4b protein inhibits type I
interferon production through both cytoplasmic and nuclear targets.

Yang Y(1,)(2), Ye F(1), Zhu N(1), Wang W(1), Deng Y(1), Zhao Z(3), Tan W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Virology, Ministry of Health; National Institute for
Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Beijing, 102206, China. (2)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Pathogen and
Immunity, Shenzhen Third People's Hospital, Shenzhen, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Pathogen System Biology, Ministry of Health; Institute of Pathogen Biology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100176, China.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is a novel and highly
pathogenic human coronavirus and has quickly spread to other countries in the
Middle East, Europe, North Africa and Asia since 2012. Previous studies have
shown that MERS-CoV ORF4b antagonizes the early antiviral alpha/beta interferon
(IFN-a/ß) response, which may significantly contribute to MERS-CoV pathogenesis; 
however, the underlying mechanism is poorly understood. Here, we found that ORF4b
in the cytoplasm could specifically bind to TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and I<U+03BA>B 
kinase epsilon (IKKe), suppress the molecular interaction between mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) and IKKe, and inhibit IFN regulatory factor 3 
(IRF3) phosphorylation and subsequent IFN-ß production. Further analysis showed
that ORF4b could also inhibit IRF3 and IRF7-induced production of IFN-ß, whereas 
deletion of the nuclear localization signal of ORF4b abrogated its ability to
inhibit IRF3 and IRF7-induced production of IFN-ß, but not IFN-ß production
induced by RIG-I, MDA5, MAVS, IKKe, and TBK-1, suggesting that ORF4b could
inhibit the induction of IFN-ß in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. Collectively,
these results indicate that MERS-CoV ORF4b inhibits the induction of type I IFN
through a direct interaction with IKKe/TBK1 in the cytoplasm, and also in the
nucleus with unknown mechanism. Viruses have evolved multiple strategies to evade
or thwart a host's antiviral responses. A novel human coronavirus (HCoV), Middle 
East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), is distinguished from other
coronaviruses by its high pathogenicity and mortality. However, virulence
determinants that distinguish MERS-CoV from other HCoVs have yet to be
identified. MERS-CoV ORF4b antagonizes the early antiviral response, which may
contribute to MERS-CoV pathogenesis. Here, we report the identification of the
interferon (IFN) antagonism mechanism of MERS-CoV ORF4b. MERS-CoV ORF4b inhibits 
the production of type I IFN through a direct interaction with IKKe/TBK1 in the
cytoplasm, and also in the nucleus with unknown mechanism. These findings provide
a rationale for the novel pathogenesis of MERS-CoV as well as a basis for
developing a candidate therapeutic against this virus.

PMCID: PMC4668369
PMID: 26631542  [PubMed - in process]


51. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 2016 Mar;11(2):173-81. doi: 10.1097/COH.0000000000000233.

HIV replication: a game of hide and sense.

Sauter D(1), Kirchhoff F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology, Ulm University Medical Center, Ulm, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The goal of this review is to summarize recent progress in our
understanding of innate sensing of HIV. Furthermore, we present the mechanisms
that HIV has evolved to attenuate innate immune responses and discuss open
questions.
RECENT FINDINGS: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and various cytosolic sensors induce 
an antiviral interferon response upon detection of genomic HIV RNA or
intermediates of reverse transcription. HIV limits activation of these sensing
pathways by interfering with TLR signaling and by cloaking viral nucleic acids in
the cytoplasm, before proviral dsDNA translocates into the nucleus. Furthermore, 
the viral accessory protein Vpu mitigates antiviral gene expression by inhibiting
canonical nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling. These evasion mechanisms,
however, are imperfect and HIV infection almost inevitably triggers the
activation of IRF3, NF-<U+03BA>B and other key transcription factors of antiviral
immunity. Notably, the interplay of these processes plays a critical role in the 
induction of chronic inflammation that drives progression to AIDS.
SUMMARY: HIV has evolved sophisticated but imperfect mechanisms to evade and
counteract innate sensing. Whether virus-induced immune activation represents
merely a suboptimal adaptation of HIV to its human host or even facilitates HIV
replication, for example by increasing the number of viral target cells, remains 
to be clarified.

PMID: 26628325  [PubMed - in process]


52. J Neurochem. 2015 Nov 30. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13448. [Epub ahead of print]

Attenuation of Cerebral Ischemic Injury in Interferon Regulatory Factor 3
Deficient Rat.

Li L(1,)(2), Qin JJ(1,)(2), Guo S(1,)(2), Zhang P(1,)(2), Gong J(1,)(2,)(3),
Zhang XJ(4), Zheng A(1,)(2), Xia H(1), Li H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430060, 
China. (2)Animal Experiment Center/Animal Biosafety Level-III Laboratory, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, 430060, China. (3)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, 430072, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese
Medicine, Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macao,
999078, China.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is a transcription factor that plays a
central role in the innate immune response, apoptosis and oncogenesis. Previous
studies have shown that endogenous IRF3 does not affect stroke in mice; however, 
paradoxically, elevated IRF3 expression was observed in rat brains following
cerebral ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury, indicating that IRF3 may have
different functions during stroke in rats than in mice. A clear and comprehensive
study of the effect of IRF3 on stroke in rats has been hampered by the lack of an
IRF3-knockout rat strain. In this study, a novel IRF3-knockout rat strain and a
transgenic rat strain with neuronal-specific IRF3-overexpression (IRF3-TG) were
created. Subsequently, the generated IRF3-knockout rats, the neuronal-specific
IRF3-overexpressing rats and their corresponding controls were subjected to
transient middle cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) and followed by reperfusion,
to investigate the exact role of IRF3 in cerebral I/R in rats. In contrast to the
results in mice, IRF3 deficiency in rats provided significant protection against 
cerebral I/R injury and inhibited neuronal apoptosis, inflammation and oxidative 
stress after cerebral I/R injury; the opposite patterns were observed in
neuronal-specific IRF3-overexpressing rats. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that IRF3 plays a negative regulatory role in cerebral I/R in rats,
and IRF3 may be an attractive therapeutic target for preventing stroke. This
article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26617114  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


53. J Mol Cell Biol. 2016 Feb;8(1):31-43. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjv068. Epub 2015 Nov 26.

Autoubiquitination of TRIM26 links TBK1 to NEMO in RLR-mediated innate antiviral 
immune response.

Ran Y(1), Zhang J(2), Liu LL(1), Pan ZY(1), Nie Y(1), Zhang HY(1), Wang YY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wuhan Institute of Virology, State Key Laboratory of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. (2)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, China. (3)Wuhan Institute of Virology, State Key Laboratory of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China wangyy@wh.iov.cn.

The transcription factors IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B are required for the expression of many 
genes involved in antiviral innate immune response, including type I interferons 
(IFNs) and proinflammatory cytokines. It is well established that TBK1 is an
essential kinase engaged downstream of multiple pattern-recognition receptors
(PRRs) to mediate IRF3 phosphorylation and activation, whereas the precise
mechanisms of TBK1 activation have not been fully elucidated yet. Here, we
identified tripartite motif 26 (TRIM26) as an important regulator for RNA
virus-triggered innate immune response. Knockdown of TRIM26 impaired
virus-triggered IRF3, NF-<U+03BA>B activation, IFN-ß induction, and cellular antiviral
response. TRIM26 was physically associated with TBK1 independent of viral
infection. As an E3 ligase, TRIM26 underwent autoubiquitination upon viral
infection. Ubiquitinated TRIM26 subsequently associated with NEMO, thus bridging 
TBK1-NEMO interaction, which is critical for the recruitment of TBK1 to the VISA 
signalsome and activation of TBK1. Our findings suggest that TRIM26 is an
important regulator of innate immune responses against RNA viruses, which
functions by bridging TBK1 to NEMO and mediating the activation of TBK1.

© The Author (2015). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26611359  [PubMed - in process]


54. J Physiol Biochem. 2016 Mar;72(1):9-23. doi: 10.1007/s13105-015-0452-6. Epub 2015
Nov 26.

Inhibition of IRF3 expression reduces TGF-ß1-induced proliferation of hepatic
stellate cells.

Ni MM(1,)(2), Xu T(1,)(2), Wang YR(1,)(2), He YH(1,)(2), Zhou Q(1,)(2), Huang
C(1,)(2), Meng XM(1,)(2), Li J(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China. (2)Institute for Liver Diseases
of Anhui Medical University, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Anhui Key Laboratory of Bioactivity of Natural Products,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, 230032, China. ahmulijun001@163.com.
(4)Institute for Liver Diseases of Anhui Medical University, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, 230032, China. ahmulijun001@163.com. (5)School of Pharmacy,
Anhui Medical University, 81 Mei Shan Road, Hefei, Anhui Province, 230032, China.
ahmulijun001@163.com.

Therapeutic management of liver fibrosis remains an unresolved clinical problem. 
Activation of hepatic stellate cell (HSC) is a pivotal event in the progression
of liver fibrosis. Recent reports have showed that inhibition of activated HSC
proliferation contributes to the reversal of liver fibrosis. Interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), one member of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 
family, is recently proven to be a critical modulator in cardiac fibrosis. And
accumulating evidence demonstrated that IRF3 plays a crucial role in liver
diseases, such as hepatic steatosis, liver inflammation, and alcoholic liver
injury. However, the understanding of the function of IRF3 in liver fibrosis
remains limited. Our results identified the role of IRF3 in regulating human HSC 
(LX-2 cell) cell proliferation and apoptosis. The present study indicated that
the expression of IRF3 was significantly increased in HSCs in response to TGF-ß1 
stimulation. Moreover, a stable and unlimited source of human HSC, the LX-2 cell 
line, transfected with IRF3-siRNA significantly decreases the expression level of
type I collagen (Col1a1) and a-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) in activated LX-2
cells. On the contrary, overexpression of IRF3 gives rise to an upregulation of
Col1a1 and a-SMA in LX-2 cells, and further promoted HSC proliferation. Moreover,
the inhibition of IRF3 significantly suppressed TGF-ß1-induced HSC proliferation 
and increased its apoptosis. Of note, the present study indicated IRF3 may
regulate LX-2 cell proliferation by via AKT signaling pathway. In summary, these 
observations suggest IRF3 may function as a novel regulator to modulate
TGF-ß1-induced LX-2 proliferation, at least in part, via AKT signaling pathway.

PMID: 26611114  [PubMed - in process]


55. J Virol. 2015 Nov 25;90(4):1705-17. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02417-15.

The Interferon Type I/III Response to Respiratory Syncytial Virus Infection in
Airway Epithelial Cells Can Be Attenuated or Amplified by Antiviral Treatment.

McCutcheon KM(1), Jordan R(2), Mawhorter ME(3), Noton SL(3), Powers JG(4), Fearns
R(3), Cihlar T(2), Perron M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Virology, Department of Biology, Gilead Sciences, Foster City,
California, USA Krista.McCutcheon@gilead.com. (2)Discovery Virology, Department
of Biology, Gilead Sciences, Foster City, California, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(4)Bioinformatics, Expression Analysis, Inc., Quintiles, Durham, North Carolina, 
USA.

Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a single-stranded RNA virus that
causes acute, and occasionally fatal, lower respiratory illness in young infants,
the elderly, and immunocompromised patients. Therapeutic interventions able to
cut short viral replication and quickly return the airways to normal function are
needed. An understanding of antiviral activities and their effects on host
defense mechanisms is important for the design of safe and effective therapy. We 
targeted functionally and temporally distinct steps within the viral life cycle
using small-molecule RSV inhibitors and studied their antiviral activities and
their effects on innate interferon responses of airway epithelial cells in vitro.
Antivirals acting upstream of RSV polymerase activity (i.e., compounds targeting 
the fusion protein or the nucleoprotein) reduced viral load immediately
postinfection and partially attenuated interferon responses. In contrast,
antivirals directed to the RSV polymerase demonstrated activity throughout the
viral replication cycle and specifically modulated the RIG-I/mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS)/TBK1/IRF3/interferon-stimulated gene (ISG)
axis, causing either an upregulation or a downregulation of interferon responses,
depending on the mechanism of polymerase inhibition. Notably, polymerase
inhibition leading to the accumulation of abortive RNA products correlated with
the amplification of interferon-stimulated genes to up to 10 times above normal
infection levels. Understanding how antiviral activities and their modulation of 
innate immunity may affect recovery from RSV infection will help guide the
development of safe and effective therapies.IMPORTANCE: RSV circulates
seasonally, causing acute lower respiratory disease. Therapeutic interventions
with efficacy throughout the viral replication cycle, rapid viral clearance, and 
prevention of potentially harmful inflammatory responses are desirable. Compounds
targeting the RSV polymerase inhibited virus replication late in the viral life
cycle and, depending on the functional domain targeted, either attenuated or
amplified RIG-I and downstream interferon pathways in infected cells. These data 
will help guide the development of safe and effective therapies by providing new 
molecular evidence that the mechanism of inhibition by an antiviral compound can 
directly impact innate antiviral immune responses in the airway epithelium.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4733981 [Available on 2016-07-28]
PMID: 26608311  [PubMed - in process]


56. Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2015 Nov 9;2(6):e179. doi:
10.1212/NXI.0000000000000179. eCollection 2015.

Glatiramer acetate treatment negatively regulates type I interferon signaling.

Molnarfi N(1), Prod'homme T(1), Schulze-Topphoff U(1), Spencer CM(1), Weber
MS(1), Patarroyo JC(1), Lalive PH(1), Zamvil SS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Program in Immunology (N.M., T.P., U.S.-T.,
C.M.S., J.C.P., S.S.Z.), University of California, San Francisco; the Institute
of Neuropathology and Department of Neurology (M.S.W.), University Medical
Center, Georg-August University, Göttingen, Germany; the Department of Pathology 
and Immunology (P.H.L.), Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva; and the
Department of Neurosciences (P.H.L.), Division of Neurology, University Hospital 
of Geneva, Switzerland. N.M. is currently affiliated with the Department of
Pathology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Geneva, and
Department of Neurosciences, Division of Neurology, University Hospital of
Geneva, Switzerland. T.P. is currently affiliated with Momenta Pharmaceuticals,
Cambridge, MA. U.S.-T. is currently affiliated with Silence Therapeutics GmbH,
Berlin, Germany. J.C.P. is currently affiliated with Vedanta Biosciences, Inc.,
Cambridge, MA.

Erratum in
    Neurol Neuroimmunol Neuroinflamm. 2015 Dec;2(6):e189.

OBJECTIVE: Glatiramer acetate (GA; Copaxone), a disease-modifying therapy for
multiple sclerosis (MS), promotes development of anti-inflammatory (M2, type II) 
monocytes that can direct differentiation of regulatory T cells. We investigated 
the innate immune signaling pathways that participate in GA-mediated M2 monocyte 
polarization.
METHODS: Monocytes were isolated from myeloid differentiation primary response
gene 88 (MyD88)-deficient, Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing 
interferon (IFN)-ß (TRIF)-deficient, IFN-a/ß receptor subunit 1
(IFNAR1)-deficient, and wild-type (WT) mice and human peripheral blood.
GA-treated monocytes were stimulated with Toll-like receptor ligands, then
evaluated for activation of kinases and transcription factors involved in innate 
immunity, and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines. GA-treated mice were
evaluated for cytokine secretion and susceptibility to experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis.
RESULTS: GA-mediated inhibition of proinflammatory cytokine production by
monocytes occurred independently of MyD88 and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B, but was blocked 
by TRIF deficiency. Furthermore, GA did not provide clinical benefit in
TRIF-deficient mice. GA inhibited activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase, an upstream regulator of activating transcription factor (ATF)-2, and
c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1, which regulates IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3).
Consequently, nuclear translocation of ATF-2 and IRF3, components of the IFN-ß
enhanceosome, was impaired. Consistent with these observations, GA inhibited
production of IFN-ß in vivo in WT mice, but did not modulate proinflammatory
cytokine production by monocytes from IFNAR1-deficient mice.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that GA inhibits the type I IFN pathway in M2
polarization of monocytes independently of MyD88, providing an important
mechanism connecting innate and adaptive immune modulation in GA therapy and
valuable insight regarding its potential use with other MS treatments.

PMCID: PMC4645172
PMID: 26601118  [PubMed]


57. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 23;10(11):e0143539. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143539.
eCollection 2015.

Respiratory DC Use IFITM3 to Avoid Direct Viral Infection and Safeguard
Virus-Specific CD8+ T Cell Priming.

Infusini G(1), Smith JM(2), Yuan H(2), Pizzolla A(2), Ng WC(2), Londrigan SL(2), 
Haque A(3), Reading PC(2,)(4), Villadangos JA(2,)(5), Wakim LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Systems Biology and Personalised Medicine, The Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia. (2)Department
of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, at the Peter Doherty
Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia.
(3)Malaria Immunology Lab, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane,
Australia. (4)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza,
Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, at the Peter Doherty
Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010,
Australia.

Respiratory dendritic cells (DC) play a pivotal role in the initiation of
adaptive immune responses to influenza virus. To do this, respiratory DCs must
ferry viral antigen from the lung to the draining lymph node without becoming
infected and perishing en route. We show that respiratory DCs up-regulate the
expression of the antiviral molecule, interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 
(IFITM3) in response to influenza virus infection, in a manner dependent on type 
I interferon signaling and the transcription factors IRF7 and IRF3. Failure of
respiratory DCs to up-regulate IFITM3 following influenza virus infection
resulted in impaired trafficking to the draining LN and consequently in impaired 
priming of an influenza-specific CD8+ T cell response. The impaired trafficking
of IFITM3-deficient DC correlated with an increased susceptibility of these DC to
influenza virus infection. This work shows that the expression of IFITM3 protects
respiratory DCs from influenza virus infection, permitting migration from lung to
LN and optimal priming of a virus specific T-cell response.

PMCID: PMC4657952
PMID: 26600246  [PubMed - in process]


58. J Immunol. 2016 Jan 1;196(1):310-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501836. Epub 2015 Nov 
20.

A cGAS-Independent STING/IRF7 Pathway Mediates the Immunogenicity of DNA
Vaccines.

Suschak JJ(1), Wang S(1), Fitzgerald KA(2), Lu S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nucleic Acid Vaccines, Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655; and. (2)Program in Innate
Immunity, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655. (3)Laboratory of Nucleic Acid 
Vaccines, Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655; and shan.lu@umassmed.edu.

It has been known since the discovery of DNA vaccines >20 y ago that DNA vaccines
can function as adjuvants. Our recent study reported the involvement of Aim2 as
the sensor of DNA vaccines in eliciting Ag-specific Ab responses. Our findings
indicated the presence of previously unrecognized innate immune response pathways
in addition to the TLR9 pathway, which is mainly activated by the CpG motifs of
DNA vaccines. Our data further demonstrated the requirement of type I IFN in DNA 
vaccine-induced immune responses via the Aim2 pathway, but the exact downstream
molecular mechanism was not characterized. In the present study, we investigated 
the roles of the putative DNA sensor cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGas), as well as
the downstream IFN regulatory factors (IRF) 3 and 7 in type I IFN induction and
Ag-specific immune responses elicited by DNA vaccination. Our results showed that
DNA vaccine-induced, Irf7-dependent signaling, as part of the Sting pathway, was 
critical for generation of both innate cytokine signaling and Ag-specific B and T
cell responses. In contrast, Irf3 was not as critical as expected in this pathway
and, more surprisingly, immune responses elicited by DNA vaccines were not
cGas-dependent in vivo. Data from this study provide more details on the innate
immune mechanisms involved in DNA vaccination and further enrich our
understanding on the potential utility of DNA vaccines in generating Ag-specific 
immune responses.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4685033 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26590319  [PubMed - in process]


59. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Nov 20;11(11):e1005264. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005264.
eCollection 2015.

Activation of Type I and III Interferon Response by Mitochondrial and Peroxisomal
MAVS and Inhibition by Hepatitis C Virus.

Bender S(1,)(2), Reuter A(2), Eberle F(1), Einhorn E(2,)(3), Binder M(2),
Bartenschlager R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, Heidelberg University, 
Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Division of Virus-Associated Carcinogenesis, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Master BioSciences,
Département de Biologie, École Normale Supérieure de Lyon, Université de Lyon,
Lyon, France.

Sensing viruses by pattern recognition receptors (PRR) triggers the innate immune
system of the host cell and activates immune signaling cascades such as the
RIG-I/IRF3 pathway. Mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS, also known
as IPS-1, Cardif, and VISA) is the crucial adaptor protein of this pathway
localized on mitochondria, peroxisomes and mitochondria-associated membranes of
the endoplasmic reticulum. Activation of MAVS leads to the production of type I
and type III interferons (IFN) as well as IFN stimulated genes (ISGs). To refine 
the role of MAVS subcellular localization for the induction of type I and III IFN
responses in hepatocytes and its counteraction by the hepatitis C virus (HCV), we
generated various functional and genetic knock-out cell systems that were
reconstituted to express mitochondrial (mito) or peroxisomal (pex) MAVS,
exclusively. Upon infection with diverse RNA viruses we found that cells
exclusively expressing pexMAVS mounted sustained expression of type I and III
IFNs to levels comparable to cells exclusively expressing mitoMAVS. To determine 
whether viral counteraction of MAVS is affected by its subcellular localization
we employed infection of cells with HCV, a major causative agent of chronic liver
disease with a high propensity to establish persistence. This virus efficiently
cleaves MAVS via a viral protease residing in its nonstructural protein 3 (NS3)
and this strategy is thought to contribute to the high persistence of this virus.
We found that both mito- and pexMAVS were efficiently cleaved by NS3 and this
cleavage was required to suppress activation of the IFN response. Taken together,
our findings indicate comparable activation of the IFN response by pex- and
mitoMAVS in hepatocytes and efficient counteraction of both MAVS species by the
HCV NS3 protease.

PMCID: PMC4654527
PMID: 26588843  [PubMed - in process]


60. J Mol Neurosci. 2016 Feb;58(2):287-96. doi: 10.1007/s12031-015-0678-3. Epub 2015 
Nov 12.

TRAM1 Promotes Microglia M1 Polarization.

Wang H(1), Liu C(2), Han M(1), Cheng C(3), Zhang D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory for Inflammation and Molecular Drug Target,
Medical College of Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China. 
(2)Jiangsu Province Laboratory Animal Center, Medical College of Nantong
University, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China. (3)Jiangsu Province Key
Laboratory for Inflammation and Molecular Drug Target, Medical College of Nantong
University, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China. 1402339591@qq.com.
(4)Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory for Inflammation and Molecular Drug Target,
Medical College of Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, 226001, China. 
zdm@ntu.edu.cn.

Microglia, the major immune cells of the central nervous system (CNS), can be
driven to adopt M1 and M2 phenotypes. Recently, the distinct functions of M1 and 
M2 microglia have been intensively studied. M1-activation microglia are
pro-inflammatory and may contribute to the development of several CSN disorders, 
while M2-activation microglia are anti-inflammatory and may promote tissue
reconstruction. TRAM1 is a protein involved in translocation of nascent
polypeptides and functions as a sorting adaptor of TLR4. Here, we found that
TRAM1 plays an important role in microglia M1 polarization. Our results showed
that the expression of TRAM1 is highly induced in LPS/interferon
(IFN)-<U+03B3>-stimulated BV2 cells and primary microglia cells. Flag-TRAM1
transfection, but not Flag-GFP used as a control, significantly enhanced M1
polarization by strongly increasing expression of M1 makers, such as IL-6, IL-1ß,
iNOS, and so on. Silence of TRAM1 effectively inhibited LPS/IFN-<U+03B3>-induced
expression of M1-related genes in BV2 cells. In addition, TRAM1 was found to
cooperate with TLR4 to induce an M1 genetic program in Flag-TRAM1-transfected and
LPS/IFN-<U+03B3>-induced BV2 cells. TRAM1 is essential for LPS/IFN-<U+03B3> induced expressions
of adapter molecule (IRAK1, phosphorylation of TBK1, and IRF3) of TLR4. TRAM1 is 
also essential for phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>B and P65 and for P65-NF-kB translocation
to nucleus. Overall, our findings showed that TRAM1 could promote microglia M1
polarization.

PMID: 26563450  [PubMed - in process]


61. Gene. 2016 Jan 15;576(1 Pt 3):512-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.070. Epub 2015
Nov 4.

The transcription regulation analysis of Ctenopharyngodon idellus PKR and PKZ
genes.

Liu D(1), Mao H(1), Gu M(1), Xu X(1), Sun Z(1), Lin G(1), Wang H(1), Xie D(1),
Hou Q(1), Wang X(1), Mi Y(1), Liu X(1), Hu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. Electronic address:
hucy2008@163.com.

Protein kinase R (PKR), the double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase, exists 
in mammalian and fish. PKZ, a PKR-like protein kinase containing Z-DNA binding
domains, just exists in fish. PKR and PKZ work synergistically in the antiviral
defense by inhibiting intracellular protein translation. The transcriptional
factor IRF3 (interferon regulatory factor 3) acts as a key regulator of type I
IFN (Interferon) and ISG (interferon stimulated gene). On the basis of the cloned
CiIRF3 previously, CiIRF3 with His-tag was over-expressed in BL21 Escherichia
coli, and the expressed protein was purified by affinity chromatography with
Ni-NTA His-Bind Resin. In this study, we have demonstrated that grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idellus) PKR (CiPKR) and PKZ (CiPKZ) genes were inducible by
Poly I:C in C. idella kidney (CIK) cells. So, they might be implicated in the
intracellular antiviral activity. To understand the up regulatory mechanism of
CiPKR and CiPKZ genes upon virus induction, we constructed wild type
(pGL3-CiPKR-luc and pGL3-CiPKZ-luc) and the mutant (pGL3-CiPKR-nISRE-luc and
pGL3-CiPKZ-nISRE-luc) reporter gene vectors according to the promoter sequences
of CiPKR (KJ704845) and CiPKZ (KJ704844). In vitro, gel mobility shift assays
demonstrated that CiIRF3 can combine CiPKR and CiPKZ promoters with high
affinity. However, CiIRF3 bound to the mutants CiPKR-nISRE and CiPKZ-nISRE
faintly. Whereafter, the recombinant plasmids of pGL3-CiPKR-luc, pGL3-CiPKZ-luc
were transiently co-transfected with pcDNA3.1-CiIRF3, pcDNA3.1-CiIRF7
respectively into CIK cells. Cell transfection assays indicated that CiIRF3 and
CiIRF7 up-regulated the transcriptional level of CiPKR and CiPKZ. The results
also revealed that the consensus sequence of ISRE (interferon stimulated response
element) is an important regulatory element for the transcriptional initiation of
CiPKR and CiPKZ.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26546976  [PubMed - in process]


62. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Dec;47(2):978-85. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.10.039.
Epub 2015 Nov 3.

Fish IRF3 up-regulates the transcriptional level of IRF1, IRF2, IRF3 and IRF7 in 
CIK cells.

Xu X(1), Lai Q(2), Gu M(1), Liu D(1), Hou Q(1), Liu X(1), Mi Y(1), Sun Z(1), Wang
H(1), Lin G(1), Hu C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China; Infectious Diseases Hospital of
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, Jiangxi Province, China. (3)Department of
Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China.
Electronic address: hucy2008@163.com.

Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs) belong to a family of transcription factor
involved in transcriptional regulation of type I IFN and IFN-stimulated genes
(ISG) in cells. In the present study, an IRF3 full-length cDNA (termed CiIRF3,
JX999055) and its promoter sequence were cloned by homology cloning strategy and 
genome walking from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). The full-length cDNA
sequence of CiIRF3 is comprised of a 5'UTR (195 bp), a 3'UTR (269 bp) and a
largest open reading frame (ORF) of 1377 bp encoding a polypeptide of 458 amino
acids. CiIRF3 has a conservative DNA-binding domain (DBD) at N-terminal and a
relatively conserved interferon regulatory factors association domain (IAD).
Phylogenetic tree analysis indicated that CiIRF3 gathers together with other
IRF-3 from higher vertebrates in the same branch. The promoter sequence of CiIRF3
(596 bp) consists of three IRF-E, a C/EBP beta, a NF-kappa B and a TATA-BOX.
CiIRF3 was constitutively expressed at low level in different grass carp tissues 
but was rapidly up-regulated with Poly I:C stimulation. To study the molecular
mechanism of CiIRF3 regulating the transcription of IRFs, CiIRF3 was expressed in
Escherichia coli BL21 and purified by affinity chromatography with the Ni-NTA
His-Bind Resin. Gel mobility shift assays revealed the affinity of CiIRF3 protein
with promoters of CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7 respectively. Then, CIK cells
were co-transfected with pcDNA3.1-CiIRF3, pGL3-promotor (pGL3-CiIRF1,
pGL3-CiIRF2, pGL3-CiIRF3, pGL3-CiIRF7) and luciferase reporter vector
respectively. The cotransfection experiment showed that CiIRF3 increased the
promoter activity of CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7. Furthermore,
overexpression of CiIRF3 in CIK cells also up-regulated the expressions of
CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7. So, CiIRF3 can improve the transcriptional
level of CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26545324  [PubMed - in process]


63. Cell Signal. 2016 Jan;28(1):25-33. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.10.015. Epub 2015 
Oct 27.

Gene expression profiling reveals the role of RIG1 like receptor signaling in p53
dependent apoptosis induced by PUVA in keratinocytes.

Chowdhari S(1), Saini N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, 
Mall Road, Delhi -110007, India. (2)Functional Genomics Unit, CSIR-Institute of
Genomics and Integrative Biology, Mall Road, Delhi -110007, India. Electronic
address: nsaini@igib.in.

Photochemotherapy using 8-methoxypsoralen in combination with UVA radiation
(PUVA) is an effective treatment for various skin dermatosis including psoriasis 
however its molecular mechanism is not clear. Previously we demonstrated that
PUVA differentially regulates miRNA expression profile with a significant
up-regulation of hsa-miR-4516. To study in detail the molecular mechanism of PUVA
in keratinocytes, we investigated the genome wide transcriptomic changes using
Illumina whole genome gene expression beadchip. Microarray analysis revealed 1932
differentially expressed gene and their Insilico analysis revealed Retinoic Acid 
Inducible Gene-I (RIG-1) signaling, apoptosis and p53 pathway to be associated
with PUVA induced effects. We demonstrate that miR-4516 mediated down-regulation 
of UBE2N promotes p53 nuclear translocation and pro-apoptotic activity of PUVA is
independent of IRF3 but is mediated by the RIG-I in a p53 and NF<U+03BA>B dependent
manner. Additionally, PUVA inactivated the AKT/mTOR pathway in concert with
inhibition of autophagy and suppressed cell migration. Taken together this study 
broadens our understanding about the mechanism of action of PUVA providing
possible new strategy targeting proapoptotic function of RIG-1, a regulator of
innate immune response or p53 for psoriasis therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26518362  [PubMed - in process]


64. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2015 Dec;47(12):960-8. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmv108. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Effect of modulation of unfolded protein response pathway on dengue virus
infection.

Diwaker D(1), Mishra KP(2), Ganju L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunomodulation Lab, Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied Sciences, Delhi
110054, India. (2)Immunomodulation Lab, Defence Institute of Physiology & Allied 
Sciences, Delhi 110054, India kpmpgi@rediffmail.com.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a cascade of events that helps restoring
cellular homeostasis under stressful conditions. It is activated when there is an
imbalance in the protein load and protein folding capacity of the endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) as a result of an increase in the naïve, unfolded, or misfolded
protein content of the cell. Dengue virus (DENV) utilizes the host machinery to
synthesize viral proteins and replicates in the cell. During DENV infection,
up-regulation of viral proteins increases the protein pool of the cell, resulting
in the induction of UPR pathway. In this study, we have tried to understand the
consequence of UPR induction during DENV infection in human monocytic cells. To
fulfill this objective, we have used VER-155008 (VER), a known inhibitor of the
78 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78), which is the master regulator of the
UPR pathway. After VER treatment, cells were infected with DENV, and the
induction of the UPR elements and their downstream activation was studied by
western blotting and RT-PCR analysis. Interestingly, inhibition of GRP78 via VER 
treatment led to the decreased expression of DENV envelope protein through the
activation of the UPR elements, protein kinase-like ER resident kinase,
activating transcription factor 6, and inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), and
then led to the activation of innate immune factors such as double-stranded
RNA-activated protein kinase (PKR), interferon regulated factor 3 (IRF3), nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and interleukin 1ß (IL-1ß). This strategy may be used to
decrease viral infection transiently. Thus UPR elements could be important
therapeutic targets for decreasing DENV multiplication.

© The Author 2015. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 26515795  [PubMed - in process]


65. Genes Immun. 2015 Dec;16(8):552-66. doi: 10.1038/gene.2015.46. Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Mutations in the TLR3 signaling pathway and beyond in adult patients with herpes 
simplex encephalitis.

Mørk N(1), Kofod-Olsen E(2), Sørensen KB(1), Bach E(1), Ørntoft TF(3), Østergaard
L(1,)(2), Paludan SR(4), Christiansen M(2,)(5), Mogensen TH(1,)(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital Skejby, Aarhus, 
Denmark. (2)International Center for Immunodeficiency Diseases, Aarhus University
Hospital Skejby, Aarhus, Denmark. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus
University Hospital Skejby, Aarhus, Denmark. (4)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus
University, Aarhus, Denmark. (5)Department of Clinical Immunology, Aarhus
University Hospital Skejby, Aarhus, Denmark.

Herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) in children has previously been linked to
defects in type I interferon production downstream of Toll-like receptor (TLR)3. 
In the present study, we used whole-exome sequencing to investigate the genetic
profile of 16 adult patients with a history of HSE. We identified novel mutations
in IRF3, TYK2 and MAVS, molecules involved in generating innate antiviral immune 
responses, which have not previously been associated with HSE. Moreover, data
revealed mutations in TLR3, TRIF, TBK1 and STAT1 known to be associated with HSE 
in children but not previously described in adults. All discovered mutations were
heterozygous missense mutations, the majority of which were associated with
significantly decreased antiviral responses to HSV-1 infection and/or the TLR3
agonist poly(I:C) in patient peripheral blood mononuclear cells compared with
controls. Altogether, this study demonstrates novel mutations in the TLR3
signaling pathway in molecules previously identified in children, suggesting that
impaired innate immunity to HSV-1 may also increase susceptibility to HSE in
adults. Importantly, the identification of mutations in innate signaling
molecules not directly involved in TLR3 signaling suggests the existence of
innate immunodeficiencies predisposing to HSE beyond the TLR3 pathway.

PMID: 26513235  [PubMed - in process]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 10;112(45):13994-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1510760112. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Differential outcome of TRIF-mediated signaling in TLR4 and TLR3 induced DC
maturation.

Hu W(1), Jain A(1), Gao Y(1), Dozmorov IM(1), Mandraju R(1), Wakeland EK(1),
Pasare C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9093. (2)Department of Immunology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9093
chandrashekhar.pasare@utsouthwestern.edu.

Recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns by Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) on dendritic cells (DCs) leads to DC maturation, a process involving
up-regulation of MHC and costimulatory molecules and secretion of proinflammatory
cytokines. All TLRs except TLR3 achieve these outcomes by using the signaling
adaptor myeloid differentiation factor 88. TLR4 and TLR3 can both use the
Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-ß (TRIF)-dependent
signaling pathway leading to IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activation and
induction of IFN-ß and -a4. The TRIF signaling pathway, downstream of both of
these TLRs, also leads to DC maturation, and it has been proposed that the type I
IFNs act in cis to induce DC maturation and subsequent effects on adaptive
immunity. The present study was designed to understand the molecular mechanisms
of TRIF-mediated DC maturation. We have discovered that TLR4-TRIF-induced DC
maturation was independent of both IRF3 and type I IFNs. In contrast,
TLR3-mediated DC maturation was completely dependent on type I IFN feedback. We
found that differential activation of mitogen-activated protein kinases by the
TLR4- and TLR3-TRIF axes determined the type I IFN dependency for DC maturation. 
In addition, we found that the adjuvanticity of LPS to induce T-cell activation
is completely independent of type I IFNs. The important distinction between the
TRIF-mediated signaling pathways of TLR4 and TLR3 discovered here could have a
major impact in the design of future adjuvants that target this pathway.

PMCID: PMC4653191 [Available on 2016-05-10]
PMID: 26508631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Oncoimmunology. 2015 Apr 14;4(10):e1029698. eCollection 2015.

Targeted activation of melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5) for
immunotherapy of pancreatic carcinoma.

Duewell P(1), Beller E(1), Kirchleitner SV(1), Adunka T(1), Bourhis H(1), Siveke 
J(2), Mayr D(3), Kobold S(1), Endres S(1), Schnurr M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Klinische Pharmakologie; Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV; 
Klinikum der Universität München ; Munich, Germany. (2)II. Medizinische Klinik;
Klinikum rechts der Isar; Technische Universität München ; Munich, Germany.
(3)Pathologisches Institut; Ludwig Maximilians Universität ; München, Germany.

The RIG-I-like helicase melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5) is
an innate immune receptor for double-stranded viral RNA (dsRNA) that, upon
activation, induces a Type I interferon (IFN)-driven immune response. In the
present study, we demonstrate that human und murine pancreatic cancer cells
express functional MDA5 and are highly sensitive to MDA5-induced cell death.
Activation of MDA5 by cytosolic delivery of the synthetic dsRNA analog poly(I:C) 
led to phosphorylation of the transcription factor IRF3, IFNß production and
upregulation of MHC-I expression. MDA5 signaling also induced tumor cell
apoptosis via the intrinsic pathway and sensitized tumor cells toward extrinsic, 
Fas-mediated apoptosis. Systemic treatment of orthotopic pancreatic
cancer-bearing mice with the MDA5 ligand resulted in activated CD8(+) T cell
tumor infiltration, an increased frequency of tumor antigen-specific CD8(+) T
cells and an immunogenic cytokine milieu in the tumor microenvironment. These
effects were paralleled by MDA5-induced pronounced tumor cell death in situ and
significantly prolonged survival in two different mouse models for pancreatic
cancer, an immunotherapeutic response dependent on CD8(+) T cells. Treated mice
were further protected from subsequent tumor challenge. In summary, we identified
MDA5 as a novel therapeutic target for overcoming apoptosis resistance and
tumor-mediated immunosuppression in pancreatic cancer. MDA5 ligands link innate
with adaptive immune mechanisms for effective tumor control.

PMCID: PMC4589065
PMID: 26504669  [PubMed]


68. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Dec;21(12):917-29. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav058. Epub 2015 Oct
26.

Induction of interferon-<U+03BB> contributes to TLR3 and RIG-I activation-mediated
inhibition of herpes simplex virus type 2 replication in human cervical
epithelial cells.

Zhou L(1), Li JL(2), Zhou Y(2), Liu JB(1), Zhuang K(1), Gao JF(3), Liu S(4), Sang
M(5), Wu JG(4), Ho WZ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biosafety Level III Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment,
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China State Key Laboratory of Virology, College
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China. (2)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. (3)Animal Biosafety Level III Laboratory at the
Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China. (5)Animal Biosafety Level III Laboratory at the Center for Animal
Experiment, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China Present address: College of
Basic Medical Sciences, Central Laboratory of the Fourth Affiliated Hospital in
Xiangyang, Hubei Key Laboratory of Wudang Local Chinese Medicine Research, Hubei 
University of Medicine, Shiyan 44200, China. (6)Animal Biosafety Level III
Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA wenzheho@temple.edu.

STUDY HYPOTHESIS: Is it possible to immunologically activate human cervical
epithelial cells to produce antiviral factors that inhibit herpes simplex virus
type 2 (HSV-2) replication?
STUDY FINDING: Our results indicate that human cervical epithelial cells possess 
a functional TLR3/RIG-I signaling system, the activation of which can mount an
Interferon-<U+03BB> (IFN-<U+03BB>)-mediated anti-HSV-2 response.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: There is limited information about the role of cervical
epithelial cells in genital innate immunity against HSV-2 infection.
STUDY DESIGN, SAMPLES/MATERIALS, METHODS: We examined the expression of toll-like
receptors (TLRs) and retinoic acid-inducible I (RIG-I) in End1/E6E7 cells by
real-time PCR. The IFN-<U+03BB> induced by TLR3 and RIG-I activation of End1/E6E7 cells 
was also examined by real-time PCR and ELISA. HSV-2 infection of End1/E6E7 cells 
was evaluated by the real-time PCR detection of HSV-2 gD expression. The antibody
to IL-10Rß was used to determine whether IFN-<U+03BB> contributes to TLR3/RIG-I mediated
HSV-2 inhibition. Expression of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), IRF7,
IFN-stimulated gene 56 (ISG56), 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase I (OAS-1) and
myxovirus resistance A (MxA) were determined by the real-time PCR and western
blot. End1/E6E7 cells were transfected with shRNA to knockdown the IRF3, IRF7 or 
RIG-I expression. Student's t-test and post Newman-Keuls test were used to
analyze stabilized differences in the immunological parameters above between
TLR3/RIG-I-activated cells and control cells.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Human cervical epithelial cells expressed
functional TLR3 and RIG-I, which could be activated by poly I:C and 5'ppp
double-strand RNAs (5'ppp dsRNA), resulting in the induction of endogenous
interferon lambda (IFN-<U+03BB>). The induced IFN-<U+03BB> contributed to TLR3/RIG-I-mediated
inhibition of HSV-2 replication in human cervical epithelial cells, as an
antibody to IL-10Rß, an IFN-<U+03BB> receptor subunit, could compromise
TLR3/RIG-I-mediated inhibition of HSV-2. Further studies showed that TLR3/RIG-I
signaling in the cervical epithelial cells by dsRNA induced the expression of the
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), ISG56, 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase I (OAS-1) and
myxovirus resistance A (MxA), the key antiviral elements in the IFN signaling
pathway. In addition, we observed that the topical treatment of genital mucosa
with poly I:C could protect mice from genital HSV-2 infection.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Future prospective studies with primary cells
and suitable animal models are needed in order to confirm these outcomes.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The findings provide direct and compelling
evidence that there is intracellular expression and regulation of IFN-<U+03BB> in human 
cervical epithelial cells, which may have a key role in the innate genital
protection against viral infections.
LARGE SCALE DATA: Not applicable.
STUDY FUNDING AND COMPETING INTERESTS: This work was supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (81301428 to L.Z. and 81271334 to W.-Z.H.),
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2042015kf0188 to
L.Z.), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2013M531745 to L.Z.), the
Development Program of China ('973', 2012CB518900 to W.-Z.H.) from the Ministry
of Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, grants (DA12815 and 
DA022177 to W.-Z.H.) from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and the
open project of Hubei Key Laboratory of Wudang Local Chinese Medicine Research
(WDCM005 to M.S.). The authors declare no competing financial interests.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4664393 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26502803  [PubMed - in process]


69. Viruses. 2015 Oct 16;7(10):5361-74. doi: 10.3390/v7102879.

Respiratory Syncytial Virus Persistence in Murine Macrophages Impairs IFN-ß
Response but Not Synthesis.

Rivera-Toledo E(1), Torres-González L(2), Gómez B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, National
Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), Ciudad Universitaria, D.F. Mexico C.P.
04510, Mexico. evelynmicro@gmail.com. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Parasitology, Faculty of Medicine, National Autonomous University of Mexico
(UNAM), Ciudad Universitaria, D.F. Mexico C.P. 04510, Mexico.
tgonzalezlaura@gmail.com. (3)Department of Microbiology and Parasitology, Faculty
of Medicine, National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM), Ciudad
Universitaria, D.F. Mexico C.P. 04510, Mexico. begomez@unam.mx.

Type-I interferon (IFN-I) production is an early response to viral infection and 
pathogenic viruses have evolved multiple strategies to evade this cellular
defense. Some viruses can establish and maintain persistent infections by
altering the IFN-I signaling pathway. Here, we studied IFN-I synthesis and
response in an in vitro model of persistent infection by respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV) in a murine macrophage-like cell line. In this model, interferon
regulatory factor 3 was constitutively active and located at nuclei of
persistently infected cells, inducing expression of IFN-beta mRNA and protein.
However, persistently infected macrophages did not respond in an autocrine manner
to the secreted-IFN-beta or to recombinant-IFN-beta, since phosphorylated-STAT1
was not detected by western blot and transcription of the interferon-stimulated
genes (ISGs) Mx1 and ISG56 was not induced. Treatment of non-infected macrophages
with supernatants from persistently infected cells induced STAT1 phosphorylation 
and ISGs expression, mediated by the IFN-I present in the supernatants, because
blocking the IFN-I receptor inhibited STAT1 phosphorylation. Results suggest that
the lack of autocrine response to IFN-I by the host cell may be one mechanism for
maintenance of RSV persistence. Furthermore, STAT1 phosphorylation and ISGs
expression induced in non-infected cells by supernatants from persistently
infected macrophages suggest that RSV persistence may trigger a proinflammatory
phenotype in non-infected cells as part of the pathogenesis of RSV infection.

PMCID: PMC4632387
PMID: 26501312  [PubMed - in process]


70. J Reprod Dev. 2016 Feb 20;62(1):29-35. doi: 10.1262/jrd.2015-086. Epub 2015 Oct
26.

Expression dynamics of bovine MX genes in the endometrium and placenta during
early to mid pregnancy.

Shirozu T(1), Sasaki K, Kawahara M, Yanagawa Y, Nagano M, Yamauchi N, Takahashi
M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding and Reproduction, Department of Animal Science, 
Research Faculty of Agriculture, Hokkaido University, Hokkaido 060-8589, Japan.

MX belongs to a family of type I interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes, and the MX
protein has antiviral activity. MX has at least two isoforms, known as MX1 and
MX2, in mammals. Moreover, bovine MX1 has been found to have alternative splice
variants-namely, MX1-a and MX1B. In ruminants, IFN-t-a type I IFN-is temporarily 
produced from the conceptus before implantation and induces MX expression in the 
endometrium. However, the expression dynamics of MX after implantation are not
clear. In the present study, we investigated the expression of MX1-a, MX1B and
MX2 in the endometrium and placenta before and after implantation along with the 
expression of IFN-a, type I receptors (IFNAR1 and IFNAR2) and interferon
regulatory factors (IRF3 and IRF9). Pregnant uterine samples were divided into
five groups according to pregnancy days 14-18, 25-40, 50-70, 80-100, and 130-150.
Tissue samples were collected from the intercaruncular endometrium (IC),
caruncular endometrium (C) and fetal placenta (P). Although all the MX
expressions were significantly higher in the IC and C at days 14-18, presumably
caused by embryo-secreted IFN-t stimulation, their expressions were also
detectable in the IC, C and P after implantation. Furthermore, IFN-a expression
was significantly higher in the IC. RT-PCR indicated IFNAR1, IFNAR2, IRF3 and
IRF9 mRNA in all the tissues during pregnancy. These results suggest that all the
MX genes are affected by the type I IFN pathway during pregnancy and are involved
in an immune response to protect the mother and fetus.

PMCID: PMC4768776
PMID: 26498202  [PubMed - in process]


71. Immunol Res. 2015 Oct 22. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatitis E virus infection activates signal regulator protein a to down-regulate
type I interferon.

Huang F(1,)(2), Yang C(3), Yu W(4), Bi Y(3), Long F(3), Wang J(3), Li Y(3), Jing 
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Faculty, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming,
People's Republic of China. huangfen6789@163.com. (2)Kunming General Hospital of 
Chengdu Military Region, Kunming, People's Republic of China.
huangfen6789@163.com. (3)Medical Faculty, Kunming University of Science and
Technology, Kunming, People's Republic of China. (4)Institute of Medical Biology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, 935 Jiaoling
Road, Kunming, People's Republic of China.

Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is a major cause of enterically transmitted acute
hepatitis worldwide. However, the mechanism of HEV replication is unclear. Type I
interferon is the first defense line of host against viral infection. Signal
regulator protein a (SIRP-a) plays an important role in negative regulation of
innate immunity. In the present study, HEV infection significantly activated the 
expression of SIRP-a and down-regulated phosphorylation of IRF3, consequently
resulted in suppression of type I interferon (IFN-ß). In conclusion, HEV
exploited SIRP-a to negative regulated IFN-ß of the host innate immune system to 
promote viral infection. It suggested that interfering with the functions of
SIRP-a should be considered as a potential therapeutic approach to the prevention
and treatment of HEV infection.

PMID: 26492885  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


72. J Gen Virol. 2016 Jan;97(1):18-26. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000322. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Identification of the IFN-ß response in H3N2 canine influenza virus infection.

Su S(1), Huang S(1), Fu C(1), Wang L(1), Zheng Y(1), Zhou P(1), Li S(1).

Author information: 
(1)1<U+200B>College of Veterinary Medicine, South China Agricultural University,
Guangzhou, PR China 2<U+200B>Key Laboratory of Comprehensive Prevention and Control for 
Severe Clinical Animal Diseases of Guangdong Province, Guangzhou, PR China
3<U+200B>Guangdong Engineering and Technological Research Center on pet, Guangzhou, PR
China.

Canine influenza viruses (CIVs) circulate continuously in the dog population,
providing opportunities for exposure to humans and other species. Although the
dog genome has been sequenced, innate immunity in dogs is not well characterized,
which limits the understanding of H3N2 canine influenza virus pathogenesis.
Equally, how this virus evades the canine host innate immune response to
successfully establish infection remains unclear. To analyse the IFN-ß response
to CIV infection in Madin-Darby canine kidney cells, the canine IFN-ß promoter
sequence and its positive regulatory domain motifs were first cloned and
identified using a luciferase reporter system. Next, we found that infection with
the CIV strain GD/12 blocked the IFN-ß response primarily by inhibiting the NF-<U+03BA>B
and IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) signalling pathways. Expression of GD/12
non-structural protein 1 alone was sufficient to inhibit Sendai virus-induced
NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 activation by suppressing p65 and IRF3 phosphorylation, suggesting
the important role of this protein in the CIV-mediated inhibition of the IFN-ß
response. These results suggest that inhibition of the IFN-ß signalling pathway
may have played a role in CIV establishment and spread in dog populations.

PMID: 26490006  [PubMed - in process]


73. Dev Comp Immunol. 2016 Feb;55:130-7. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2015.10.011. Epub 2015
Oct 22.

Molecular characterization and functional analysis of IRF3 in tilapia
(Oreochromis niloticus).

Gu YF(1), Wei Q(2), Tang SJ(3), Chen XW(4), Zhao JL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Exploration and Utilization of Aquatic Genetic Resources,
Ministry of Education, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, 201306, China;
Department of Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center at Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard Dallas, TX, 75390-9133, USA.
Electronic address: gu-yifeng@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Surgical Oncology and
Institute of Clinical Medicine, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China; Department of International Medicine,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 6000 Harry Hines
Boulevard Dallas, TX, 75390-9133, USA. (3)Key Laboratory of Exploration and
Utilization of Aquatic Genetic Resources, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Ocean
University, Shanghai, 201306, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Exploration and
Utilization of Aquatic Genetic Resources, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Ocean
University, Shanghai, 201306, China. Electronic address: xwchen@shou.edu.cn.
(5)Key Laboratory of Exploration and Utilization of Aquatic Genetic Resources,
Ministry of Education, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, 201306, China.
Electronic address: jlzhao@shou.edu.cn.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) plays a key role in interferon (IFN)
response and binding to the IFN stimulatory response elements (ISREs) within the 
promoter of IFN and IFN-stimulated genes followed by virus infection. In the
current study, we discovered one IRF3 homologue in tilapia genome and analyzed
the characterizations and functions of tilapia IRF3. Tilapia IRF3 contains
1368 bp with an ORF of 455 aa. Structurally, tilapia IRF3 protein typically
shares the conserved characterizations with other species' IRF3 homologues,
displaying conserved DNA-binding domain, IRF association domain, serine-rich C
terminal domain, and tryptophan residue cluster. Phylogenetic analysis
illustrated that tilapia IRF3 belongs to the IRF3 subfamily. Real-time PCR
revealed a broad expression pattern of tilapia IRF3 in various tissues.
Subcellular localization analysis showed that tilapia IRF3 mainly resides in the 
cytoplasm, Western blot demonstrated that IRF3 was distributed in the cytoplasmic
fraction. Functionally, IRF3 was found to be transcriptionally up-regulated by
the poly I:C stimulation. Moreover, reporter assay elucidated that tilapia IRF3
serves as a regulator in mediating IFN response by increasing the activity of
IFN-ß and ISRE-containing promoter. These data supported the view that tilapia
IRF3 is a potential molecule in IFN immune defense system against viral
infection.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26483348  [PubMed - in process]


74. J Virol. 2015 Oct 14;90(1):189-205. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02276-15.

Interferon-Regulatory Factor 5-Dependent Signaling Restricts Orthobunyavirus
Dissemination to the Central Nervous System.

Proenca-Modena JL(1), Hyde JL(2), Sesti-Costa R(3), Lucas T(2), Pinto AK(2),
Richner JM(2), Gorman MJ(4), Lazear HM(5), Diamond MS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Genetics, Evolution and Bioagents, Institute of
Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. (2)Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (3)Department
of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, University of São Paulo,
Ribeirão Preto School of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. (4)Department of
Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Molecular
Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA 
Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA diamond@wusm.wustl.edu.

Interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) is a transcription factor that
induces inflammatory responses after engagement and signaling by pattern
recognition receptors. To define the role of IRF-5 during bunyavirus infection,
we evaluated Oropouche virus (OROV) and La Crosse virus (LACV) pathogenesis and
immune responses in primary cells and in mice with gene deletions in Irf3, Irf5, 
and Irf7 or in Irf5 alone. Deletion of Irf3, Irf5, and Irf7 together resulted in 
uncontrolled viral replication in the liver and spleen, hypercytokinemia,
extensive liver injury, and an early-death phenotype. Remarkably, deletion of
Irf5 alone resulted in meningoencephalitis and death on a more protracted
timeline, 1 to 2 weeks after initial OROV or LACV infection. The clinical signs
in OROV-infected Irf5(-/-) mice were associated with abundant viral antigen and
terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling
(TUNEL)-positive cells in several regions of the brain. Circulating dendritic
cell (DC) subsets in Irf5(-/-) mice had higher levels of OROV RNA in vivo yet
produced lower levels of type I IFN than wild-type (WT) cells. This result was
supported by data obtained in vitro, since a deficiency of IRF-5 resulted in
enhanced OROV infection and diminished type I IFN production in bone
marrow-derived DCs. Collectively, these results indicate a key role for IRF-5 in 
modulating the host antiviral response in peripheral organs that controls
bunyavirus neuroinvasion in mice.IMPORTANCE: Oropouche virus (OROV) and La Crosse
virus (LACV) are orthobunyaviruses that are transmitted by insects and cause
meningitis and encephalitis in subsets of individuals in the Americas. Recently, 
we demonstrated that components of the type I interferon (IFN) induction pathway,
particularly the regulatory transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7, have key
protective roles during OROV infection. However, the lethality in Irf3(-/-)
Irf7(-/-) (DKO) mice infected with OROV was not as rapid or complete as observed 
in Ifnar(-/-) mice, indicating that other transcriptional factors associated with
an IFN response contribute to antiviral immunity against OROV. Here, we evaluated
bunyavirus replication, tissue tropism, and cytokine production in primary cells 
and mice lacking IRF-5. We demonstrate an important role for IRF-5 in preventing 
neuroinvasion and the ensuing encephalitis caused by OROV and LACV.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702527 [Available on 2016-06-17]
PMID: 26468541  [PubMed - in process]


75. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 12;36(1):13-29. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00641-15.

ß-Catenin Upregulates the Constitutive and Virus-Induced Transcriptional Capacity
of the Interferon Beta Promoter through T-Cell Factor Binding Sites.

Marcato V(1), Luron L(1), Laqueuvre LM(1), Simon D(2), Mansuroglu Z(1), Flamand
M(3), Panthier JJ(2), Souès S(1), Massaad C(4), Bonnefoy E(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR-S1007, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris,
France. (2)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Génétique Fonctionnelle de la Souris,
Paris, France Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique URA 2578, Paris,
France. (3)Institut Pasteur, Unité de Recherche de Virologie Structurale, Paris, 
France. (4)INSERM UMR-S1124, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Paris, France. (5)INSERM UMR-S1007, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Paris, France eliette.bonnefoy@parisdescartes.fr.

Rapid upregulation of interferon beta (IFN-ß) expression following virus
infection is essential to set up an efficient innate antiviral response.
Biological roles related to the antiviral and immune response have also been
associated with the constitutive production of IFN-ß in naive cells. However, the
mechanisms capable of modulating constitutive IFN-ß expression in the absence of 
infection remain largely unknown. In this work, we demonstrate that inhibition of
the kinase glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK-3) leads to the upregulation of the
constitutive level of IFN-ß expression in noninfected cells, provided that GSK-3 
inhibition is correlated with the binding of ß-catenin to the IFN-ß promoter.
Under these conditions, IFN-ß expression occurred through the T-cell factor (TCF)
binding sites present on the IFN-ß promoter independently of interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Enhancement of the constitutive level of IFN-ß per se
was able to confer an efficient antiviral state to naive cells and acted in
synergy with virus infection to stimulate virus-induced IFN-ß expression. Further
emphasizing the role of ß-catenin in the innate antiviral response, we show here 
that highly pathogenic Rift Valley fever virus (RVFV) targets the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway and the formation of active TCF/ß-catenin complexes at the
transcriptional and protein level in RVFV-infected cells and mice.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702592 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 26459757  [PubMed - in process]


76. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 15;195(10):4650-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501053. Epub 2015
Oct 12.

A Lymphotoxin/Type I IFN Axis Programs CD8+ T Cells To Infiltrate a Self-Tissue
and Propagate Immunopathology.

Ng D(1), Maître B(1), Cummings D(2), Lin A(3), Ward LA(1), Rahbar R(3), Mossman
KL(2), Ohashi PS(3), Gommerman JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8,
Canada; (2)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4L8, Canada; and. (3)Campbell Family Cancer Research
Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario M5G 2M9, Canada.
(4)Department of Immunology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 1A8,
Canada; jen.gommerman@utoronto.ca.

Type I IFNs (IFN-I) are cytokines that can mediate both immune suppression and
activation. Dendritic cells (DC) are significant producers of IFN-I, and
depending on the context (nature of Ag, duration of exposure to Ag), DC-derived
IFN-I can have varying effects on CD8(+) T cell responses. In this study, we
report that in the context of a CD8(+) T cell response to a self-Ag, DC-intrinsic
expression of IFN regulatory factor 3 is required to induce optimal proliferation
and migration of autoreactive CD8(+) T cells, ultimately determining their
ability to infiltrate a target tissue (pancreas), and the development of glucose 
intolerance in rat insulin promoter-glycoprotein (RIP-GP) mice. Moreover, we show
that signals through the lymphotoxin-ß receptor (LTßR) in DC are also required
for the proliferation of autoreactive CD8(+) T cells, the upregulation of
VLA4/LFA1 on activated CD8(+) T cells, and their subsequent infiltration into the
pancreas both in vitro and in vivo. Importantly, the defects in autoreactive
CD8(+) T cell proliferation, accumulation of CD8(+) T cells in the pancreas, and 
consequent glucose intolerance observed in the context of priming by LTßR(-/-) DC
could be rescued by exogenous addition of IFN-I. Collectively, our data
demonstrate that the LTßR/IFN-I axis is essential for programming of CD8(+) T
cells to mediate immunopathology in a self-tissue. A further understanding of the
IFN-I/LTßR axis will provide valuable therapeutic insights for treatment of
CD8(+) T cell-mediated autoimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26459352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Nov;47(1):535-44. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.09.040.
Epub 2015 Oct 9.

A splicing isoform of Ctenopharyngodon idella ADAR1 (CiADAR1-like): Genome
organization, tissue specific expression and transcriptional regulation.

Wang B(1), Liu Y(1), Sun Z(1), Liu X(1), Mi Y(1), Liu D(1), Xu X(1), Hou Q(1),
Wang F(1), Hu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. Electronic address:
hucy2008@163.com.

Catalyzing the deamination of adenosine to inosine in RNA, ADAR1 (adenosine
deaminase that act on RNA 1) belongs to ADAR family. In our previous work, we
have cloned the complete genomic sequence of ADAR1 from grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idella), named CiADAR1. In the process, we found a splicing
isoform of CiADAR1 (CiADAR1-like). CiADAR1 and CiADAR1-like are possessed by
different promoters but share a common exon 2. The complete genomic CiADAR1-like 
has 9 exons and 8 introns. Its full-length cDNA is comprised of a 5' UTR (417
bp), a 3' UTR (118 bp) and a 3324 bp-long ORF encoding a polypeptide of 1107
amino acids. The deduced amino acid sequence of CiADAR1-like contains two Z-DNA
binding domains, three dsRNA binding motifs and a truncate catalytic domain.
CiADAR1-like shared higher homology with Danio rerio ADAR1 and lower homology
with HsADAR1-like in phylogenetic tree. qRT-PCR showed that CiADAR1-like were
ubiquitously expressed and significantly up-regulated after stimulation with Poly
I:C. Its mRNA reached the peak at 12 h post-stimulation in all tested tissues.
Western-blotting experiment proved CiADAR1-like was factually expressed in C.
idella kidney (CIK) cells. To further study the transcriptional regulatory
mechanism of CiADAR1-like, we cloned its promoter sequence. CiADAR1-like promoter
is 1173 bp in length containing 3 ISRE and 8 IRF-E. Subsequently, grass carp IRF1
(CiIRF1) and IRF3 (CiIRF3) were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 and purified
by affinity chromatography with the Ni-NTA His-Bind Resin. In vitro, CiIRF1 and
CiIRF3 were able to bind to CiADAR1-like promoter with high affinity in gel
mobility shift assays, revealing that IRF1 and IRF3 could be the potential
transcriptional regulatory factors for CiADAR1-like. In vivo, Co-transfection of 
pcDNA3.1-IRF1 (or pcDNA3.1-IRF3) with pGL3-CiADAR1-like promoter into CIK cells
showed that both IRF1 and IRF3 significantly increased the luciferase activity,
suggesting that they play a positive role in CiADAR1-like transcription.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26455664  [PubMed - in process]


78. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 8;10(10):e0139481. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139481.
eCollection 2015.

Infectious Chikungunya Virus in the Saliva of Mice, Monkeys and Humans.

Gardner J(1), Rudd PA(2), Prow NA(1), Belarbi E(3), Roques P(3), Larcher T(4),
Gresh L(5), Balmaseda A(6), Harris E(7), Schroder WA(1), Suhrbier A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Inflammation Biology Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,
and the Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, Brisbane, Queensland,
Australia. (2)School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, University of
Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. (3)CEA, iMETI, Division of
Immuno-Virology, Université Paris Sud and Center for immunology of viral
infections and autoimmune diseases Inserm, UMR 1184, Fontenay-aux-Roses, France. 
(4)Institut National de Recherche Agronomique, Nantes, France. (5)Sustainable
Sciences Institute, Managua, Nicaragua. (6)Laboratorio Nacional de Virología,
Centro Nacional de Diagnóstico y Referencia, Ministry of Health, Managua,
Nicaragua. (7)Division of Infectious Diseases and Vaccinology, School of Public
Health, University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, United States of
America.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) is a reemerging, ordinarily mosquito-transmitted,
alphavirus that occasionally produces hemorrhagic manifestations, such as nose
bleed and bleeding gums, in human patients. Interferon response factor 3 and 7
deficient (IRF3/7-/-) mice, which are deficient for interferon a/ß responses,
reliably develop hemorrhagic manifestations after CHIKV infection. Here we show
that infectious virus was present in the oral cavity of CHIKV infected IRF3/7-/- 
mice, likely due to hemorrhagic lesions in the olfactory epithelium that allow
egress of infected blood into the nasal, and subsequently, oral cavities. In
addition, IRF3/7-/- mice were more susceptible to infection with CHIKV via
intranasal and oral routes, with IRF3/7-/- mice also able to transmit virus
mouse-to-mouse without an arthropod vector. Cynomolgus macaques often show
bleeding gums after CHIKV infection, and analysis of saliva from several infected
monkeys also revealed the presence of viral RNA and infectious virus.
Furthermore, saliva samples collected from several acute CHIKV patients with
hemorrhagic manifestations were found to contain viral RNA and infectious virus. 
Oral fluids can therefore be infectious during acute CHIKV infections, likely due
to hemorrhagic manifestations in the oral/nasal cavities.

PMCID: PMC4598147
PMID: 26447467  [PubMed - in process]


79. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 7;10(10):e0139856. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139856.
eCollection 2015.

Leukotriene B4 Enhances NOD2-Dependent Innate Response against Influenza Virus
Infection.

Le Bel M(1), Gosselin J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Innate Immunology, CHU de Québec-Université Laval Research
Center, Quebec, Canada. (2)Laboratory of Innate Immunology, CHU de
Québec-Université Laval Research Center, Quebec, Canada; Department of Molecular 
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Quebec, Canada.

Leukotriene B4 (LTB4), a central mediator of inflammation, is well known for its 
chemoattractant properties on effectors cells of the immune system. LTB4 also has
the ability to control microbial infection by improving host innate defenses
through the release of antimicrobial peptides and modulation of intracellular
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) expression in response to agonist challenge. In this
report, we provide evidences that LTB4 acts on nucleotide-binging oligomerization
domain 2 (NOD2) pathway to enhance immune response against influenza A infection.
Infected mice receiving LTB4 show improved survival, lung architecture and
reduced lung viral loads as compared to placebo-treated animals. NOD2 and its
downstream adaptor protein IPS-1 have been found to be essential for
LTB4-mediated effects against IAV infection, as absence of NOD2 or IPS-1
diminished its capacity to control viral infection. Treatment of IAV-infected
mice with LTB4 induces an increased activation of IPS-1-IRF3 axis leading to an
enhanced production of IFNß in lungs of infected mice. LTB4 also has the ability 
to act on the RICK-NF-<U+03BA>B axis since administration of LTB4 to mice challenged
with MDP markedly increases the secretion of IL-6 and TNFa in lungs of mice. TAK1
appears to be essential to the action of LTB4 on NOD2 pathway since pretreatment 
of MEFs with TAK1 inhibitor prior stimulation with IAV or MDP strongly abrogated 
the potentiating effects of LTB4 on both IFNß and cytokine secretion. Together,
our results demonstrate that LTB4, through its ability to activate TAK1,
potentiates both IPS-1 and RICK axis of the NOD2 pathway to improve host innate
responses.

PMCID: PMC4596707
PMID: 26444420  [PubMed - in process]


80. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 15;195(10):4573-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500162. Epub 2015
Oct 2.

Cutting Edge: Inhibiting TBK1 by Compound II Ameliorates Autoimmune Disease in
Mice.

Hasan M(1), Dobbs N(1), Khan S(2), White MA(3), Wakeland EK(2), Li QZ(2), Yan
N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390; Department of Microbiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390; (2)Department of Immunology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390; (3)Department 
of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390; Department of Microbiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390; nan.yan@utsouthwestern.edu.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) is a serine/threonine protein kinase that plays a
crucial role in innate immunity. Enhanced TBK1 function is associated with
autoimmune diseases and cancer, implicating the potential benefit of
therapeutically targeting TBK1. In this article, we examined a recently
identified TBK1 inhibitor Compound II on treating autoimmune diseases. We found
that Compound II is a potent and specific inhibitor of TBK1-mediated IFN
response. Compound II inhibited polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid-induced immune
activation in vitro and in vivo. Compound II treatment also ameliorated
autoimmune disease phenotypes of Trex1(-/-) mice, increased mouse survival, and
dampened the IFN gene signature in TREX1 mutant patient lymphoblasts. In
addition, we found that TBK1 gene expression is elevated in systemic lupus
erythematosus patient cells, and systemic lupus erythematosus cells with high IFN
signature responded well to Compound II treatment. Together, our findings
provided critical experimental evidence for inhibiting TBK1 with Compound II as
an effective treatment for TREX1-associated autoimmune diseases and potentially
other interferonopathies.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4635567
PMID: 26432890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 29;10(9):e0139491. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0139491.
eCollection 2015.

Synergistic Proinflammatory Responses by IL-17A and Toll-Like Receptor 3 in Human
Airway Epithelial Cells.

Mori K(1), Fujisawa T(1), Kusagaya H(1), Yamanaka K(2), Hashimoto D(1), Enomoto
N(1), Inui N(3), Nakamura Y(1), Maekawa M(2), Suda T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Second Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Hamamatsu University School 
of Medicine, 1-20-1 Handayama Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.
(2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
1-20-1 Handayama Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan. (3)Department of Clinical
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1
Handayama Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.

Viral respiratory infections activate the innate immune response in the airway
epithelium through Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and induce airway inflammation,
which causes acute exacerbation of asthma. Although increases in IL-17A
expression were observed in the airway of severe asthma patients, the interaction
between IL-17A and TLR activation in airway epithelium remains poorly understood.
In this study, we demonstrated that IL-17A and polyI:C, the ligand of TLR3,
synergistically induced the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and
chemokines (G-CSF, IL-8, CXCL1, CXCL5, IL-1F9), but not type I interferon
(IFN-a1, -ß) in primary culture of normal human bronchial epithelial cells.
Synergistic induction after co-stimulation with IL-17A and polyI:C was observed
from 2 to 24 hours after stimulation. Treatment with cycloheximide or actinomycin
D had no effect, suggesting that the synergistic induction occurred without de
novo protein synthesis or mRNA stabilization. Inhibition of the TLR3,
TLR/TIR-domain-containing adaptor-inducing interferon ß (TRIF), NF-<U+03BA>B, and IRF3
pathways decreased the polyI:C- and IL-17A/polyI:C-induced G-CSF and IL-8 mRNA
expression. Comparing the levels of mRNA induction between co-treatment with
IL-17A/polyI:C and treatment with polyI:C alone, blocking the of NF-<U+03BA>B pathway
significantly attenuated the observed synergism. In western blotting analysis,
activation of both NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 was observed in treatment with polyI:C and
co-treatment with IL-17A/polyI:C; moreover, co-treatment with IL-17A/polyI:C
augmented I<U+03BA>B-a phosphorylation as compared to polyI:C treatment alone.
Collectively, these findings indicate that IL-17A and TLR3 activation cooperate
to induce proinflammatory responses in the airway epithelium via
TLR3/TRIF-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B/IRF3 activation, and that enhanced activation of the
NF-<U+03BA>B pathway plays an essential role in synergistic induction after co-treatment
with IL-17A and polyI:C in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4587973
PMID: 26418032  [PubMed - in process]


82. Ann Oncol. 2015 Dec;26(12):2450-6. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mdv474. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Variations in genes regulating tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) to predict
outcomes of bevacizumab-based treatment in patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer: results from TRIBE and FIRE3 trials.

Sunakawa Y(1), Stintzing S(2), Cao S(3), Heinemann V(2), Cremolini C(4), Falcone 
A(4), Yang D(3), Zhang W(5), Ning Y(5), Stremitzer S(5), Matsusaka S(5), Yamauchi
S(5), Parekh A(5), Okazaki S(5), Berger MD(5), Graver S(6), Mendez A(5), Scherer 
SJ(6), Loupakis F(4), Lenz HJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School 
of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA Division of
Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Showa University Northern
Yokohama Hospital, Yokohama, Japan y.suna0825@gmail.com. (2)Department of
Hematology and Oncology, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Preventive Medicine, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA. (4)U.O. 
Oncologia Medica, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria Pisana, Istituto Toscano
Tumori, Pisa, Italy. (5)Division of Medical Oncology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
USA. (6)Department of Physiological Chemistry, Biocenter, University of
Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) with the M2-like phenotype are
regulated by mainly NF-kB pathway including TBK1, which can influence tumor
progression by secretion of proangiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial
growth factor. The CCL2/CCR2 axis, histidine-rich glycoprotein (HRG), and
placenta growth factor (PIGF) play a critical role in the polarization of M1/M2
phenotypes and the recruitment of TAMs to tumor microenvironment. We therefore
hypothesized that variations in genes involved in regulating TAMs may predict
clinical outcomes of bevacizumab treatment in patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer (mCRC).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed genomic DNA extracted from samples of patients 
receiving bevacizumab plus FOLFIRI as a first-line treatment using PCR-based
direct sequencing. Twelve functional single-nucleotide polymorphisms in eight
genes (CCL2, CCR2, HRG, PIGF, NFKB1, TBK1, CCL18, and IRF3) were tested for
associations with clinical outcomes in a discovery cohort of 228 participants in 
TRIBE trial (NCT00719797), then validated in 248 KRAS exon2 (KRAS) wild-type
participants in FIRE3 trial (NCT00433927). FIRE3-cetuximab cohort served as a
negative control.
RESULTS: TBK1 rs7486100 was significantly associated with overall survival in 95 
KRAS wild-type patients of TRIBE cohort in univariate analysis and had a strong
trend in multivariable analysis; furthermore, the association of the T allele was
observed for progression-free survival (PFS) in both univariate and multivariable
analyses in FIRE3-bevacizumab but not cetuximab cohort. CCL2 rs4586, CCL18
rs14304, and IRF3 rs2304205 had univariate and multivariable correlations with
PFS in KRAS mutant patients of the TRIBE cohort, whereas they had no correlations
in KRAS wild-type patients of the TRIBE cohort. No association was seen in
control cohort.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates for the first time that variations in genes
regulating TAMs-related functions are significantly associated with clinical
outcomes in mCRC patients treated with bevacizumab-containing chemotherapy. These
results also suggest that some TAM-related gene variations may predict outcomes
of bevacizumab treatment in KRAS status-dependent manner.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society for Medical Oncology. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4658546 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26416897  [PubMed - in process]


83. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 1;195(9):4456-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402628. Epub 2015
Sep 25.

Identification of a Regulatory Acidic Motif as the Determinant of Membrane
Localization of TICAM-2.

Funami K(1), Matsumoto M(1), Enokizono Y(2), Ishii N(1), Tatematsu M(1), Oshiumi 
H(1), Inagaki F(2), Seya T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan; and. (2)Department of Structural
Biology, Faculty of Advanced Life Science, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 001-0021,
Japan. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan; and seya-tu@pop.med.hokudai.ac.jp.

TLR4 triggers LPS signaling through the adaptors Toll/IL-1R domain-containing
adaptor molecule (TICAM)-2 (also called TRAM) and TICAM-1 (also called TRIF),
together with Toll/IL-1R domain-containing adaptor protein (TIRAP) and MyD88. The
MyD88 pathway mediates early phase responses to LPS on the plasma membrane,
whereas the TICAM pathway mediates late-phase responses, which induce the
production of type I IFN and activation of inflammasomes. TICAM-2 bridges TLR4
and TICAM-1 for LPS signaling in the endosome. Recently, we identified an acidic 
motif, E87/D88/D89 in TICAM-2, that provides the interaction surfaces between
TICAM-2 and TICAM-1. In the present study, we found additional D91/E92 in
TICAM-2, conserved across species, that is crucial for TICAM-1 activation. The
D91A/E92A mutant protein was distributed largely to the cytosol, despite
myristoylation, suggesting its importance for assistance of membrane localization
of TICAM-2. An ectopically expressed D91A/E92A mutant per se failed to activate
TICAM-1, unlike its wild-type counterpart that forms self-aggregation, but it
still retained the ability to pass LPS-mediated IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3
activation. In a TICAM-2 knockout human cell line expressing TLR4/MD-2 with or
without CD14, overexpression of the D91A/E92A mutant did not activate IRF3, but
upon LPS stimulation, it induced sufficient TLR4-mediated IRF3 activation with
high coefficient colocalization. Hence, the D91/E92 motif guides TICAM-2 membrane
localization and self-activation for signaling. Our results suggest the presence 
of two distinct steps underlying endosomal LPS signaling on TICAM-2 for TICAM-1
activation: TICAM-2 assembling in TLR4 and/or TICAM-2 self-activation. D91A/E92A 
of TICAM-2 selectively associates the TLR4-dependent TICAM-2 assembling, but not 
cytosolic TICAM-2 self-aggregation, to activate TICAM-1.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26408662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Sep 25;11(9):e1005179. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005179.
eCollection 2015.

DYRK2 Negatively Regulates Type I Interferon Induction by Promoting TBK1
Degradation via Ser527 Phosphorylation.

An T(1), Li S(2), Pan W(2), Tien P(2), Zhong B(2), Shu HB(2), Wu S(2).

Author information: 
(1)The College of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern
Virology Research Center, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China; The College of Basic
Medical Science, Shaanxi University of Chinese Medicine, Xi'an, China. (2)The
College of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Virology, Modern Virology
Research Center, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Viral infection activates the transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3, which
contribute to the induction of type I interferons (IFNs) and cellular antiviral
responses. Protein kinases play a critical role in various signaling pathways by 
phosphorylating their substrates. Here, we identified dual-specificity
tyrosine-(Y)-phosphorylation-regulated kinase 2 (DYRK2) as a negative regulator
of virus-triggered type I IFN induction. DYRK2 inhibited the virus-triggered
induction of type I IFNs and promoted the K48-linked ubiquitination and
degradation of TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) in a kinase-activity-dependent
manner. We further found that DYRK2 phosphorylated Ser527 of TBK1, which is
essential for the recruitment of NLRP4 and for the E3 ubiquitin ligase DTX4 to
degrade TBK1. These findings suggest that DYRK2 negatively regulates
virus-triggered signaling by targeting TBK1 for phosphorylation and priming it
for degradation, and these data provide new insights into the molecular
mechanisms that dictate the cellular antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC4583546
PMID: 26407194  [PubMed - in process]


85. J Virol. 2015 Dec;89(23):12014-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01576-15. Epub 2015 Sep 16.

RIG-I Signaling Is Essential for Influenza B Virus-Induced Rapid Interferon Gene 
Expression.

Mäkelä SM(1), Österlund P(2), Westenius V(2), Latvala S(2), Diamond MS(3), Gale M
Jr(4), Julkunen I(5).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Infections Unit, Department of Infectious Diseases, National Institute
for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland sanna.makela@thl.fi. (2)Viral
Infections Unit, Department of Infectious Diseases, National Institute for Health
and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland. (3)Departments of Medicine, Pathology and
Immunology, and Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (4)Center for Innate Immunity and Immune Disease,
Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle,
Washington, USA. (5)Viral Infections Unit, Department of Infectious Diseases,
National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland Department of
Virology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Influenza B virus causes annual epidemics and, along with influenza A virus,
accounts for substantial disease and economic burden throughout the world.
Influenza B virus infects only humans and some marine mammals and is not
responsible for pandemics, possibly due to a very low frequency of reassortment
and a lower evolutionary rate than that of influenza A virus. Influenza B virus
has been less studied than influenza A virus, and thus, a comparison of influenza
A and B virus infection mechanisms may provide new insight into virus-host
interactions. Here we analyzed the early events in influenza B virus infection
and interferon (IFN) gene expression in human monocyte-derived macrophages and
dendritic cells. We show that influenza B virus induces IFN regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) activation and IFN-<U+03BB>1 gene expression with faster kinetics than does
influenza A virus, without a requirement for viral protein synthesis or
replication. Influenza B virus-induced activation of IRF3 required the fusion of 
viral and endosomal membranes, and nuclear accumulation of IRF3 and viral NP
occurred concurrently. In comparison, immediate early IRF3 activation was not
observed in influenza A virus-infected macrophages. Experiments with RIG-I-,
MDA5-, and RIG-I/MDA5-deficient mouse fibroblasts showed that RIG-I is the
critical pattern recognition receptor needed for the influenza B virus-induced
activation of IRF3. Our results show that innate immune mechanisms are activated 
immediately after influenza B virus entry through the endocytic pathway, whereas 
influenza A virus avoids early IRF3 activation and IFN gene induction.IMPORTANCE:
Recently, a great deal of interest has been paid to identifying the ligands for
RIG-I under conditions of natural infection, as many previous studies have been
based on transfection of cells with different types of viral or synthetic RNA
structures. We shed light on this question by analyzing the earliest step in
innate immune recognition of influenza B virus by human macrophages. We show that
influenza B virus induces IRF3 activation, leading to IFN gene expression after
viral RNPs (vRNPs) are released into the cytosol and are recognized by RIG-I
receptor, meaning that the incoming influenza B virus is already able to activate
IFN gene expression. In contrast, influenza A (H3N2) virus failed to activate
IRF3 at very early times of infection, suggesting that there are differences in
innate immune recognition between influenza A and B viruses.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4645339 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26378160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Neurochem. 2015 Dec;135(6):1161-77. doi: 10.1111/jnc.13356. Epub 2015 Oct 16.

Prothymosin-alpha preconditioning activates TLR4-TRIF signaling to induce
protection of ischemic retina.

Halder SK(1), Matsunaga H(1), Ishii KJ(2), Ueda H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutic Innovation, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Vaccine
Science, Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Prothymosin-alpha protects the brain and retina from ischemic damage. Although
prothymosin-alpha contributes to toll-like receptor (TLR4)-mediated
immnunopotentiation against viral infection, the beneficial effects of
prothymosin-alpha-TLR4 signaling in protecting against ischemia remain to be
elucidated. In this study, intravitreal administration of prothymosin-alpha 48 h 
before induction of retinal ischemia prevented retinal cellular damage as
evaluated by histology, and retinal functional deficits as evaluated by
electroretinography. Prothymosin-alpha preconditioning completely prevented the
ischemia-induced loss of ganglion cells with partial survival of bipolar and
photoreceptor cells, but not amacrine cells, in immunohistochemistry experiments.
Prothymosin-alpha treatment in the absence of ischemia caused mild activation,
proliferation, and migration of retinal microglia, whereas the ischemia-induced
microglial activation was inhibited by prothymosin-alpha preconditioning. All
these preventive effects of prothymosin-alpha preconditioning were abolished in
TLR4 knock-out mice and by pre-treatments with anti-TLR4 antibodies or
minocycline, a microglial inhibitor. Prothymosin-alpha preconditioning inhibited 
the retinal ischemia-induced up-regulation of TLR4-related injury genes, and
increased expression of TLR4-related protective genes. Furthermore, the
prothymosin-alpha preconditioning-induced prevention of retinal ischemic damage
was abolished in TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-ß knock-out
mice, but not in myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 knock-out mice.
Taken together, the results of this study suggest that prothymosin-alpha
preconditioning selectively drives TLR4-TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing
interferon-ß signaling and microglia in the prevention of retinal ischemic
damage. We propose the following mechanism for prothymosin-alpha (ProTa)
preconditioning-induced retinal prevention against ischemia: ProTa
preconditioning-induced prevention of retinal ischemic damage is mediated by
selective activation of the TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-ß
(TRIF)- interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) pathway downstream of toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4) in microglia, resulting in up-regulation of TRIF-IRF3-dependent
protective genes and down-regulation of myeloid differentiation primary response 
gene 88 (MyD88)-Nuclear factor (NF)<U+03BA>B-dependent injury genes. Detailed
investigations would be helpful to test the efficacy of ProTa as a therapeutic
agent for the prevention of ischemic disorders.

© 2015 International Society for Neurochemistry.

PMID: 26364961  [PubMed - in process]


87. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Nov;47(1):157-67. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.09.014.
Epub 2015 Sep 7.

Antiviral role of grouper STING against iridovirus infection.

Huang Y(1), Ouyang Z(1), Wang W(1), Yu Y(1), Li P(1), Zhou S(1), Wei S(1), Wei
J(1), Huang X(2), Qin Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, South China Sea
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road,
Guangzhou 510301, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and
Ecology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou 510301, China. Electronic address:
huangxh@scsio.ac.cn. (3)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and
Ecology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou 510301, China. Electronic address:
qinqw@scsio.ac.cn.

Stimulator of interferon genes (STING, also known as MITA, ERIS, MPYS or TMEM173)
has been identified as a central component in the innate immune response to
cytosolic DNA and RNA derived from different pathogens. However, the detailed
role of STING during fish iridovirus infection still remained largely unknown.
Here, the STING homolog from grouper Epinephelus coioides (EcSTING) was cloned
and its effects on IFN response and antiviral activity were investigated. The
full-length EcSTING cDNA was composed of 1590 bp and encoded a polypeptide of 409
amino acids with 80% identity to STING homolog from large yellow croaker. Amino
acid alignment analysis indicated that EcSTING contained 4 predicated
transmembrane motifs (TMs) in the N terminal, and a C-terminal domain (CTD) which
consisted of a dimerization domain (DD), c-di-GMP-binding domain (CBD) and a
C-terminal tail (CTT). Expression profile analysis revealed that EcSTING was
abundant in gill, spleen, brain, skin, and liver. Upon different stimuli in vivo,
the EcSTING transcript was dramatically up-regulated after challenging with
Singapore grouper iridovirus (SGIV), lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
polyinosin-polycytidylic acid (poly I:C). Reporter gene assay showed that EcSTING
activated ISRE, zebrafish type I IFN and type III IFN promoter in vitro. Mutant
analysis showed that IFN promoter activity was mostly mediated by the
phosphorylation sites at serine residue S379 and S387. Moreover, EcSTING induced 
type I and III IFN promoter activity could be impaired by overexpression of
EcIRF3-DN or EcIRF7-DN, suggesting that EcSTING mediated IFN response in
IRF3/IRF7 dependent manner. In addition, the cytopathic effect (CPE) progression 
of SGIV infection and viral protein synthesis was significantly inhibited by
overexpression of EcSTING, and the inhibitory effect was abolished in serine
residue S379 and S387 mutant transfected cells. Together, our results
demonstrated that EcSTING might be an important regulator of grouper innate
immune response against iridovirus infection.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26359551  [PubMed - in process]


88. J Virol. 2015 Nov;89(22):11572-83. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01482-15. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Kaposi's Sarcoma-Associated Herpesvirus Viral Interferon Regulatory Factor 1
Interacts with a Member of the Interferon-Stimulated Gene 15 Pathway.

Jacobs SR(1), Stopford CM(1), West JA(1), Bennett CL(1), Giffin L(1), Damania
B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA. (2)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina, USA damania@med.unc.edu.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is a gammaherpesvirus known to
establish lifelong latency in the human host. We and others have previously shown
that three KSHV homologs of cellular interferon regulatory factors (IRFs), known 
as viral IRFs (vIRFs), participate in evasion of the host interferon (IFN)
response. We report that vIRF1 interacts with the cellular interferon-stimulated 
gene 15 (ISG15) E3 ligase, HERC5, in the context of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3)
activation and IFN induction. The ISG15 protein is covalently conjugated to
target proteins upon activation of the interferon response. Interaction between
vIRF1 and HERC5 was confirmed by immunoprecipitation, and the region between
amino acids 224 and 349 of vIRF1 was required for interaction with HERC5. We
further report that expression of vIRF1 in the context of TLR3 activation results
in decreased ISG15 conjugation of proteins. Specifically, TLR3-induced ISG15
conjugation and protein levels of cellular IRF3, a known ISG15 target, were
decreased in the presence of vIRF1 compared to the control. vIRF1 itself was also
identified as a target of ISG15 conjugation. KSHV-infected cells exhibited
increased ISG15 conjugation upon reactivation from latency in coordination with
increased IFN. Furthermore, knockdown of ISG15 in latently infected cells
resulted in a higher level of KSHV reactivation and an increase in infectious
virus. These data suggest that the KSHV vIRF1 protein affects ISG15 conjugation
and interferon responses and may contribute to effective KSHV
replication.IMPORTANCE: The KSHV vIRF1 protein can inhibit interferon activation 
in response to viral infection. We identified a cellular protein named HERC5,
which is the major ligase for ISG15, as a vIRF1 binding partner. vIRF1
association with HERC5 altered ISG15 modification of cellular proteins, and
knockdown of ISG15 augmented reactivation of KSHV from latency.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4645652
PMID: 26355087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cell Biochem Funct. 2015 Aug;33(6):415-20. doi: 10.1002/cbf.3133. Epub 2015 Sep
9.

Activation of Toll like receptor 3 induces spermatogonial stem cell apoptosis.

Hu J(1,)(2), Song D(1), Luo G(1), Xu S(1), Cao Y(1), Sun Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Guizhou People's Hospital, Guiyang, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University, Shanghai, 200080, China.

Germ cell apoptosis may be associated with the male infertility. The pathogenesis
is to be further understood. Viral infection is one of the causative factors of
apoptosis of the body cells. This study aims to investigate the role of
activation of Toll like receptor (TLR)3 in the induction of germ cell apoptosis. 
In this study, spermatogonial stem cells (SSC) were isolated from C57BL/6 mouse
testes. The expression of TLR3 on SSC was by RT-qPCR and Western blotting.
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C) was employed to activate TLR3 on SSCs.
The results showed that re-activation by PolyI:C induced SSC apoptosis. Exposure 
to PolyI:C induced interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) phosphorylation in SSCs.
TLR3 and IRF3 formed a complex in the SSCs. The complex of TLR3/IRF3 bound to the
promoter of Fas ligand and promoted Fas ligand expression in SSC, and thus
induced SSC apoptosis. In conclusion, the results of the present study indicate
that activation of TLR3 by PolyI:C induces the SSC apoptosis, which implies that 
viral infection may interfere with the male germ cell development.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26350376  [PubMed - in process]


90. J Cell Biol. 2015 Sep 14;210(6):973-89.

TRIM-mediated precision autophagy targets cytoplasmic regulators of innate
immunity.

Kimura T, Jain A, Choi SW, Mandell MA, Schroder K, Johansen T, Deretic V.

The present paradigms of selective autophagy in mammalian cells cannot fully
explain the specificity and selectivity of autophagic degradation. In this paper,
we report that a subset of tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins act as specialized
receptors for highly specific autophagy (precision autophagy) of key components
of the inflammasome and type I interferon response systems. TRIM20 targets the
inflammasome components, including NLRP3, NLRP1, and pro-caspase 1, for
autophagic degradation, whereas TRIM21 targets IRF3. TRIM20 and TRIM21 directly
bind their respective cargo and recruit autophagic machinery to execute
degradation. The autophagic function of TRIM20 is affected by mutations
associated with familial Mediterranean fever. These findings broaden the concept 
of TRIMs acting as autophagic receptor regulators executing precision autophagy
of specific cytoplasmic targets. In the case of TRIM20 and TRIM21, precision
autophagy controls the hub signaling machineries and key factors, inflammasome
and type I interferon, directing cardinal innate immunity response systems in
humans.

PMCID: PMC4576868
PMID: 26347139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Hepatology. 2015 Dec;62(6):1683-96. doi: 10.1002/hep.28143. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Impaired monocyte-macrophage functions and defective toll-like receptor signaling
in hepatitis E virus-infected pregnant women with acute liver failure.

Sehgal R(1), Patra S(2), David P(1), Vyas A(1), Khanam A(1), Hissar S(1), Gupta
E(3), Kumar G(1), Kottilil S(4), Maiwall R(5), Sarin SK(1,)(5), Trehanpati N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New Delhi,
India. (2)Gynecology and Obstetrics, Lady Harding Medical College, New Delhi,
India. (3)Department of Virology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New
Delhi, India. (4)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(5)Department of Hepatology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

Acute viral hepatitis resulting due to hepatitis E viral infection (AVH-E) is
often serious in pregnancy and could result in acute liver failure (ALF). The
role of monocytes and macrophages (mono-macs) in the pathogenesis of AVH-E and
development of ALF-E in pregnancy is unclear. We investigated the functions of
mono-macs in pregnant (P), AVH-E (n = 44), ALF-E (n = 12), healthy controls (HC; 
n = 20) and compared with nonpregnant (NP) AVH-E (n = 10), ALF-E (n = 5), and HC 
(n = 10). We also recruited non-hepatitis E virus-related pregnant (P), ALF-NE (n
= 5) and non-pregnant (NP), ALF-NE (n = 12) patients with ALF. Mono-macs,
dendritic cell (DC) phenotypes, and Toll-like receptor (TLR) expressions were
studied by flow cytometry and reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
Mono-macs functionality was determined by analyzing their phagocytic activity and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation by using flow cytometry. Frequency of
mono-macs and DCs was increased during HEV infection compared to HC (P < 0.001). 
Macrophages were increased (P < 0.002) in ALF-E(P) compared to ALF-NE(P). The
macrophage phagocytic activity and Escherichia coli-induced ROS production was
significantly impaired in ALF-E(P) compared to AVH-E(P) (P < 0.001), ALF-E(NP),
and ALF-NE(P) patients (P < 0.02). TLR3 and TLR9 expression and downstream MYD88 
signalling molecules IRF3 and IRF7 were significantly down-regulated in ALF-E(P) 
(P < 0.00) compared to AVH-E(P) and ALF-NE(P).CONCLUSION: Functionality of
mono-macs is impaired in pregnant ALF-E patients compared to AVH-E(P). Reduced
TLR3 and TLR7 expression and TLR downstream-signaling molecules in pregnant ALF-E
patients suggests inadequate triggers for the innate immune responses
contributing to development and severity of ALF-E. Studies using TLR agonists to 
activate mono-macs may be of use and in vitro studies should be undertaken using 
patient samples.(Hepatology 2015;62:1683-1696).

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 26331854  [PubMed - in process]


92. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;37(2):501-14. doi: 10.1159/000430372. Epub 2015 Aug
28.

Isoliquiritigenin Inhibits Interferon-<U+03B3>-Inducible Genes Expression in Hepatocytes
through Down-Regulating Activation of JAK1/STAT1, IRF3/MyD88, ERK/MAPK, JNK/MAPK 
and PI3K/Akt Signaling Pathways.

Wu S(1), Xue J, Yang Y, Zhu H, Chen F, Wang J, Lou G, Liu Y, Shi Y, Yu Y, Xia C, 
Hu Y, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University. Collaborative
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The high expression levels of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>)-inducible
genes correlate positively with liver diseases. The present study aimed to
explore the effect of isoliquiritigenin (ISL) on the expression of genes induced 
by IFN-<U+03B3> in vitro, and to elucidate the underlying molecular mechanisms.
METHODS: HepG2 and L02 cells were divided into control, ISL, IFN-<U+03B3>, and IFN-<U+03B3>
plus ISL groups. The cytotoxicity of compounds to cells was evaluated by Cell
Counting Kit 8 (CCK8) assay; the expression levels of chemokine (C-X-C motif)
ligand 9 (CXCL9), CXCL10, CXCL11, and interleukin-6 (IL-6) in cells and
supernatant were measured by quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) and ELISA, respectively. Moreover, western blot was used to examine the
phosphorylated levels of janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1), nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B, interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3)/myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88), mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Protein Kinase B (Akt) in
HepG2 and L02 cells exposed to ISL, IFN-<U+03B3> and IFN-<U+03B3> plus ISL.
RESULTS: The results showed that IFN-<U+03B3> treatment induced the expression of CXCL9,
CXCL10, CXCL11, and IL-6 in HepG2 and LO2 cells, which could be significantly and
dose-dependently inhibited by ISL treatment (P < 0.05 or P < 0.01), but the
inhibitory effect of ISL on IL-6 expression was not so good as on CXCL9, CXCL10, 
and CXCL11 expression. Furthermore, ISL treatment dose-dependently inhibited the 
activation of JAK1/STAT1, IRF3/MyD88, extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK)/MAPK, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK)/MAPK, and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways
(P < 0.05), but had no effect on the activation of JAK2/STAT1, NF-<U+03BA>B and p38/MAPK
signaling pathways.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate that ISL inhibits IFN-<U+03B3>-induced inflammation in
hepatocytes via influencing the activation of JAK1/STAT1, IRF3/MyD88, ERK/MAPK,
JNK/MAPK, and PI3K/Akt signaling pathways.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26315837  [PubMed - in process]


93. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 8;112(36):11324-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1509968112. Epub 2015 Aug 24.

Induction of USP25 by viral infection promotes innate antiviral responses by
mediating the stabilization of TRAF3 and TRAF6.

Lin D(1), Zhang M(2), Zhang MX(2), Ren Y(2), Jin J(2), Zhao Q(2), Pan Z(2), Wu
M(2), Shu HB(2), Dong C(3), Zhong B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China; (2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China; (3)School of Medicine, Tsinghua University,
Beijing 10084, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China; zhongbo@whu.edu.cn.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Oct 27;112(43):E5901.

Host pathogen-recognition receptors detect nucleic acid from invading viruses and
initiate a series of signaling pathways that lead to the production of type I
interferons (IFNs) and proinflammatory cytokines. Here, we found that a viral
infection-induced deubiquitinase (DUB), ubiquitin-specific protease 25 (USP25)
was required for host defense against RNA and DNA viruses. The activation of
transcription factors IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B was impaired and the production of type I
IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines was inhibited in Usp25-/- cells compared with 
the wild-type counterparts after RNA or DNA viruses infection. Consistently,
USP25 deficient mice were more susceptible to H5N1 or HSV-1 infection compared
with the wild-type mice. USP25 was associated with TRAF3 and TRAF6 after
infection by RNA or DNA viruses and protected virus-induced proteasome-dependent 
or independent degradation of TRAF3 and TRAF6, respectively. Moreover,
reconstitution of TRAF3 and TRAF6 into Usp25-/- MEFs restored virus-triggered
production of type I IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines. Our findings thus reveal
a previously uncovered positive feedback regulation of innate immune responses
against RNA and DNA viruses by USP25.

PMCID: PMC4568686
PMID: 26305951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 14;6(23):19348-9.

MAPK phosphatase 5 inhibits IRF3.

Png CW(1,)(2), Zhang Y(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore. (2)Immunology Programme, Life Science
Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

PMCID: PMC4637282
PMID: 26305722  [PubMed - in process]


95. J Exp Med. 2015 Aug 24;212(9):1342-3. doi: 10.1084/jem.2129insight4.

Inborn errors underlying herpes simplex encephalitis: From TLR3 to IRF3.

Zhang SY(1), Casanova JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Rockefeller University; Paris Descartes University, Imagine Institute,
Inserm U1163; Necker Hospital for Sick Children; and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute.

Comment on
    J Exp Med. 2015 Aug 24;212(9):1371-9.

PMCID: PMC4548049
PMID: 26304982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Cells. 2015 Sep;38(9):759-64. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2015.0047. Epub 2015 Aug
21.

Regulation of MDA5-MAVS Antiviral Signaling Axis by TRIM25 through TRAF6-Mediated
NF-<U+03BA>B Activation.

Lee NR(1), Kim HI(1), Choi MS(1), Yi CM(1), Inn KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Science, College of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee
University, Seoul 130-701, Korea.

Tripartite motif protein 25 (TRIM25), mediates K63-linked polyubiquitination of
Retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I) that is crucial for downstream antiviral
interferon signaling. Here, we demonstrate that TRIM25 is required for melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) and MAVS mediated activation of NF-<U+03BA>B
and interferon production. TRIM25 is required for the full activation of NF-<U+03BA>B at
the downstream of MAVS, while it is not involved in IRF3 nuclear translocation.
Mechanical studies showed that TRIM25 is involved in TRAF6-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B
activation. These collectively indicate that TRIM25 plays an additional role in
RIG-I/MDA5 signaling other than RIG-I ubiquitination via activation of NF-<U+03BA>B.

PMCID: PMC4588718
PMID: 26299329  [PubMed - in process]


97. J Ethnopharmacol. 2015 Nov 4;174:195-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.08.018. Epub 2015
Aug 20.

A herbal formula comprising Rosae Multiflorae Fructus and Lonicerae Japonicae
Flos inhibits the production of inflammatory mediators and the IRAK-1/TAK1 and
TBK1/IRF3 pathways in RAW 264.7 and THP-1 cells.

Cheng BC(1), Yu H(1), Su T(1), Fu XQ(1), Guo H(1), Li T(1), Cao HH(1), Tse AK(1),
Kwan HY(1), Yu ZL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer and Inflammation Research, School of Chinese Medicine, Hong 
Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong. (2)Centre for Cancer and
Inflammation Research, School of Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, 
Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong. Electronic address: zlyu@hkbu.edu.hk.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: As documented in the Chinese Materia Medica Grand
Dictionary (), a herbal formula (RL) consisting of Rosae Multiflorae Fructus
(multiflora rose hips) and Lonicerae Japonicae Flos (Japanese honeysuckle
flowers) has traditionally been used in treating inflammatory disorders. RL was
previously reported to inhibit the expression of various inflammatory mediators
regulated by NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPKs that are components of the TLR4 signalling pathways.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This study aims to provide further justification for clinical
application of RL in treating inflammatory disorders by further delineating the
involvement of the TLR4 signalling cascades in the effects of RL on inflammatory 
mediators.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: RL consisting of Rosae Multiflorae Fructus and Lonicerae
Japonicae Flos (in 5:3 ratio) was extracted using absolute ethanol. We
investigated the effect of RL on the production of cytokines and chemokines that 
are regulated by three key transcription factors of the TLR4 signalling pathways 
AP-1, NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells using the multiplex
biometric immunoassay. Phosphorylation of AP-1, NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF3, I<U+03BA>B-a, IKKa/ß, Akt, 
TAK1, TBK1, IRAK-1 and IRAK-4 were examined in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells and 
THP-1 cells using Western blotting. Nuclear localizations of AP-1, NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3
were also examined using Western blotting.
RESULTS: RL reduced the secretion of various pro-inflammatory cytokines and
chemokines regulated by transcription factors AP-1, NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3.
Phosphorylation and nuclear protein levels of these transcription factors were
decreased by RL treatment. Moreover, RL inhibited the activation/phosphorylation 
of I<U+03BA>B-a, IKKa/ß, TAK1, TBK1 and IRAK-1.
CONCLUSIONS: Suppression of the IRAK-1/TAK1 and TBK1/IRF3 signalling pathways was
associated with the effect of RL on inflammatory mediators in LPS-stimulated
RAW264.7 and THP-1 cells. This provides further pharmacological basis for the
clinical application of RL in the treatment of inflammatory disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26297845  [PubMed - in process]


98. J Autoimmun. 2015 Dec;65:19-29. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.07.015. Epub 2015 Aug
18.

LL37 inhibits the inflammatory endothelial response induced by viral or
endogenous DNA.

Merkle M(1), Pircher J(2), Mannell H(3), Krötz F(3), Blüm P(1), Czermak T(1),
Gaitzsch E(1), Schneider C(1), Köppel S(1), Ribeiro A(1), Wörnle M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik IV, Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität
München, Germany. (2)Walter Brendel Centre of Experimental Medicine and Munich
Heart Alliance, Ludwig Maximilians University München, Germany; Medizinische
Klinik und Poliklinik I, Klinikum der Universität München, Germany. (3)Walter
Brendel Centre of Experimental Medicine and Munich Heart Alliance, Ludwig
Maximilians University München, Germany. (4)Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik
IV, Innenstadt, Klinikum der Universität München, Germany. Electronic address:
Markus.Woernle@med.uni-muenchen.de.

In viral infection, morbidity and mortality often result from extrahepatic
disease manifestations such as vasculitis. We hereby show that human
microvascular endothelial cells express viral receptors of the innate immune
system which are induced upon ligand engagement. Furthermore, stimulation of
endothelial cells with the synthetic analog of viral DNA, poly (dA:dT), human DNA
and hepatitis B virus-containing immunoprecipitates from a patient with
polyarteritis nodosa induces an inflammatory response including the upregulation 
of adhesion molecules, which is mediated exclusively by TLR9 and involves an
IRF3-dependent pathway. Thus, endothelial cells are able to actively participate 
in immune mediated vascular inflammation caused by viral infections. Furthermore,
we provide evidence for the ability of LL37 to bind and internalize viral or
endogenous DNA into non-immune cells. DNA nucleotides internalized by LL37
suppress the production of proinflammatory mediators suggesting a protective
effect against direct responses to viral infection or circulating DNA-fragments
of endogenous origin.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26297208  [PubMed - in process]


99. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Oct;46(2):745-52. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.08.013.
Epub 2015 Aug 17.

Expression profiles and interaction suggest TBK1 can be regulated by Nrdp1 in
response to immune stimulation in large yellow croaker Larimichthys crocea.

Zhang DL(1), Yu da H(2), Chen J(1), Fan S(2), Wang ZY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for The East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, PR China.
(2)South China Sea Resource Exploitation and Protection Collaborative Innovation 
Center (SCS-REPIC), South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy
of Fishery Sciences, Guangzhou, 510300, PR China. (3)Key Laboratory of Healthy
Mariculture for The East China Sea, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries College,
Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, PR China. Electronic address: zywang@jmu.edu.cn.

TBK1 has been extensively studied in mammals because of its important roles as a 
molecular bridge, linking the TLRs (TLR3 and TLR4) and RLRs signals to activate
transcriptional factors IRF3 and IRF7 for IFN-I production. However, the
information on molecular and functional characteristics of TBK1 in teleosts is
limited. In this study, the molecular characterization and immune response of
TBK1 in Larimichthys crocea (named as LcTBK1) as well as its interaction with
Nrdp1 were investigated. Sequence analysis demonstrated that LcTBK1 included four
functional motifs, the N-terminal protein kinase domain and ATP-binding site,
middle ULD and C-terminal coiled-coil domain. The tissue expression profiles
indicated that LcTBK1 gene was constitutively expressed in the twelve tissues
examined, with high expression in brain. Temporal expression analysis showed that
LcTBK1 mRNA was obviously increased in the liver after injection of LPS, Poly I:C
and inactive Vibrio parahaemolyticus, however, declined at some time points in
spleen and head-kidney. Furthermore, we found that LcTBK1 can interact with
LcNrdp1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase that involved in immune response to Cryptocaryon 
irritans infection in L. crocea. The qPCR showed that LcNrdp1 was also
significantly up-regulated in liver, down-regualted at some time points in spleen
and head-kidney after LPS, Poly I:C and inactive V. parahaemolyticus injection,
although the expression patterns of the two genes after the three treatments were
different in change magnitude and up-regulation timespan. These results suggested
that LcTBK1 was involved in L. crocea defense against the pathogen infection and 
can be regulated by Nrdp1 in PPRs signaling pathway of fishes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26291490  [PubMed - in process]


100. Sci Rep. 2015 Aug 20;5:13446. doi: 10.1038/srep13446.

In silico mechanistic analysis of IRF3 inactivation and high-risk HPV E6
species-dependent drug response.

Shah M(1), Anwar MA(1), Park S(1), Jafri SS(2), Choi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Science and Technology, Ajou University, Suwon,
443-749, Korea. (2)The Center of Excellence in Molecular Biology, University of
the Punjab, Lahore, 54890, Pakistan.

The high-risk human papillomavirus E6 (hrHPV E6) protein has been widely studied 
due to its implication in cervical cancer. In response to viral threat, activated
kinases phosphorylate the IRF3 autoinhibitory domain, inducing type1 interferon
production. HPV circumvents the antiviral response through the possible E6
interaction with IRF3 and abrogates p53's apoptotic activity by recruiting
E6-associated protein. However, the molecular mechanism of IRF3 inactivation by
hrHPV E6 has not yet been delineated. Therefore, we explored this mechanism
through in silico examination of protein-protein and protein-ligand docking,
binding energy differences, and computational alanine mutagenesis. Our results
suggested that the LxxLL motifs of IRF3 binds within the hydrophobic pocket of
E6, precluding Ser-patch phosphorylation, necessary for IRF3 activation and
interferon induction. This model was further supported by molecular dynamics
simulation. Furthermore, protein-ligand docking and drug resistance modeling
revealed that the polar patches in the pocket of E6, which are crucial for
complex stability and ligand binding, are inconsistent among hrHPV species. Such 
variabilities pose a risk of treatment failure owing to point mutations that
might render drugs ineffective, and allude to multi-drug therapy. Overall, this
study reveals a novel perspective of innate immune suppression in HPV infections 
and suggests a plausible therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC4542336
PMID: 26289783  [PubMed - in process]


101. Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 1;75(17):3436-41. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0989. Epub
2015 Aug 17.

Ligand-Independent EGFR Signaling.

Guo G(1), Gong K(1), Wohlfeld B(2), Hatanpaa KJ(3), Zhao D(4), Habib AA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. VA North Texas
Health Care System, Dallas, Texas. (3)Department of Pathology, The University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (4)Department of Radiology, The
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. (5)Department of 
Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas. VA North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas.
Amyn.Habib@UTSouthwestern.edu.

Constitutive activation of the EGFR is common in cancer due to EGFR wild-type
(EGFRwt) overexpression or the presence of mutant EGFR. Signaling by
constitutively active NSCLC EGFR mutants or the EGFRvIII mutant in glioblastoma
has been studied intensively and the downstream signals are known. Normally, the 
EGFRwt is activated when it is exposed to ligand, resulting in activation of
canonical signals such as ERK and Akt. The EGFRwt also becomes tyrosine
phosphorylated and constitutively activated without ligand when it is
overexpressed, but downstream signals are unclear. Recent studies have identified
a noncanonical form of signaling triggered by EGFRwt exclusively in the absence
of ligand that does not involve ERK or Akt activation but, instead, results in
activation of the transcription factor IRF3. The addition of ligand turns off
IRF3-dependent transcription and activates ERK and Akt. Thus, the EGFR triggers
distinct and mutually exclusive signaling networks, depending on the presence of 
ligand. Furthermore, noncanonical EGFRwt signaling may influence response to
treatment in cancer. Also, there are reports of both synergistic and antagonistic
interactions between ligand-dependent EGFRwt and EGFRvIII signaling. Here, we
discuss ligand-independent EGFR signal transduction by oncogenic EGFR mutants and
EGFRwt, and review the interplay between EGFRwt and EGFRvIII.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4558210 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26282175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Elife. 2015 Aug 11;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.06848.

ISG15 counteracts Listeria monocytogenes infection.

Radoshevich L(1), Impens F(1), Ribet D(1), Quereda JJ(1), Nam Tham T(1), Nahori
MA(1), Bierne H(2), Dussurget O(1), Pizarro-Cerdá J(1), Knobeloch KP(3), Cossart 
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. (2)Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique, UMR1319, Micalis, AgroParisTech, Jouy-en-Josas, France. (3)Molecular
Genetics Group, Neuropathologie, Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

ISG15 is an interferon-stimulated, linear di-ubiquitin-like protein, with
anti-viral activity. The role of ISG15 during bacterial infection remains
elusive. We show that ISG15 expression in nonphagocytic cells is dramatically
induced upon Listeria infection. Surprisingly this induction can be type I
interferon independent and depends on the cytosolic surveillance pathway, which
senses bacterial DNA and signals through STING, TBK1, IRF3 and IRF7. Most
importantly, we observed that ISG15 expression restricts Listeria infection in
vitro and in vivo. We made use of stable isotope labeling in tissue culture
(SILAC) to identify ISGylated proteins that could be responsible for the
protective effect. Strikingly, infection or overexpression of ISG15 leads to
ISGylation of ER and Golgi proteins, which correlates with increased secretion of
cytokines known to counteract infection. Together, our data reveal a previously
uncharacterized ISG15-dependent restriction of Listeria infection, reinforcing
the view that ISG15 is a key component of the innate immune response.

PMCID: PMC4530601
PMID: 26259872  [PubMed - in process]


103. J Dermatol Sci. 2015 Oct;80(1):54-60. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2015.06.017. Epub
2015 Jul 17.

Poly(I:C) induces expressions of MMP-1, -2, and -3 through various signaling
pathways including IRF3 in human skin fibroblasts.

Yao C(1), Lee DH(1), Oh JH(1), Kim MK(1), Kim KH(1), Park CH(1), Chung JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea; Institute of Human-Environment Interface Biology,
Medical Research Center, Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea;
Laboratory of Cutaneous Aging Research, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul
National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Dermatology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of
Korea; Institute of Human-Environment Interface Biology, Medical Research Center,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Laboratory of Cutaneous
Aging Research, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul, Republic of Korea; Institute on Aging, Seoul National
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jhchung@snu.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Ultraviolet (UV) irradiation can result in premature skin aging
(photoaging) which is characterized by decreased expression of collagen and
increased expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Double-stranded RNAs
(dsRNAs) can be generated at various conditions including virally infected cells 
or UV-damaged skin cells. Recent studies have shown that a synthetic dsRNA,
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)), can reduce procollagen expression in
human skin fibroblasts. However, little is known about the effect of poly(I:C) on
the expression of MMPs in skin fibroblasts and its underlying mechanisms.
OBJECTIVE: We examined the effect of poly(I:C) on MMP-1, -2, and -3 expressions
in human skin fibroblasts. Then, we further explored the underlying signaling
pathways involved in the processes.
METHODS: Human skin fibroblasts were treated with poly(I:C) for the indicated
times in the presence or the absence of various chemical inhibitors or small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) at the indicated concentrations. Protein and mRNA
levels of various target molecules were examined by Western blotting and
quantitative real-time PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: Poly(I:C) induced MMP-1, -2, and -3 expressions, which were dependent on
TLR3. Poly(I:C) also induced activations of the mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs), the nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-<U+03BA>B) and the interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) pathways. By using specific inhibitors, we found that poly(I:C)-induced
expressions of MMP-1, -2, and -3 were differentially regulated by these signaling
pathways. In particular, we found that the inhibition of IRF3 signaling pathways 
attenuated poly(I:C)-induced expressions of all the three MMPs.
CONCLUSION: Our data show that the expressions of MMP-1, -2, and -3 are induced
by poly(I:C) through various signaling pathways in human skin fibroblasts and
suggest that TLR3 and/or IRF3 may be good targets for regulating the expressions 
of MMP-1, -2, and -3 induced by dsRNAs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26255711  [PubMed - in process]


104. Virology. 2015 Nov;485:145-52. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.07.010. Epub 2015 Aug 6.

Lloviu virus VP24 and VP35 proteins function as innate immune antagonists in
human and bat cells.

Feagins AR(1), Basler CF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY 10029, United States. (2)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, United States. Electronic address:
chris.basler@mssm.edu.

Lloviu virus (LLOV) is a new member of the filovirus family that also includes
Ebola virus (EBOV) and Marburg virus (MARV). LLOV has not been cultured; however,
its genomic RNA sequence indicates the coding capacity to produce homologs of the
EBOV and MARV VP24, VP35, and VP40 proteins. EBOV and MARV VP35 proteins inhibit 
interferon (IFN)-alpha/beta production and EBOV VP35 blocks activation of the
antiviral kinase PKR. The EBOV VP24 and MARV VP40 proteins inhibit IFN signaling,
albeit by different mechanisms. Here we demonstrate that LLOV VP35 suppresses
Sendai virus induced IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) phosphorylation, IFN-a/ß
production, and PKR phosphorylation. Additionally, LLOV VP24 blocks tyrosine
phosphorylated STAT1 binding to karyopherin alpha 5 (KPNA5), STAT1 nuclear
accumulation, and IFN-induced gene expression. LLOV VP40 lacks detectable IFN
antagonist function. These activities parallel EBOV IFN inhibitory functions.
EBOV and LLOV VP35 and VP24 proteins also inhibit IFN responses in bat cells.
These data suggest that LLOV infection will block innate immune responses in a
manner similar to EBOV.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26255028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2015 Nov;35(11):859-74. doi: 10.1089/jir.2015.0020.
Epub 2015 Aug 3.

Control of FoxO4 Activity and Cell Survival by TRIM22 Directs TLR3-Stimulated
Cells Toward IFN Type I Gene Induction or Apoptosis.

Oteiza A(1,)(2), Mechti N(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 CNRS, UMR5235, DIMNP, University of Montpellier 2 , Montpellier, France .
(2)2 CNRS UMR5236, University of Montpellier 1 and 2 , Montpellier, France .

Activation of innate immune response, induced after the recognition of
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), formed during replication of most viruses, results
in intracellular signaling cascades ultimately culminating in the expression of
type I interferon (IFN). In this study, we provide the first evidence that FoxO4 
triggers the activation of the innate immune signaling pathway in coupling
stimulation of TLR3 and RIG-like receptors by the synthetic dsRNA analog,
poly(I:C), to IFN-ß and IFN-induced gene induction, whereas knockdown of FoxO4
had opposite effects. Similar effects of FoxO4 were observed during
paramyxovirus-mediated IFN-ß transcriptional induction. We further found that
knockdown of FoxO4 did not affect IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B activation by poly(I:C),
suggesting that FoxO4 would act downstream in the signaling pathway. In addition,
we show that the IFN-induced TRIM22 ubiquitin ligase targets FoxO4 and
antagonizes its activity through an unrelated ubiquitin/autophagosomic-lysosomal 
pathway. Unexpectedly, TRIM22 knockdown strongly sensitizes cells to
dsRNA-induced caspase-dependent apoptosis, as early as 2<U+2009>h after poly(I:C)
stimulation, concomitantly to the inhibition of the expression of the
antiapoptotic protein, Bcl-2, indicating that TRIM22 might be a key factor for
controlling the cell survival after TLR3 stimulation. Taken together, our data
demonstrate that the regulation of FoxO4 protein expression and cell survival by 
TRIM22 controls TLR3-mediated IFN type I gene induction, preventing excessive
antiviral response through dsRNA-induced apoptosis.

PMID: 26237181  [PubMed - in process]


106. Cell Host Microbe. 2015 Aug 12;18(2):157-68. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2015.07.001.
Epub 2015 Jul 30.

STING Activation by Translocation from the ER Is Associated with Infection and
Autoinflammatory Disease.

Dobbs N(1), Burnaevskiy N(2), Chen D(2), Gonugunta VK(1), Alto NM(3), Yan N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of Microbiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (2)Department of
Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA. (3)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: neal.alto@utsouthwestern.edu. 
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Department of Microbiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address:
nan.yan@utsouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Host Microbe. 2015 Aug 12;18(2):137-9.

STING is an ER-associated membrane protein that is critical for innate immune
sensing of pathogens. STING-mediated activation of the IFN-I pathway through the 
TBK1/IRF3 signaling axis involves both cyclic-dinucleotide binding and its
translocation from the ER to vesicles. However, how these events are coordinated,
and the exact mechanism of STING activation, remain poorly understood. Here, we
found that the Shigella effector protein IpaJ potently inhibits STING signaling
by blocking its translocation from the ER to ERGIC, even in the context of
dinucleotide binding. Reconstitution using purified components revealed STING
translocation as the rate-limiting event in maximal signal transduction.
Furthermore, STING mutations associated with autoimmunity in humans were found to
cause constitutive ER exit and to activate STING independent of cGAMP binding.
Together, these data provide compelling evidence for an ER retention and
ERGIC/Golgi-trafficking mechanism of STING regulation that is subverted by
bacterial pathogens and is deregulated in human genetic disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4537353 [Available on 2016-08-12]
PMID: 26235147  [PubMed - in process]


107. J Exp Med. 2015 Aug 24;212(9):1371-9. doi: 10.1084/jem.20142274. Epub 2015 Jul
27.

Functional IRF3 deficiency in a patient with herpes simplex encephalitis.

Andersen LL(1), Mørk N(2), Reinert LS(1), Kofod-Olsen E(2), Narita R(3),
Jørgensen SE(4), Skipper KA(1), Höning K(5), Gad HH(1), Østergaard L(6), Ørntoft 
TF(2), Hornung V(5), Paludan SR(1), Mikkelsen JG(1), Fujita T(3), Christiansen
M(6), Hartmann R(1), Mogensen TH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus Research Center for
Innate Immunity, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus,
Denmark Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus Research Center for 
Innate Immunity, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus,
Denmark. (2)Department of Infectious Diseases, International Center for
Immunodeficiency Diseases, Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of
Clinical Immunology, Aarhus University Hospital Skejby, 8200 Aarhus, Denmark.
(3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(4)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus Research Center for
Innate Immunity, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus,
Denmark Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus Research Center for 
Innate Immunity, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus,
Denmark Department of Infectious Diseases, International Center for
Immunodeficiency Diseases, Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of
Clinical Immunology, Aarhus University Hospital Skejby, 8200 Aarhus, Denmark.
(5)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Bonn, 53113 Bonn, Germany.
(6)Department of Infectious Diseases, International Center for Immunodeficiency
Diseases, Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Immunology,
Aarhus University Hospital Skejby, 8200 Aarhus, Denmark Department of Infectious 
Diseases, International Center for Immunodeficiency Diseases, Department of
Molecular Medicine, Department of Clinical Immunology, Aarhus University Hospital
Skejby, 8200 Aarhus, Denmark. (7)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Aarhus Research Center for Innate Immunity, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus
University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Aarhus Research Center for Innate Immunity, Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus
University, 8000 Aarhus, Denmark Department of Infectious Diseases, International
Center for Immunodeficiency Diseases, Department of Molecular Medicine,
Department of Clinical Immunology, Aarhus University Hospital Skejby, 8200
Aarhus, Denmark Department of Infectious Diseases, International Center for
Immunodeficiency Diseases, Department of Molecular Medicine, Department of
Clinical Immunology, Aarhus University Hospital Skejby, 8200 Aarhus, Denmark
trinmoge@rm.dk.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2015 Aug 24;212(9):1342-3.

Herpes simplex encephalitis (HSE) in children has previously been linked to
defects in type I interferon (IFN) production downstream of Toll-like receptor 3.
Here, we describe a novel genetic etiology of HSE by identifying a heterozygous
loss-of-function mutation in the IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) gene, leading to 
autosomal dominant (AD) IRF3 deficiency by haploinsufficiency, in an adolescent
female patient with HSE. IRF3 is activated by most pattern recognition receptors 
recognizing viral infections and plays an essential role in induction of type I
IFN. The identified IRF3 R285Q amino acid substitution results in impaired IFN
responses to HSV-1 infection and particularly impairs signaling through the
TLR3-TRIF pathway. In addition, the R285Q mutant of IRF3 fails to become
phosphorylated at S386 and undergo dimerization, and thus has impaired ability to
activate transcription. Finally, transduction with WT IRF3 rescues the ability of
patient fibroblasts to express IFN in response to HSV-1 infection. The
identification of IRF3 deficiency in HSE provides the first description of a
defect in an IFN-regulating transcription factor conferring increased
susceptibility to a viral infection in the CNS in humans.

© 2015 Andersen et al.

PMCID: PMC4548062
PMID: 26216125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Immunol. 2015 Oct;67(2 Pt B):416-25. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.07.006. Epub 
2015 Jul 22.

Dysfunction in macrophage toll-like receptor signaling caused by an inborn error 
of cationic amino acid transport.

Kurko J(1), Vähä-Mäkilä M(2), Tringham M(3), Tanner L(4), Paavanen-Huhtala S(5), 
Saarinen M(6), Näntö-Salonen K(7), Simell O(8), Niinikoski H(9), Mykkänen J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku,
Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
johanna.kurko@utu.fi. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and 
University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic
address: mari.vaha-makila@utu.fi. (3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Genetics, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, Finland.
Electronic address: maaria.tringham@utu.fi. (4)Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Genetics, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, Finland;
Department of Clinical Genetics, Turku University Hospital, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, 
PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic address: laura.tanner@utu.fi.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku,
Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
paavanen@gmail.com. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and
University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland; Department
of Public Health, University of Turku, Lemminkäisenkatu 1, 20014 Turku, Finland. 
Electronic address: maiju.m.saarinen@utu.fi. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Turku
University Hospital and University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521
Turku, Finland. Electronic address: kirsti.nanto-salonen@tyks.fi. (8)Department
of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu
4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic address: olli.simell@utu.fi.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku,
Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
harri.niinikoski@tyks.fi. (10)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital
and University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland;
Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of 
Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
juha.mykkanen@utu.fi.

Amino acids, especially arginine, are vital for the well-being and activity of
immune cells, and disruption of amino acid balance may weaken immunity and
predispose to infectious and autoimmune diseases. We present here a model of an
inborn aminoaciduria, lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI), in which a single
mutation in y(+)LAT1 cationic amino acid transporter gene SLC7A7 leads to a
multisystem disease characterized by immunological complications,
life-threatening pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and nephropathy. Macrophages are 
suggested to play a central role in LPI in the development of these severe
secondary symptoms. We thus studied the effect of the Finnish y(+)LAT1 mutation
on monocyte-derived macrophages where toll-like receptors (TLRs) act as the key
molecules in innate immune response against external pathogens. The function of
LPI patient and control macrophage TLR signaling was examined by stimulating the 
TLR2/1, TLR4 and TLR9 pathways with their associated pathogen-associated
molecular patterns. Downregulation in expression of TLR9, IRF7, IRF3 and IFNB1
and in secretion of IFN-a was detected, suggesting an impaired response to TLR9
stimulation. In addition, secretion of TNF-a, IL-12 and IL-1RA by TLR2/1
stimulation and IL-12 and IL-1RA by TLR4 stimulation was increased in the LPI
patients. LPI macrophages secreted significantly less nitric oxide than control
macrophages, whereas plasma concentrations of inflammatory chemokines CXCL8,
CXCL9 and CXCL10 were elevated in the LPI patients. In conclusion, our results
strengthen the relevance of macrophages in the pathogenesis of LPI and,
furthermore, suggest that cationic amino acid transport plays an important role
in the regulation of innate immune responses.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26210182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Clin Immunol. 2015 Oct;160(2):328-35. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2015.07.008. Epub 2015 
Jul 21.

Tim-3 promotes intestinal homeostasis in DSS colitis by inhibiting M1
polarization of macrophages.

Jiang X(1), Yu J(2), Shi Q(3), Xiao Y(4), Wang W(5), Chen G(6), Zhao Z(7), Wang
R(3), Xiao H(3), Hou C(3), Feng J(3), Ma Y(2), Shen B(3), Wang L(8), Li Y(3), Han
G(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing
100850, China; State Key laboratory of Toxicology and Medical Countermeasures,
Beijing 100850, China; Beijing Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Beijing 100850,
China. (2)Institute of Immunology, Medical School of Henan University, Kaifeng
475001, China. (3)Department of Immunology, Beijing Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100850, China. (4)Department of Respiratory Diseases, First
Affiliated Hospital of the Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100037, China.
(5)Department of Immunology, Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing
100850, China; Institute of Immunology, Medical School of Henan University,
Kaifeng 475001, China. (6)Department of Immunology, Beijing Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic address: guogangch@yahoo.com.
(7)Department of Pathology, Zhengzhou People's Hospital, YIHE Hospital, Zhengzhou
450000, China. (8)State Key laboratory of Toxicology and Medical Countermeasures,
Beijing 100850, China. (9)Department of Immunology, Beijing Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic address: genchenghan@163.com.

Tim-3 is involved in the physiopathology of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), but
the underlying mechanism is unknown. Here, we demonstrated that, in mouse with
DSS colitis, Tim-3 inhibited the polarization of pathogenic pro-inflammatory M1
macrophages, while Tim-3 downregulation or blockade resulted in an increased M1
response. Adoptive transfer of Tim-3-silenced macrophages worsened DSS colitis
and enhanced inflammation, while Tim-3 overexpression attenuated DSS colitis by
decreasing the M1 macrophage response. Co-culture of Tim-3-overexpressing
macrophages with intestinal lymphocytes decreased the pro-inflammatory response. 
Tim-3 shaped intestinal macrophage polarization may be TLR-4 dependent since
Tim-3 blockade failed to exacerbate colitis or increase M1 macrophage response in
the TLR-4 KO model. Finally, Tim-3 signaling inhibited phosphorylation of IRF3, a
TLR-4 downstream transcriptional factor regulating macrophage polarization. A
better understanding of this pathway may shed new light on colitis pathogenesis
and result in a new therapeutic strategy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26208474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cell Signal. 2015 Oct;27(10):1977-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.07.008. Epub
2015 Jul 15.

Estrogen receptor alpha inhibits RLR-mediated immune response via ubiquitinating 
TRAF3.

Wang C(1), Huang Y(2), Sheng J(2), Huang H(2), Zhou J(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Reproductive Genetics, Ministry of Education (Zhejiang
University), Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China; Department of Cell Biology, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China. (2)The Key Laboratory of
Reproductive Genetics, Ministry of Education (Zhejiang University), Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, China. (3)The Key Laboratory of Reproductive Genetics, Ministry of
Education (Zhejiang University), Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China; Department of Cell
Biology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
Electronic address: zhjjwm300@zju.edu.cn.

RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) function as key sentinel receptor for invading
viruses. Moderate activation of RLR signaling is critical for efficient viral
clearance without harmful immunopathology. Estrogen receptor alpha (ERa) is a
member of the nuclear receptor superfamily of ligand-activated transcription
factors and is involved in the regulation of innate immune responses. However,
the effects of ERa on RLR signaling and the molecular mechanisms are poorly
understood. In this study, we identify ERa as a negative regulator of
RLR-triggered antiviral immune responses. The expression level of ERa is
upregulated following RLR activation in macrophages. In the absence of ligand,
VSV infection phosphorylates ERa at serine 167. ERa inhibits VSV-induced IRF3
activation. We further demonstrate that ERa directly interacts with TRAF3 and
promotes K48-linked proteasomal degradation of TRAF3. Consistently, ERa inhibits 
VSV-triggered IFN-ß production in macrophages in a ligand independent mechanism. 
Thus, ERa functions as a negative feedback regulator of RLR-triggered antiviral
immune responses. These findings also provide the insights that separate the
immune effects of ERa from its ligand-induced hormonal effects.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26186972  [PubMed - in process]


111. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 17;6:7811. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8811.

An autoinhibitory mechanism modulates MAVS activity in antiviral innate immune
response.

Shi Y(1), Yuan B(1), Qi N(1), Zhu W(1), Su J(1), Li X(1), Qi P(1), Zhang D(1),
Hou F(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Innovation Center for Cell Signaling
Network, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

In response to virus infection, RIG-I senses viral RNA and activates the adaptor 
protein MAVS, which then forms prion-like filaments and stimulates a specific
signalling pathway leading to type I interferon production to restrict virus
proliferation. However, the mechanisms by which MAVS activity is regulated remain
elusive. Here we identify distinct regions of MAVS responsible for activation of 
transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor
kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-<U+03BA>B). These IRF3- and
NF-<U+03BA>B-stimulating regions recruit preferential TNF receptor-associated factors
(TRAFs) for downstream signalling. Strikingly, these regions' activities are
inhibited by their respective adjacent regions in quiescent MAVS. Our data thus
show that an autoinhibitory mechanism modulates MAVS activity in unstimulated
cells and, on viral infection, individual regions of MAVS are released following 
MAVS filament formation to activate antiviral signalling cascades.

PMCID: PMC4518314
PMID: 26183716  [PubMed - in process]


112. J Virol. 2015 Oct;89(19):9781-90. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01596-15. Epub 2015 Jul 15.

HIV Vpu Interferes with NF-<U+03BA>B Activity but Not with Interferon Regulatory Factor 
3.

Manganaro L(1), de Castro E(1), Maestre AM(1), Olivieri K(2), García-Sastre A(3),
Fernandez-Sesma A(1), Simon V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York, USA. (2)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla,
California, USA. (3)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York, USA Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA Global
Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York, USA. (4)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA Division of Infectious Diseases,
Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New
York, USA Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, USA viviana.simon@mssm.edu.

The accessory HIV protein Vpu inhibits a number of cellular pathways that trigger
host innate restriction mechanisms. HIV Vpu-mediated degradation of tetherin
allows efficient particle release and hampers the activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway
thereby limiting the expression of proinflammatory genes. In addition, Vpu
reduces cell surface expression of several cellular molecules such as newly
synthesized CD4. However, the role of HIV Vpu in regulating the type 1 interferon
response to viral infection by degradation of the interferon regulatory factor 3 
(IRF3) has been subject of conflicting reports. We therefore systematically
investigated the expression of IRF3 in primary CD4(+) T cells and macrophages
infected with HIV at different time points. In addition, we also tested the
ability of Vpu to interfere with innate immune signaling pathways such as the
NF-<U+03BA>B and the IRF3 pathways. We report here that HIV Vpu failed to degrade IRF3
in infected primary cells. Moreover, we observed that HIV NL4.3 Vpu had no effect
on IRF3-dependent gene expression in reporter assays. On the other hand, HIV
NL4.3 Vpu downmodulated NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent transcription. Mutation of two serines
(positions 52 and 56) involved in the binding of NL4.3 Vpu to the ßTrCP ubiquitin
ligase abolishes its ability to inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B activity. Taken together, these
results suggest that HIV Vpu regulates antiviral innate response in primary human
cells by acting specifically on the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway.IMPORTANCE: HIV Vpu plays a
pivotal role in enhancing HIV infection by counteraction of Tetherin. However,
Vpu also regulates host response to HIV infection by hampering the type 1
interferon response. The molecular mechanism by which Vpu inhibits the interferon
response is still controversial. Here we report that Vpu affects interferon
expression by inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B activity without affecting IRF3 levels or
activity. These data suggest that Vpu facilitates HIV infection by regulating
NF-<U+03BA>B transcription to levels sufficient for viral transcription while limiting
cellular responses to infection.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4577919
PMID: 26178989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Scand J Immunol. 2015 Nov;82(5):452-9. doi: 10.1111/sji.12341.

Genomewide Histone H3 Lysine 9 Acetylation Profiling in CD4+ T Cells Revealed
Endoplasmic Reticulum Stress Deficiency in Patients with Acute-on-chronic Liver
Failure.

Jin L(1), Wang K(2), Liu H(3), Chen T(1), Yang Y(1), Ma X(3), Wang J(1), Li Y(4),
Du D(1), Zhao Y(1), He Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, the First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China. (2)Department
of Infectious Diseases, the Third Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou City, Guangdong Province, China. (3)The Eighth Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi
Province, China. (4)Xi'an children's hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, China.

Acute-on-chronic liver failure (ACLF) displayed 'sepsis-like' immune paralysis.
Little is known about the role of CD4+ T lymphocytes, the primary regulator of
innate and adopted immune system, played in ACLF. Acetylation of histone H3
lysine 9 (H3K9ac), a key epigenetic modification, tightly controls gene
transcription. Whether and how does H3K9ac modification regulate CD4+ T cells in 
ACLF remains unclear. PBMCs were isolated from patients with ACLF, immune
tolerance of chronic hepatitis B (CHB-T) and immune active of chronic hepatitis B
(CHB-A). Then, CD4+ T lymphocytes were purified by magnetic microbeads, and the
purity was confirmed by flow cytometry. H3K9ac variations were analysed in CD4+ T
cells using chromatin immunoprecipitation microarray and then confirmed by
quantitative PCR. Whole-genome H3K9 acetylation analyses were conducted by
bioinformatics. A total of 70 genes were differently modified in H3K9ac between
CHB-A and ACLF groups, while 44 genes were differently modified in H3K9ac between
CHB-T and ACLF groups. Clustering algorithm analysis showed patients with ACLF
displayed 'sepsis-like' immune paralysis. Functional analysis showed endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress, or downstream pathway-related genes, such as BIP, ATF4,
PER1, CSNK1D, IRF3, BNIP1, AKT1 and UBC, were differentially modified in ACLF. We
profiled H3K9 acetyl modification in CD4+ T lymphocytes from HBV-infected
patients with three different immune states, that is ACLF, immune tolerance and
immune active phases. ACLF displayed 'sepsis-like' immune paralysis. ER stress in
CD4+ T lymphocytes attributed to ACLF. This study provides some useful clues for 
revealing the mechanisms underlying ACLF.

© 2015 The Foundation for the Scandinavian Journal of Immunology.

PMID: 26173605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jul 10;16:517. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1728-5.

Transcriptome sequencing of microglial cells stimulated with TLR3 and TLR4
ligands.

Das A(1), Chai JC(2), Kim SH(3), Lee YS(4), Park KS(5), Jung KH(6,)(7), Chai
YG(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bionanotechnology, Hanyang University, Seoul, 133-791, Republic 
of Korea. amitabhdas.kn@gmail.com. (2)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences,
Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791, Republic of Korea. jincchai@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences, Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791,
Republic of Korea. eio3492@gmail.com. (4)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences,
Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791, Republic of Korea. yslee@hanyang.ac.kr.
(5)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences, Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791,
Republic of Korea. kspark73@gmail.com. (6)Department of Molecular & Life
Sciences, Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791, Republic of Korea.
khjung2@gmail.com. (7)Institute of Natural Science & Technology, Hanyang
University, Ansan, 426-791, South Korea. khjung2@gmail.com. (8)Department of
Bionanotechnology, Hanyang University, Seoul, 133-791, Republic of Korea.
ygchai@hanyang.ac.kr. (9)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences, Hanyang
University, Ansan, 426-791, Republic of Korea. ygchai@hanyang.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Resident macrophages in the CNS microglia become activated and
produce proinflammatory molecules upon encountering bacteria or viruses. TLRs are
a phylogenetically conserved diverse family of sensors that drive innate immune
responses following interactions with PAMPs. TLR3 and TLR4 recognize viral dsRNA 
Poly (I:C) and bacterial endotoxin LPS, respectively. Importantly, these
receptors differ in their downstream adaptor molecules. Thus far, only a few
studies have investigated the effects of TLR3 and TLR4 in macrophages. However, a
genome-wide search for the effects of these TLRs has not been performed in
microglia using RNA-seq. Gene expression patterns were determined for the BV-2
microglial cell line when stimulated with viral dsRNA Poly (I:C) or bacterial
endotoxin LPS to identify novel transcribed genes, as well as investigate how
differences in downstream signaling could influence gene expression in innate
immunity.
RESULTS: Sequencing assessment and quality evaluation revealed that common and
unique patterns of proinflammatory genes were significantly up-regulated in
response to TLR3 and TLR4 stimulation. However, the IFN/viral response gene
showed a stronger response to TLR3 stimulation than to TLR4 stimulation.
Unexpectedly, TLR3 and TLR4 stimulation did not activate IFN-ß and IRF3 in BV-2
microglia. Most importantly, we observed that previously unidentified
transcription factors (TFs) (i.e., IRF1, IRF7, and IRF9) and the epigenetic
regulators KDM4A and DNMT3L were significantly up-regulated in both TLR3- and
TLR4-stimulated microglia. We also identified 29 previously unidentified genes
that are important in immune regulation. In addition, we confirmed the
expressions of key inflammatory genes as well as pro-inflammatory mediators in
the supernatants were significantly induced in TLR3-and TLR4-stimulated primary
microglial cells. Moreover, transcriptional start sites (TSSs) and isoforms, as
well as differential promoter usage, revealed a complex pattern of
transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene regulation upon infection with TLR3
and TLR4. Furthermore, TF motif analysis (-950 to +50 bp of the 5' upstream
promoters) revealed that the DNA sequences for NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF1, and STAT1 were
significantly enriched in TLR3- and TLR4-stimulated microglia.
CONCLUSIONS: These unprecedented findings not only permit a comparison of
TLR3-and TLR4-stimulated genes but also identify new genes that have not been
previously implicated in innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC4497376
PMID: 26159724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS Pathog. 2015 Jun 29;11(6):e1005030. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1005030.
eCollection 2015.

BRCA1 Regulates IFI16 Mediated Nuclear Innate Sensing of Herpes Viral DNA and
Subsequent Induction of the Innate Inflammasome and Interferon-ß Responses.

Dutta D(1), Dutta S(1), Veettil MV(1), Roy A(1), Ansari MA(1), Iqbal J(1),
Chikoti L(1), Kumar B(1), Johnson KE(1), Chandran B(1).

Author information: 
(1)H. M. Bligh Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Chicago Medical School, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, North Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

The innate immune system pattern recognition receptors (PRR) are the first line
of host defenses recognizing the various pathogen- or danger-associated molecular
patterns and eliciting defenses by regulating the production of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines such as IL-1ß, IL-18 or interferon ß (IFN-ß). NOD-like receptors (NLRs)
and AIM2-like receptors (ALRs) are cytoplasmic inflammasome sensors of foreign
molecules, including DNA. IFI16, a sequence-independent nuclear innate sensor
ALR, recognizes episomal dsDNA genomes of herpes viruses such as KSHV, EBV, and
HSV-1 in the infected cell nuclei, forms an inflammasome complex with ASC and
procaspase1, and relocates into the cytoplasm leading into Caspase-1 and IL-1ß
generation. IFI16 also induces IFN-ß during HSV-1 infection via the cytoplasmic
STING-TBK1-IRF3 pathway. Thus far, whether IFI16 recognizes foreign DNA directly 
or utilizes other host protein(s) is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that BRCA1, a 
DNA damage repair sensor and transcription regulator, is in complex with IFI16 in
the host cell nucleus, and their association increases in the presence of nuclear
viral genomes during de novo KSHV, EBV and HSV-1 infection, and in latent KSHV or
EBV infection, but not by DNA damage responses (DDR) induced by bleomycin and
vaccinia virus cytoplasmic dsDNA. BRCA1 is a constituent of the triggered
IFI16-inflammasome and is translocated into the cytoplasm after genome
recognition along with the IFI16-inflammasome. The absence of BRCA1 abrogated
IFI16-viral genome association, inflammasome assembly, IFI16 cytoplasmic
localization, and Caspase-1 and IL-1ß production. The absence of BRCA1 also
abolished the cytoplasmic IFI16-STING interaction, downstream IRF3
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation of pIRF3 and IFN-ß production during de
novo KSHV and HSV-1 infection. These findings highlight that BRCA1 plays a
hitherto unidentified innate immunomodulatory role by facilitating nuclear
foreign DNA sensing by IFI16, subsequent assembly and cytoplasmic distribution of
IFI16-inflammasomes leading into IL-1ß formation and the induction of IFN-ß via
cytoplasmic signaling through IFI16-STING, TBK1 and IRF3.

PMCID: PMC4487893
PMID: 26121674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Sep;45(9):2615-27. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545514. Epub 2015 Jul 
20.

DLK1 is a novel inflammatory inhibitor which interferes with NOTCH1 signaling in 
TLR-activated murine macrophages.

González MJ(1), Ruiz-García A(1), Monsalve EM(1), Sánchez-Prieto R(1), Laborda
J(1), Díaz-Guerra MJ(1), Ruiz-Hidalgo MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Centro Regional de Investigaciones Biomédicas (CRIB),
Unidad de Biomedicina UCLM-CSIC, Albacete, Spain.

Delta-like protein 1 (DLK1) is a noncanonical ligand that inhibits NOTCH1
receptor activity and regulates multiple differentiation processes. In
macrophages, NOTCH signaling increases TLR-induced expression of key
pro-inflammatory mediators. We have investigated the role of DLK1 in macrophage
activation and inflammation using Dlk1-deficient mice and Raw 264.7 cells
overexpressing Dlk1. In the absence of Dlk1, NOTCH1 expression is increased and
the activation of macrophages with TLR3 or TLR4 agonists leads to higher
production of IFN-ß and other pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-a, IL-12,
and IL-23. The expression of key proteins involved in IFN-ß signaling, such as
IRF3, IRF7, IRF1, or STAT1, as well as cRel, or RelB, which are responsible for
the generation of IL-12 and IL-23, is enhanced in Dlk1 KO macrophages.
Consistently, Dlk1 KO mice are more sensitive to LPS-induced endotoxic shock.
These effects seem to be mediated through the modulation of NOTCH1 signaling.
TLR4 activation reduces DLK1 expression, whereas increases NOTCH1 levels. In
addition, DLK1 expression diminishes during differentiation of human U937 cells
to macrophages. Overall, these results reveal a novel role for DLK1 as a
regulator of NOTCH-mediated, pro-inflammatory macrophage activation, which could 
help to ensure a baseline level preventing constant tissue inflammation.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26115479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2015 Aug 15;309(4):G270-8. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00304.2014. Epub 2015 Jun 25.

Hepatic TLR4 signaling in obese NAFLD.

Sharifnia T(1), Antoun J(2), Verriere TG(1), Suarez G(1), Wattacheril J(1),
Wilson KT(3), Peek RM Jr(1), Abumrad NN(2), Flynn CR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, Department of Internal
Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee;
(2)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee; and. (3)Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition,
Department of Internal Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee; Veterans Affairs Tennessee Valley Healthcare System, Nashville,
Tennessee. (4)Department of Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee; and robb.flynn@vanderbilt.edu.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease occurs frequently in the setting of metabolic
syndrome, but the factors leading to nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) are not 
fully understood. This study investigated Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling
in human liver with the goal of delineating whether activation of this pathway
segregates those with nonalcoholic fatty liver from those with NASH. Experiments 
were performed using liver biopsy tissue obtained from class III obese subjects
undergoing bariatric surgery, and extended to an immortalized human hepatocyte
HepaRG cell line and primary human hepatocytes. The bacterial endotoxin
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and total free fatty acid levels were significantly
increased in plasma of NASH patients. TLR4 mRNA levels were significantly
increased in subjects with NASH compared with NAFL as was interferon regulatory
factor (IRF) 3 in the myeloid differentiation factor 88-independent signaling
pathway. In HepaRG cells, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) nuclear translocation and
functional activity increased following treatment with the fatty acid, palmitate,
and following exposure to LPS compared with hepatocytes stimulated with a
lipogenic treatment that induced de novo lipogenesis. Palmitate and LPS induction
of NF-<U+03BA>B activity was partially attenuated by chemical- or small-interfering
RNA-mediated inhibition of TLR4. Expression of TLR4 and its downstream mediators 
was upregulated with palmitate and LPS. Similar results were observed using
primary human hepatocytes from a lean donor. Interestingly, NF-<U+03BA>B activity assays
showed obese donor hepatocytes were resistant to chemical TLR4 inhibition. In
conclusion, TLR4 expression is upregulated in a large cohort of NASH patients,
compared with those with NAFL, and this occurs within the setting of increased
LPS and fatty acids.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4537925 [Available on 2016-08-15]
PMID: 26113297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Nov;53(1):23-32. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2015.06.005. Epub 2015
Jun 23.

Functional characterizations of IPS-1 in CIK cells: Potential roles in regulating
IFN-I response dependent on IRF7 but not IRF3.

Feng X(1), Zhang Y(1), Yang C(2), Liao L(3), Wang Y(3), Su J(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling
712100, China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology
and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 
430072, China. (4)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling 712100, China; College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China; Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation 
Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430070, China. Electronic address:
sujianguo2015@163.com.

IPS-1, as the sole adaptor of RIG-I and MDA5, plays a central role in innate
antiviral immunity. In this study, we investigated potential roles of IPS-1 in
innate immunity and the domain-requirement of IPS-1 for its signaling in grass
carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). Overexpression experiment showed that CiIPS-1
mediated IFN-I signal possibly dependent on CiIRF7 but not CiIRF3. Post GCRV
challenge, CiIPS-1 could enhance antiviral immune responses. CARD and TM domains 
were crucial for antiviral function of CiIPS-1, and TRAF motif played an
assistant role. PRO domain seemed as a negative regulator but was pivotal for the
initiation of CiIFN-I and CiMx1. Post viral/bacterial PAMPs stimulation,
CiIPS-1-mediated signaling was tightly controlled. CARD domain of CiIPS-1 could
significantly elicit poly I:C/LPS/PGN-mediated signaling. PRO domain negatively
regulated CiIRF7 and CiIFN-I but was indispensable for inductions of CiMx1 and
CiIL-1ß. TRAF motif and TM domain regulated the signaling presumably in a
cooperative fashion. Post poly I:C stimulation, TRAF motif negatively regulated
CiIRF7, CiIFN-I and CiIL-1ß at a relative early time while TM domain functioned
at a relative late time. TRAF motif was indispensable for the production of
CiMx1, while TM domain slightly negatively regulated the expression. Post LPS and
PGN stimulation, TRAF motif excited an assistant and persistent negative role on 
CiIFN-I, CiIRF7 and CiIL-1ß induction, but was crucial for induction of CiMx1. TM
domain slightly negatively regulated LPS- and PGN-triggered signaling. Taken
together, CiIPS-1 not only exerted important functions in antiviral immune
response but also participated in viral/bacterial PAMPs-triggered immune response
which was tightly controlled to prevent harmful effects resulting from excessive 
activation. This study provided novel insights into the pivotal role of IPS-1 in 
innate immunity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26111995  [PubMed - in process]


119. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Oct;46(2):243-51. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.06.021.
Epub 2015 Jun 21.

Identification and characterization of tumor necrosis factor receptor
(TNFR)-associated factor 3 from humphead snapper, Lutjanus sanguineus.

Cai J(1), Xia H(1), Huang Y(1), Tang J(1), Jian J(1), Wu Z(2), Lu Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fishery, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang 524088, China;
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524088, China; Guangdong Key Laboratory of
Control for Diseases of Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524088, China.
(2)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524088, China; Guangdong Key Laboratory of
Control for Diseases of Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524088, China;
Zhongkai University of Agriculture and Engineering, Guangzhou 510225, China.
(3)College of Fishery, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang 524088, China;
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Biology and Epidemiology for
Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524088, China; Guangdong Key Laboratory of
Control for Diseases of Aquatic Economic Animals, Zhanjiang 524088, China.
Electronic address: fishdis@163.com.

Tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)-associated factor 3(TRAF3) is a key
regulator in TNFR and Toll-like receptor (TLRs)/RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs)
signal pathway. Here, a TRAF3 gene (Ls-TRAF3, GenBank Accession No: KJ789921) is 
cloned from humphead snapper (Lutjanus sanguineus). The Ls-TRAF3 cDNA contains an
open reading frame of 1788 bp, which encodes a polypeptide of 595 amino acids.
The deduced amino acid of Ls-TRAF3 possesses a RING finger, two TRAF-type zinc
fingers, a coiled-coil and a MATH domain. Ls-TRAF3 protein shares high identities
with other known TRAF3 proteins. In healthy fish, Ls-TRAF3 transcripts were
broadly expressed in all examined tissues with highest expression levels in
spleen, liver and head kidney. Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis
revealed that Ls-TRAF3 could be induced by bacteria or viral PAMP poly I:C
stimulation in vivo. Here, we also showed Ls-TRAF3 that, positively regulated
IRF3 and Mx upon poly I:C stimuli, whereas prevented production of
proinflammatory cytokine IL-6 after LPS injection. Moreover, over-expression of
wide type (WT) Ls-TRAF3 and truncated forms, including <U+0394>Zinc finger 1, <U+0394>Zinc
finger 2 and <U+0394>coiled-coil suppressed NF-<U+03BA>B activity significantly, whereas the
inhibitory effect of NF-<U+03BA>B was partially impaired when the RING finger or MATH
domain deletion, suggesting the latter was more important for downstream signal
transduction. Taken together, these results implicated that Ls-TRAF3 might play
regulatory roles in immune response to pathogen invasion.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26108034  [PubMed - in process]


120. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 7;112(27):8391-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1424980112. Epub 2015 Jun 23.

CD14 dependence of TLR4 endocytosis and TRIF signaling displays ligand
specificity and is dissociable in endotoxin tolerance.

Rajaiah R(1), Perkins DJ(1), Ireland DD(2), Vogel SN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201; (2)Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, US
Food and Drug Administration, Silver Spring, MD 20993. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201; svogel@som.umaryland.edu.

Dimerization of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)/myeloid differentiation factor 2
(MD2) heterodimers is critical for both MyD88- and TIR-domain-containing
adapter-inducing IFN-ß (TRIF)-mediated signaling pathways. Recently, Zanoni et
al. [(2011) Cell 147(4):868-880] reported that cluster of differentiation 14
(CD14) is required for LPS-/Escherichia coli- induced TLR4 internalization into
endosomes and activation of TRIF-mediated signaling in macrophages. We confirmed 
their findings with LPS but report here that CD14 is not required for receptor
endocytosis and downstream signaling mediated by TLR4/MD2 agonistic antibody
(UT12) and synthetic small-molecule TLR4 ligands (1Z105) in murine macrophages.
CD14 deficiency completely ablated the LPS-induced TBK1/IRF3 signaling axis that 
mediates production of IFN-ß in murine macrophages without affecting
MyD88-mediated signaling, including NF-<U+03BA>B, MAPK activation, and TNF-a and IL-6
production. However, neither the MyD88- nor TRIF-signaling pathways and their
associated cytokine profiles were altered in the absence of CD14 in UT12- or
1Z105-treated murine macrophages. Eritoran (E5564), a lipid A antagonist that
binds the MD2 "pocket," completely blocked LPS- and 1Z105-driven, but not
UT12-induced, TLR4 dimerization and endocytosis. Furthermore, TLR4 endocytosis is
induced in macrophages tolerized by exposure to either LPS or UT12 and is
independent of CD14. These data indicate that TLR4 receptor endocytosis and the
TRIF-signaling pathway are dissociable and that TLR4 internalization in
macrophages can be induced by UT12, 1Z105, and during endotoxin tolerance in the 
absence of CD14.

PMCID: PMC4500272
PMID: 26106158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Virology. 2015 May;479-480:110-21. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2015.02.017. Epub 2015
Mar 5.

RIG-I in RNA virus recognition.

Kell AM(1), Gale M Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Innate Immunity and Immune Disease, Department of Immunology,
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. (2)Center for
Innate Immunity and Immune Disease, Department of Immunology, University of
Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. Electronic address:
mgale@uw.edu.

Antiviral immunity is initiated upon host recognition of viral products via
non-self molecular patterns known as pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs). Such recognition initiates signaling cascades that induce intracellular 
innate immune defenses and an inflammatory response that facilitates development 
of the acquired immune response. The retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and
the RIG-I-like receptor (RLR) protein family are key cytoplasmic pathogen
recognition receptors that are implicated in the recognition of viruses across
genera and virus families, including functioning as major sensors of RNA viruses,
and promoting recognition of some DNA viruses. RIG-I, the charter member of the
RLR family, is activated upon binding to PAMP RNA. Activated RIG-I signals by
interacting with the adapter protein MAVS leading to a signaling cascade that
activates the transcription factors IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B. These actions induce the
expression of antiviral gene products and the production of type I and III
interferons that lead to an antiviral state in the infected cell and surrounding 
tissue. RIG-I signaling is essential for the control of infection by many RNA
viruses. Recently, RIG-I crosstalk with other pathogen recognition receptors and 
components of the inflammasome has been described. In this review, we discuss the
current knowledge regarding the role of RIG-I in recognition of a variety of
virus families and its role in programming the adaptive immune response through
cross-talk with parallel arms of the innate immune system, including how RIG-I
can be leveraged for antiviral therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4424084 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25749629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cytokine. 2015 May;73(1):138-43. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2015.01.029. Epub 2015 Mar
6.

Knockdown of interleukin-1a does not attenuate LPS-induced production of
interleukin-1ß in mouse macrophages.

Almog T(1), Kandel-Kfir M(1), Shaish A(1), Dissen M(2), Shlomai G(2), Voronov
E(3), Apte RN(3), Harats D(2), Kamari Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)The Bert W. Strassburger Lipid Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer,
Israel. (2)The Bert W. Strassburger Lipid Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer, Israel; Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel.
(3)The Shraga Segal Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Ben-Gurion
University, Beer-Sheva, Israel. (4)The Bert W. Strassburger Lipid Center, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel; Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Israel. Electronic address: yehuda.kamari@sheba.health.gov.il.

IL-1a and IL-1ß are synthesized as 31kDa cell-associated precursors following
TLR-4 stimulation, but their processing to the mature form and secretion require 
a second intracellular stimulus. The unique localization of the precursor of
IL-1a (pro-IL-1a) to the nucleus suggested a role in transcriptional regulation
of inflammatory cytokines. We explored the hypothesis that pro-IL-1a is involved 
in regulation of IL-1ß expression following TLR-4 stimulation. IL-1ß mRNA and
protein levels were specifically decreased in macrophages from IL-1a-deficient
mice following TLR-1/2, TLR-4 or TLR-9 stimulation, supporting the hypothesis.
However, activation of the main upstream regulators of IL-1ß expression, IRF3,
NFkB and p38/JNK, were not reduced in macrophages from IL-1a-deficient mice. In
order to assess the specific role of IL-1a in macrophages, we generated mice with
myeloid cell deficiency of IL-1a (LyzMCre-loxp). Despite over 90% knockdown of
IL-1a, TLR-4 stimulated macrophages from LyzMCre-loxp mice did not produce lower 
levels of IL-1ß compared to IL-1a-loxp-flanked mice. In order to overcome the
possibility that effects are caused by the incomplete deficiency of IL-1a, we
generated new whole-body IL-1a knockout mice (GeneralCre-IL-1a) and the findings 
were similar to myeloid cell-deficient IL-1a. Collectively, our findings do not
support the previously suggested role of nuclear IL-1a in gene regulation of
IL-1ß. Rather, they suggest that IL-1a acts mainly as an alarmin that is
sequestered in the nucleus following stimulation with TLR-4.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25748836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Virol. 2015 May;89(10):5557-68. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00264-15. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Role of hydrogen sulfide in paramyxovirus infections.

Li H(1), Ma Y(1), Escaffre O(2), Ivanciuc T(1), Komaravelli N(1), Kelley JP(1),
Coletta C(3), Szabo C(3), Rockx B(4), Garofalo RP(5), Casola A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston,
Galveston, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical
Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Anesthesiology,
University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston,
Galveston, Texas, USA Department of Rare and Emerging Viral Infections and
Response, Center for Infectious Disease Control, National Institute for Public
Health and the Environment, Bilthoven, The Netherlands. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas,
USA Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, University of Texas Medical Branch at
Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, University 
of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA. (6)Department of
Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas,
USA Sealy Center for Vaccine Development, University of Texas Medical Branch at
Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, University 
of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston, Galveston, Texas, USA ancasola@utmb.edu.

Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is an endogenous gaseous mediator that has gained
increasing recognition as an important player in modulating acute and chronic
inflammatory diseases. However, its role in virus-induced lung inflammation is
currently unknown. Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a major cause of upper
and lower respiratory tract infections in children for which no vaccine or
effective treatment is available. Using the slow-releasing H2S donor GYY4137 and 
propargylglycin (PAG), an inhibitor of cystathionine-<U+03B3>-lyase (CSE), a key enzyme 
that produces intracellular H2S, we found that RSV infection led to a reduced
ability to generate and maintain intracellular H2S levels in airway epithelial
cells (AECs). Inhibition of CSE with PAG resulted in increased viral replication 
and chemokine secretion. On the other hand, treatment of AECs with the H2S donor 
GYY4137 reduced proinflammatory mediator production and significantly reduced
viral replication, even when administered several hours after viral absorption.
GYY4137 also significantly reduced replication and inflammatory chemokine
production induced by human metapneumovirus (hMPV) and Nipah virus (NiV),
suggesting a broad inhibitory effect of H2S on paramyxovirus infections. GYY4137 
treatment had no effect on RSV genome replication or viral mRNA and protein
synthesis, but it inhibited syncytium formation and virus assembly/release.
GYY4137 inhibition of proinflammatory gene expression occurred by modulation of
the activation of the key transcription factors nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) at a step subsequent to their nuclear
translocation. H2S antiviral and immunoregulatory properties could represent a
novel treatment strategy for paramyxovirus infections.IMPORTANCE: RSV is a global
health concern, causing significant morbidity and economic losses as well as
mortality in developing countries. After decades of intensive research, no
vaccine or effective treatment, with the exception of immunoprophylaxis, is
available for this infection as well as for other important respiratory mucosal
viruses. This study identifies hydrogen sulfide as a novel cellular mediator that
can modulate viral replication and proinflammatory gene expression, both
important determinants of lung injury in respiratory viral infections, with
potential for rapid translation of such findings into novel therapeutic
approaches for viral bronchiolitis and pneumonia.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4442521
PMID: 25740991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 4;10(3):e0118551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118551.
eCollection 2015.

Overexpression of the transcription factor Sp1 activates the OAS-RNAse L-RIG-I
pathway.

Dupuis-Maurin V(1), Brinza L(1), Baguet J(1), Plantamura E(1), Schicklin S(1),
Chambion S(1), Macari C(1), Tomkowiak M(1), Deniaud E(1), Leverrier Y(1), Marvel 
J(1), Michallet MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre International de Recherche en Infectiologie, INSERM U111-CNRS UMR5308, 
Université de Lyon 1, ENS de Lyon, Lyon, France.

Deregulated expression of oncogenes or transcription factors such as specificity 
protein 1 (Sp1) is observed in many human cancers and plays a role in tumor
maintenance. Paradoxically in untransformed cells, Sp1 overexpression induces
late apoptosis but the early intrinsic response is poorly characterized. In the
present work, we studied increased Sp1 level consequences in untransformed cells 
and showed that it turns on an early innate immune transcriptome. Sp1
overexpression does not activate known cellular stress pathways such as DNA
damage response or endoplasmic reticulum stress, but induces the activation of
the OAS-RNase L pathway and the generation of small self-RNAs, leading to the
upregulation of genes of the antiviral RIG-I pathway at the transcriptional and
translational levels. Finally, Sp1-induced intrinsic innate immune response leads
to the production of the chemokine CXCL4 and to the recruitment of inflammatory
cells in vitro and in vivo. Altogether our results showed that increased Sp1
level in untransformed cells constitutes a novel danger signal sensed by the
OAS-RNase L axis leading to the activation of the RIG-I pathway. These results
suggested that the OAS-RNase L-RIG-I pathway may be activated in sterile
condition in absence of pathogen.

PMCID: PMC4349862
PMID: 25738304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. EMBO Rep. 2015 Apr;16(4):447-55. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439637. Epub 2015 Mar 3.

WDFY1 mediates TLR3/4 signaling by recruiting TRIF.

Hu YH(1), Zhang Y(1), Jiang LQ(1), Wang S(1), Lei CQ(1), Sun MS(1), Shu HB(1),
Liu Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Medical Research Institute College of Life
Sciences Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Virology,
Medical Research Institute College of Life Sciences Wuhan University, Wuhan,
China yuliu@whu.edu.cn.

Comment in
    EMBO Rep. 2015 Apr;16(4):397-8.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are pattern recognition receptors that sense a variety
of pathogens, initiate innate immune responses, and direct adaptive immunity. All
TLRs except TLR3 recruit the adaptor MyD88 to ultimately elicit inflammatory gene
expression, whereas TLR3 and internalized TLR4 use TIR-domain-containing adaptor 
TRIF for the induction of type I interferon and inflammatory cytokines. Here, we 
identify the WD repeat and FYVE-domain-containing protein WDFY1 as a crucial
adaptor protein in the TLR3/4 signaling pathway. Overexpression of WDFY1
potentiates TLR3- and TLR4-mediated activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3), and production of type I interferons and inflammatory cytokines.
WDFY1 depletion has the opposite effect. WDFY1 interacts with TLR3 and TLR4 and
mediates the recruitment of TRIF to these receptors. Our findings suggest a
crucial role for WDFY1 in bridging the TLR-TRIF interaction, which is necessary
for TLR signaling.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4388611
PMID: 25736436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 May;35(10):1660-72. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01478-14. Epub 2015 Mar 
2.

Promyelocytic Leukemia Protein Isoform II Promotes Transcription Factor
Recruitment To Activate Interferon Beta and Interferon-Responsive Gene
Expression.

Chen Y(1), Wright J(1), Meng X(1), Leppard KN(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom
Keith.Leppard@warwick.ac.uk.

To trigger type I interferon (IFN) responses, pattern recognition receptors
activate signaling cascades that lead to transcription of IFN and IFN-stimulated 
genes (ISGs). The promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein has been implicated in
these responses, although its role has not been defined. Here, we show that PML
isoform II (PML-II) is specifically required for efficient induction of IFN-ß
transcription and of numerous ISGs, acting at the point of transcriptional
complex assembly on target gene promoters. PML-II associated with specific
transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B and STAT1, as well as the coactivator CREB-binding
protein (CBP), to facilitate transcriptional complex formation. The absence of
PML-II substantially reduced binding of these factors and IFN regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) to IFN-ß or ISGs promoters and sharply reduced gene activation. The unique
C-terminal domain of PML-II was essential for its activity, while the N-terminal 
RBCC motif common to all PML isoforms was dispensable. We propose a model in
which PML-II contributes to the transcription of multiple genes via the
association of its C-terminal domain with relevant transcription complexes, which
promotes the stable assembly of these complexes at promoters/enhancers of target 
genes, and that in this way PML-II plays a significant role in the development of
type I IFN responses.

Copyright © 2015, Chen et al.

PMCID: PMC4405644
PMID: 25733689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 May;44(1):272-82. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.02.033.
Epub 2015 Feb 28.

Molecular characterization and expression analysis of eleven interferon
regulatory factors in half-smooth tongue sole, Cynoglossus semilaevis.

Zhang J(1), Li YX(2), Hu YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, China. (2)Taishan Vocational
College of Nursing, 8 Ying Sheng East Road, Tai'an, 271000, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, China. Electronic address:
huyonghua@qdio.ac.cn.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) act as transcription mediators in virus-,
bacteria-, and interferon (IFN)-induced signaling pathways and play diverse
functions in antimicrobial defense, immune modulation, hematopoietic
differentiation, and cell apoptosis. In this study, we described for the first
time eleven IRFs (IRF1, IRF1L, IRF2X1, IRF3, IRF4a, IRF4b, IRF5, IRF6, IRF7,
IRF8, and IRF9) from half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) and
examined their tissue distributions and expression patterns under different
conditions. The deduced protein sequences of these IRFs (except IRF1) share high 
identities (71.8-86.6%) with other corresponding IRFs in other teleosts, whereas 
the sequence identity of IRF1 with the corresponding IRF1 in other teleosts is
only 58.1%. A conserved N-terminal DNA binding domain (DBD), which is
characterized by a winged type helix-loop-helix motif with four to six tryptophan
repeats, is present in all IRFs. Another conserved IRF associated domain (IAD),
which mediates the interactions in the C-terminal part of the protein, is present
in all IRFs except IRF1 and IRF2X1, which instead contain the IAD2 domain.
Several special domains also were found, including a serine-rich domain (SRD) in 
IRF3, IRF4a, IRF4b, and IRF7; a proline-rich domain (PRD) in IRF9; nuclear
localization signals (NLSs) in IRF5, IRF8, and IRF9; and a virus activated domain
(VAD) in IRF5. Quantitative real time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis showed that
expression of all IRFs occurred in multiple tissues. IRF1, IRF2X1, IRF4a, IRF5,
IRF7, and IRF8 exhibited relatively high levels of expression in immune organs,
whereas the other five IRFs displayed high levels of expression in non-immune
organs. Infection with extracellular and intracellular bacterial pathogens and
virus upregulated the expression of IRFs in a manner that depended on tissue
type, pathogen, and infection stage. Specifically, IRF1 and IRF2X1 were highly
induced by bacterial and viral pathogens; IRF1L and IRF6 responded mainly to
extracellular and intracellular bacterial pathogens; IRF3, IRF5, IRF7, IRF8, and 
IRF9 were markedly induced by intracellular bacterial pathogen and virus; IRF4a
and IRF4b were mainly induced by virus and intracellular bacterial pathogen
respectively. These results indicate that the IRFs of C. semilaevis can be
categorized into several groups which exhibit different expression patterns in
response to the infection of different microbial pathogens. These results provide
new insights into the roles of teleost IRFs in antimicrobial immunity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25731919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 2;5:8672. doi: 10.1038/srep08672.

A cell-based screening system for anti-influenza A virus agents.

Wong WY(1), Loh SW(1), Ng WL(1), Tan MC(1), Yeo KS(1), Looi CY(2), Maah MJ(3), Ea
CK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, University of Malaya,
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Department of Chemistry,
Faculty of Science, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

Emerging of drug resistant influenza A virus (IAV) has been a big challenge for
anti-IAV therapy. In this study, we describe a relatively easy and safe
cell-based screening system for anti-IAV replication inhibitors using a
non-replicative strain of IAV. A nickel (II) complex of polyhydroxybenzaldehyde
N4-thiosemicarbazone (NiPT5) was recently found to exhibit anti-inflammatory
activity in vivo and in vitro. NiPT5 impedes the signaling cascades that lead to 
the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B in response to different stimuli, such as LPS and TNFa.
Using our cell-based screening system, we report that pretreating cells with
NiPT5 protects cells from influenza A virus (IAV) and vesicular stomatitis virus 
(VSV) infection. Furthermore, NiPT5 inhibits replication of IAV by inhibiting
transcription and translation of vRNAs of IAV. Additionally, NiPT5 reduces
IAV-induced type I interferon response and cytokines production. Moreover, NiPT5 
prevents activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, and IRF3 in response to IAV infection. These
results demonstrate that NiPT5 is a potent antiviral agent that inhibits the
early phase of IAV replication.

PMCID: PMC4345322
PMID: 25728279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Pflugers Arch. 2015 Nov;467(11):2375-85. doi: 10.1007/s00424-015-1697-1. Epub
2015 Mar 1.

Activation of Toll-like receptor 3 increases mouse aortic vascular smooth muscle 
cell contractility through ERK1/2 pathway.

Hardigan T(1), Spitler K(2), Matsumoto T(3), Carrillo-Sepulveda MA(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(3)Department of Physiology and Morphology, Institute of Medicinal Chemistry,
Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Physiology, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA, USA. mcarrill@nyit.edu. (5)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, New York Institute of Technology-College of Medicine, Northern Blvd,
Old Westbury, NY, 11568, USA. mcarrill@nyit.edu.

Erratum in
    Pflugers Arch. 2015 Nov;467(11):2387.

Activation of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), a pattern recognition receptor of the 
innate immune system, is associated with vascular complications. However, whether
activation of TLR3 alters vascular contractility is unknown. We, therefore,
hypothesized that TLR3 activation augments vascular contractility and activates
vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) contractile apparatus proteins. Male mice were
treated with polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C group, 14 days), a TLR3
agonist; control mice received saline (vehicle, 14 days). At the end of protocol,
blood pressure was measured by tail cuff method. Aortas were isolated and
assessed for contractility experiments using a wire myograph. Aortic protein
content was used to determine phosphorylated/total interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3), a downstream target of TLR3 signaling, and ERK1/2 using Western blot. We 
investigated the TLR3/IRF3/ERK1/2 signaling pathway and contractile-related
proteins such as phosphorylated/total myosin light chain (MLC) and caldesmon
(CaD) in aortic VSMC primary cultures. Poly I:C-treated mice exhibited (vs.
vehicle-treated mice) (1) elevated systolic blood pressure. Moreover, Poly I:C
treatment (2) enhanced aortic phenylephrine-induced maximum contraction, which
was suppressed by PD98059 (ERK1/2 inhibitor), and (3) increased aortic levels of 
phosphorylated IRF3 and ERK1/2. Stimulation of mouse aortic VSMCs with Poly I:C
resulted in increased phosphorylation of IRF3, ERK1/2, MLC, and CaD. Inhibition
of ERK1/2 abolished Poly I:C-mediated phosphorylation of MLC and CaD. Our data
provide functional evidence for the role of TLR3 in vascular contractile events, 
suggesting TLR3 as a potential new therapeutic target in vascular dysfunction and
regulation of blood pressure.

PMID: 25724934  [PubMed - in process]


190. Cancer Lett. 2015 May 28;361(1):67-74. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.02.037. Epub
2015 Feb 23.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma progression is mediated by EBER-triggered inflammation
via the RIG-I pathway.

Duan Y(1), Li Z(2), Cheng S(2), Chen Y(2), Zhang L(2), He J(2), Liao Q(2), Yang
L(3), Gong Z(4), Sun LQ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha 410008, China; The department of pathology of Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha 410008, China. (2)Center for Molecular Medicine,
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410008, China. (3)Center for
Molecular Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410008, 
China; Cancer Research Institute, Central South University, Changsha 410008,
China. (4)Department of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha 410008, China. Electronic address: gongzhicheng2013@163.com. (5)Center
for Molecular Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha
410008, China. Electronic address: lunquansun@csu.edu.cn.

EBERs (EBER1 and EBER2) are suggested to be involved in cellular transformation
and tumor growth. Cytoplasmic pattern recognition receptor-RIG-I, which is
characterized by the recognition of viral dsRNAs, could efficiently trigger the
downstream pathways of innate immunity. Although some previous reports have shown
that EBERs and RIG-I associate with hematological malignancies, the role of
EBERs-RIG-I signaling in solid tumors remains to be clarified. Here we
demonstrate that EBER mediation of the inflammatory response via RIG-I
contributes to NPC development in vitro and in vivo. We first verified that the
expression level of RIG-I was associated with EBER transcription in a
dose-dependent manner in NPC cells and specimens from NPC patients. Furthermore, 
pro-inflammatory cytokine transcription and release were sharply reduced after
RIG-I knockdown compared with the control shRNA group in the presence of EBERs,
accompanied by an attenuation of the NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPK signaling pathways.
Consequently, the tumor burden was greatly alleviated in the RIG-I knockdown
group in a xenograft model. In addition, macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(M-CSF) and monocyte chemoattractant protein (MCP-1), which promote the
maturation and attraction of tumor-associated macrophages, were stimulated upon
the introduction of EBERs, and this upregulation conceivably led to the
tumor-promoting subset transition of the macrophages. Taken together, our results
reveal that EBERs could promote NPC progression through RIG-I-mediated
cancer-related inflammation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25721089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:675149. doi: 10.1155/2015/675149. Epub 2015 Feb 1.

A new mechanism of vitamin C effects on A/FM/1/47(H1N1) virus-induced pneumonia
in restraint-stressed mice.

Cai Y(1), Li YF(1), Tang LP(1), Tsoi B(1), Chen M(1), Chen H(1), Chen XM(1), Tan 
RR(1), Kurihara H(1), He RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Anti-Stress and Health Research Center, Pharmacy College, Jinan University,
Guangzhou 510632, China ; Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine & Natural
Products, Pharmacy College, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China.

It is well known that vitamin C could protect against influenza infection, but
little is known about the mechanisms. This study aimed to investigate the
influence and possible mechanisms of vitamin C on pneumonia induced by influenza 
virus in stressed mice. Results showed that restraint stress significantly
increased the mortality and the severity of pneumonia in mice caused by
A/FM/1/47(H1N1) virus infection, which was attenuated by oral administration of
vitamin C (125 and 250<U+2009>mg/kg). Moreover, vitamin C administration significantly
decreased expression of susceptibility genes, including mitochondrial antiviral
signaling (MAVS) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), and increased
expression of NF-<U+03BA>B. These work in conjunction to induce type I interferons
(IFNs) and elicit innate antiviral response as key factors in RIG-I-mediated
signal transduction pathway. The above effects of vitamin C were further found to
relate with inhibition of excess CORT synthesis by regulating steroid
hydroxylating enzymes in adrenal gland. In conclusion, the protective effects of 
vitamin C on influenza virus-caused pneumonia might be related to its inhibition 
of CORT synthesis, which reduces the susceptibility to influenza viral infection 
in restraint-stressed mice. These findings provide a new mechanism for the
effects of vitamin C on influenza virus-induced pneumonia in restraint-stressed
mice.

PMCID: PMC4331320
PMID: 25710018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Cell Rep. 2015 Feb 24;10(7):1055-65. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.01.039. Epub 2015
Feb 19.

Bruton's tyrosine kinase phosphorylates DDX41 and activates its binding of dsDNA 
and STING to initiate type 1 interferon response.

Lee KG(1), Kim SS(1), Kui L(1), Voon DC(2), Mauduit M(3), Bist P(4), Bi X(1),
Pereira NA(1), Liu C(1), Sukumaran B(4), Rénia L(3), Ito Y(2), Lam KP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and
Research, Singapore 138668, Singapore. (2)Cancer Biology Program, Cancer Science 
Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117599, Singapore.
(3)Singapore Immunology Network, Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
Singapore 138648, Singapore. (4)Emerging Infectious Diseases Program, DUKE-NUS
Graduate Medical School, Singapore 169857, Singapore. (5)Bioprocessing Technology
Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 138668,
Singapore; Departments of Microbiology, Physiology, and Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117574,
Singapore. Electronic address: lam_kong_peng@bti.a-star.edu.sg.

The innate immune system senses cytosolic dsDNA and bacterial cyclic
dinucleotides and initiates signaling via the adaptor STING to induce type 1
interferon (IFN) response. We demonstrate here that BTK-deficient cells have
impaired IFN-ß production and TBK1/IRF3 activation when stimulated with agonists 
or infected with pathogens that activate STING signaling. BTK interacts with
STING and DDX41 helicase. The kinase and SH3/SH2 interaction domains of BTK bind,
respectively, the DEAD-box domain of DDX41 and transmembrane region of STING. BTK
phosphorylates DDX41, and its kinase activities are critical for STING-mediated
IFN-ß production. We show that Tyr364 and Tyr414 of DDX41 are critical for its
recognition of AT-rich DNA and binding to STING, and tandem mass spectrometry
identifies Tyr414 as the BTK phosphorylation site. Modeling studies further
indicate that phospho-Tyr414 strengthens DDX41's interaction with STING. Hence,
BTK plays a critical role in the activation of DDX41 helicase and STING
signaling.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25704810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Adv Virus Res. 2015;92:201-52. doi: 10.1016/bs.aivir.2014.11.004. Epub 2015 Jan
13.

Immune evasion strategies of molluscum contagiosum virus.

Shisler JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois,
Urbana, Illinois, USA. Electronic address: jshisler@illinois.edu.

Molluscum contagiosum virus (MCV) is the causative agent of molluscum contagiosum
(MC), the third most common viral skin infection in children, and one of the five
most prevalent skin diseases worldwide. No FDA-approved treatments, vaccines, or 
commercially available rapid diagnostics for MCV are available. This review
discusses several aspects of this medically important virus including: physical
properties of MCV, MCV pathogenesis, MCV replication, and immune responses to MCV
infection. Sequencing of the MCV genome revealed novel immune evasion molecules
which are highlighted here. Special attention is given to the MCV MC159 and MC160
proteins. These proteins are FLIPs with homologs in gamma herpesviruses and in
the cell. They are of great interest because each protein regulates apoptosis,
NF-<U+03BA>B, and IRF3. However, the mechanism that each protein uses to impart its
effects is different. It is important to elucidate how MCV inhibits immune
responses; this knowledge contributes to our understanding of viral pathogenesis 
and also provides new insights into how the immune system neutralizes virus
infections.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25701888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Adv Virus Res. 2015;92:63-100. doi: 10.1016/bs.aivir.2014.11.003. Epub 2015 Jan
15.

Innate recognition of alphaherpesvirus DNA.

Luecke S(1), Paludan SR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life Sciences, Universiteit Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark;
Aarhus Research Center for Innate Immunology, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
Electronic address: srp@biomed.au.dk.

Alphaherpesviruses include human and animal pathogens, such as herpes simplex
virus type 1, which establish life-long latent infections with episodes of
recurrence. The immunocompetence of the infected host is an important determinant
for the outcome of infections with alphaherpesviruses. Recognition of
pathogen-associated molecular patterns by pattern recognition receptors is an
essential, early step in the innate immune response to pathogens. In recent
years, it has been discovered that herpesvirus DNA is a strong inducer of the
innate immune system. The viral genome can be recognized in endosomes by TLR9, as
well as intracellularly by a variety of DNA sensors, the best documented being
cGAS, RNA Pol III, IFI16, and AIM2. These DNA sensors use converging signaling
pathways to activate transcription factors, such as IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B, which induce 
the expression of type I interferons and other inflammatory cytokines and
activate the inflammasome. This review summarizes the recent literature on the
innate sensing of alphaherpesvirus DNA, the mechanisms of activation of the
different sensors, their mechanisms of signal transduction, their physiological
role in defense against herpesvirus infection, and how alphaherpesviruses seek to
evade these responses to allow establishment and maintenance of infection.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25701886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Gen Virol. 2015 Jul;96(Pt 7):1768-76. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.000093. Epub 2015 Feb 
20.

NSP1 of human rotaviruses commonly inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B signalling by inducing ß-TrCP
degradation.

Di Fiore IJ(1), Pane JA(1), Holloway G(1), Coulson BS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne at the
Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria 3000,
Australia.

Rotavirus is a leading cause of severe gastroenteritis in infants worldwide.
Rotavirus nonstructural protein 1 (NSP1) is a virulence factor that inhibits
innate host immune responses. NSP1 from some rotaviruses targets host interferon 
response factors (IRFs), leading to inhibition of type I interferon expression. A
few rotaviruses encode an NSP1 that inhibits the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway by targeting
ß-TrCP, a protein required for I<U+03BA>B degradation and NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Available
evidence suggests that these NSP1 properties involve proteosomal degradation of
target proteins. We show here that NSP1 from several human rotaviruses and
porcine rotavirus CRW-8 inhibits the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, but cannot degrade IRF3.
Furthermore, ß-TrCP levels were much reduced in cells infected with these
rotaviruses. This provides strong evidence that ß-TrCP degradation is required
for NF-<U+03BA>B pathway inhibition by NSP1 and demonstrates the relevance of ß-TrCP
degradation to rotavirus infection. C-terminal regions of NSP1, including a
serine-containing motif resembling the ß-TrCP recognition motif of I<U+03BA>B, were
required for NF-<U+03BA>B inhibition. CRW-8 infection of HT-29 intestinal epithelial
cells induced significant levels of IFN-ß and CCL5 but not IL-8. This contrasts
with monkey rotavirus SA11-4F, whose NSP1 inhibits IRF3 but not NF-<U+03BA>B.
Substantial amounts of IL-8 but not IFN-ß or CCL5 were secreted from HT-29 cells 
infected with SA11-4F. Our results show that human rotaviruses commonly inhibit
the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway by degrading ß-TrCP and thus stabilizing I<U+03BA>B. They suggest that
NSP1 plays an important role during human rotavirus infection by inhibiting the
expression of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent cytokines, such as IL-8.

PMID: 25701827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cell Signal. 2015 May;27(5):943-50. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2015.01.019. Epub 2015
Feb 12.

CXCL10 expression induced by Mxi1 inactivation induces mesangial cell apoptosis
in mouse Habu nephritis.

Wu L(1), Chen X(1), Mei Y(2), Hong Q(2), Feng Z(2), Lv Y(2), Wen J(2), Liu X(2), 
Cai G(3), Chen X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Institute 
of Nephrology, State Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases, National Clinical
Research Center for Kidney Diseases, China; Medical College, NanKai University,
Tianjin, China. (2)Department of Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
Chinese PLA Institute of Nephrology, State Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases,
National Clinical Research Center for Kidney Diseases, China. (3)Department of
Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Institute of Nephrology,
State Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for
Kidney Diseases, China. Electronic address: caiguangyan@sina.com. (4)Department
of Nephrology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Institute of Nephrology,
State Key Laboratory of Kidney Diseases, National Clinical Research Center for
Kidney Diseases, China. Electronic address: xmchen301@126.com.

MAX interactor 1 (Mxi1) proteins are c-myc antagonists that primarily exert their
biological functions by inhibiting Myc-dependent gene transcription. In this
study, Mxi1(-/-) mice were used to generate a model of mesangial proliferative
glomerulonephritis for the first time. In the present study, we demonstrated that
Mxi1(-/-) mice exhibited a more typical and severe pathological phenotype, which 
was displayed primarily as a noticeable dissolution phenotype with a higher
proportion of apoptotic cells and higher chemokine CXCL10 expression during the
early days of modeling, compared with wild-type mice. Additionally, we determined
that IRF3-mediated TLR4 signaling was likely involved in regulating CXCL10
expression, which might participate in the mesangial dissolution process. We also
found increases in CXCL10 expression, caspase 3 activation, and the proportion of
apoptotic cells when Mxi1 expression was inhibited in mouse mesangial cells.
Furthermore, the proportion of apoptotic cells decreased after inhibiting CXCL10 
expression. Therefore, we concluded that the mesangial cell apoptosis observed in
this mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis model was related to CXCL10
expression induced by Mxi1 inactivation. This finding provides a new theoretical 
basis for the mechanism of mesangial proliferative glomerulonephritis progression
and reveals potential intervention targets for the early treatment of this
disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25683914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Jun;50(2):98-105. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2015.02.006. Epub
2015 Feb 11.

Genome organization and transcriptional regulation of Adenosine Deaminase Acting 
on RNA gene 1 (ADAR1) in grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella).

Sun Z(1), Wang B(1), Liu Y(1), Liu X(1), Mi Y(1), Gu M(1), Wang F(1), Wu C(2), Hu
C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Nanchang Teachers College, Nanchang 330103, China.
(3)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. Electronic address: hucy2008@163.com.

ADAR1, involved in A-to-I RNA editing, belongs to adenosine deaminase acting on
RNA (ADAR) family. A-to-I RNA editing is the most widespread editing phenomenon
in higher eukaryotes. In the present study, we cloned and identified the
full-length cDNA, complete genomic sequence and the promoter sequence of grass
carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) ADAR1 (CiADAR1) by homology cloning strategy and
genome walking. CiADAR1 full-length cDNA is comprised of a 5'UTR (43 <U+2009>bp), a
3'UTR (229 bp) and a 4179 bp ORF encoding a polypeptide of 1392 amino acids. The 
deduced amino acid sequence of CiADAR1 contains two Z-DNA binding domains, three 
dsRNA binding motifs and a conserved catalytic domain. The complete genomic
CiADAR1 has 16 exons and 15 introns. Phylogenetic tree analysis revealed that
CiADAR1 shared high homology with Danio rerio ADAR1 (DrADAR1). RT-PCR showed that
CiADAR1 were ubiquitously expressed and significantly up-regulated after
stimulation with poly I:C. In spleen and liver, CiADAR1 mRNA reached the peak at 
12 h and maintained the highest level during 12-24 h post-injection. CiADAR1
promoter was found to be 1102<U+2009>bp in length and divided into two distinct regions,
the proximal region containing three putative interferon regulatory factor
binding elements (IRF-E) and the distal region containing only one IRF-E. To
further study the transcriptional regulatory mechanism of CiADAR1, grass carp
IRF1 (CiIRF1) and IRF3 (CiIRF3) were expressed in Escherichia coli BL21 and
purified by affinity chromatography with the Ni-NTA His-Bind resin. Then, gel
mobility shift assay was employed to analyze the affinity of CiADAR1 promoter
sequence with CiIRF1 and CiIRF3 in vitro. The result revealed that CiIRF1 and
CiIRF3 bound to CiADAR1 promoter with high affinity, indicating that IRF1 and
IRF3 could be the potential transcriptional regulatory factor for CiADAR1.
Co-transfection of pcDNA3.1-IRF1 (or pcDNA3.1-IRF3) with pGL3-CiADAR1 into
C.<U+2009>idella kidney (CIK) cells showed that both IRF1 and IRF3 played a positive
role in CiADAR1 transcription. In addition, the mutant assay revealed that the
proximal region of CiADAR1 promoter is the main regulatory region in CiADAR1
transcription.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25681076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0117464. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117464.
eCollection 2015.

Induction of PLSCR1 in a STING/IRF3-dependent manner upon vector transfection in 
ovarian epithelial cells.

Kodigepalli KM(1), Nanjundan M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Microbiology, and Molecular Biology, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida, 33620, United States of America.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are the primary sensors of the innate immune system
that recognize pathogenic nucleic acids including double-stranded plasmid DNA
(dsDNA). TLR signaling activates multiple pathways including IRF3 which is
involved in transcriptional induction of inflammatory cytokines (i.e. interferons
(IFNs)). Phospholipid scramblase 1, PLSCR1, is a highly inducible IFN-regulated
gene mediating anti-viral properties of IFNs. Herein, we report a novel finding
that dsDNA transfection in T80 immortalized normal ovarian surface epithelial
cell line leads to a marked increase in PLSCR1 mRNA and protein. We also noted a 
comparable response in primary mammary epithelial cells (HMECs). Similar to
IFN-2a treated cells, de novo synthesized PLSCR1 was localized predominantly to
the plasma membrane. dsDNA transfection, in T80 and HMEC cells, led to activation
of MAPK and IRF3. Although inhibition of MAPK (using U0126) did not modulate
PLSCR1 mRNA and protein, IRF3 knockdown (using siRNA) significantly ablated the
PLSCR1 induction. In prior studies, the activation of IRF3 was shown to be
mediated by cGAS-STING pathway. To investigate the contribution of STING to
PLSCR1 induction, we utilized siRNA to reduce STING expression and observed that 
PLSCR1 protein was markedly reduced. In contrast to normal T80/HMECs, the
phosphorylation of IRF3 as well as induction of STING and PLSCR1 were absent in
ovarian cancer cells (serous, clear cell, and endometrioid) suggesting that the
STING/IRF3 pathway may be dysregulated in these cancer cells. However, we also
noted induction of different TLR and IFN mRNAs between the T80 and HEY (serous
epithelial ovarian carcinoma) cell lines upon dsDNA transfection. Collectively,
these results indicate that the STING/IRF3 pathway, activated following dsDNA
transfection, contributes to upregulation of PLSCR1 in ovarian epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4320088
PMID: 25658875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. BMC Cancer. 2015 Feb 6;15:34. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1032-4.

Melatonin attenuates the TLR4-mediated inflammatory response through MyD88- and
TRIF-dependent signaling pathways in an in vivo model of ovarian cancer.

Chuffa LG(1), Fioruci-Fontanelli BA(2), Mendes LO(3), Ferreira Seiva FR(4),
Martinez M(5), Fávaro WJ(6), Domeniconi RF(7), Pinheiro PF(8), Delazari Dos
Santos L(9), Martinez FE(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biosciences, UNESP - Universidade Estadual
Paulista, Botucatu, SP, Brazil. guchuffa@yahoo.com.br. (2)Department of Anatomy, 
Institute of Biosciences, UNESP - Universidade Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, SP,
Brazil. bialogia@gmail.com. (3)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biosciences,
UNESP - Universidade Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, SP, Brazil. mendeslm@ig.com.br.
(4)Institute of Biology, State University of North of Parana, UENP - Campus Luiz 
Meneghel, Bandeirantes, PR, Brazil. fabioseiva@msn.com. (5)Department of
Morphology and Pathology, UFSCar - Universidade Federal de São Carlos, São
Carlos, SP, Brazil. martinez@ufscar.br. (6)Department of Anatomy, Cell Biology
and Physiology and Biophysics, UNICAMP - Universidade de Campinas, Campinas, SP, 
Brazil. wjfavaro@unicamp.br. (7)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biosciences, 
UNESP - Universidade Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, SP, Brazil.
domeniconi@ibb.unesp.br. (8)Department of Anatomy, Institute of Biosciences,
UNESP - Universidade Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, SP, Brazil.
pinheiro@ibb.unesp.br. (9)Center for the Study of Venoms and Venomous Animals
(CEVAP), UNESP - Univ Estadual Paulista, Botucatu, SP, Brazil. luci@cevap.org.br.
(10)Department of Morphology and Pathology, UFSCar - Universidade Federal de São 
Carlos, São Carlos, SP, Brazil. martinez@ibb.unesp.br.

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are effector molecules expressed on the
surface of ovarian cancer (OC) cells, but the functions of the TLR2/TLR4
signaling pathways in these cells remain unclear. Melatonin (mel) acts as an
anti-inflammatory factor and has been reported to modulate TLRs in some
aggressive tumor cell types. Therefore, we investigated OC and the effect of
long-term mel therapy on the signaling pathways mediated by TLR2 and TLR4 via
myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) and toll-like receptor-associated
activator of interferon (TRIF) in an ethanol-preferring rat model.
METHODS: To induce OC, the left ovary of animals either consuming 10% (v/v)
ethanol or not was injected directly under the bursa with a single dose of 100 µg
of 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene (DMBA) dissolved in 10 µL of sesame oil. The
right ovaries were used as sham-surgery controls. After developing OC, half of
the animals received i.p. injections of mel (200 µg/100 g b.w./day) for 60 days.
RESULTS: Although mel therapy was unable to reduce TLR2 levels, it was able to
suppress the OC-associated increase in the levels of the following proteins:
TLR4, MyD88, nuclear factor kappa B (NFkB p65), inhibitor of NFkB alpha (IkBa),
IkB kinase alpha (IKK-a), TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), TRIF,
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), interferon ß (IFN-ß), tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-a), and interleukin (IL)-6. In addition, mel significantly
attenuated the expression of IkBa, NFkB p65, TRIF and IRF-3, which are involved
in TLR4-mediated signaling in OC during ethanol intake.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, our results suggest that mel attenuates the
TLR4-induced MyD88- and TRIF-dependent signaling pathways in ethanol-preferring
rats with OC.

PMCID: PMC4322437
PMID: 25655081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. BMC Genomics. 2015 Feb 5;16:45. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1270-5.

Expression and regulation of long noncoding RNAs in TLR4 signaling in mouse
macrophages.

Mao AP(1), Shen J(2), Zuo Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Committee on Immunology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, the United States. amao@bsd.uchicago.edu. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Shanghai, China.
shenjun@vip.163.com. (3)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, 900 East
57th street, Chicago, IL, 60637, USA. zzuo@bsd.uchicago.edu.

BACKGROUND: Though long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are emerging as critical
regulators of immune responses, whether they are involved in LPS-activated TLR4
signaling pathway and how is their expression regulated in mouse macrophages are 
still unexplored.
RESULTS: By repurposing expression microarray probes, we identified 994 lncRNAs
in bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) and classified them to enhancer-like
lncRNAs (elncRNAs) and promoter-associated lncRNAs (plncRNAs) according to
chromatin signatures defined by relative levels of H3K4me1 and H3K4me3. Fifteen
elncRNAs and 12 plncRNAs are differentially expressed upon LPS stimulation. The
expression change of lncRNAs and their neighboring protein-coding genes are
significantly correlated. Also, the regulation of both elncRNAs and plncRNAs
expression is associated with H3K4me3 and H3K27Ac. Crucially, many identified
LPS-regulated lncRNAs, such as lncRNA-Nfkb2 and lncRNA-Rel, locate near to immune
response protein-coding genes. The majority of LPS-regulated lncRNAs had at least
one binding site among the transcription factors p65, IRF3, JunB and cJun.
CONCLUSIONS: We established an integrative microarray analysis pipeline for
profiling lncRNAs. Also, our results suggest that lncRNAs can be important
regulators of LPS-induced innate immune response in BMDMs.

PMCID: PMC4320810
PMID: 25652569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2015 Mar;47(3):149-55. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmu133. Epub 2015 Feb 3.

Regulation of cellular innate antiviral signaling by ubiquitin modification.

Lin D(1), Zhong B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Renmin Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430060,
China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China zhongbo@whu.edu.cn.

Host pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) recognize pathogen-associated molecular
patterns generated by invading viruses and initiate a series of signaling
cascades that lead to the activation of interferon-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and subsequent induction of type I interferons (IFNs). 
Posttranslational modification of proteins by ubiquitin plays an essential role
in mediating or regulating the virus-triggered PRRs-mediated signaling.
Deubiquitination is the reversible process of ubiquitination and its role in
regulating PRRs-mediated signaling has recently been explored. In this review, we
first summarize the ubiquitination events in PRRs-mediated signaling that is
triggered by viral nucleic acid and then focus on host and viral deubiquitinating
enzymes-mediated regulation of virus-triggered signaling that modulates the
activation of IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B and subsequent induction of type I IFNs.

© The Author 2015. Published by ABBS Editorial Office in association with Oxford 
University Press on behalf of the Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 25651846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 17;112(7):E710-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1420217112. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Suppression of systemic autoimmunity by the innate immune adaptor STING.

Sharma S(1), Campbell AM(2), Chan J(1), Schattgen SA(1), Orlowski GM(3), Nayar
R(3), Huyler AH(1), Nündel K(4), Mohan C(5), Berg LJ(3), Shlomchik MJ(6),
Marshak-Rothstein A(7), Fitzgerald KA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Innate Immunity, Division of Infectious Diseases. (2)Department of 
Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06519;
(3)Department of Pathology, and. (4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of
Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605;
(5)Department of Immunology and Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390; (6)Department of Immunology, University of
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261; and. (7)Division of
Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01605; ann.rothstein@umassmed.edu kate.fitzgerald@umassmed.edu.
(8)Program in Innate Immunity, Division of Infectious Diseases, Centre of
Molecular Inflammation Research, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
7489 Trondheim, Norway ann.rothstein@umassmed.edu kate.fitzgerald@umassmed.edu.

Cytosolic DNA-sensing pathways that signal via Stimulator of interferon genes
(STING) mediate immunity to pathogens and also promote autoimmune pathology in
DNaseII- and DNaseIII-deficient mice. In contrast, we report here that STING
potently suppresses inflammation in a model of systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). Lymphoid hypertrophy, autoantibody production, serum cytokine levels, and 
other indicators of immune activation were markedly increased in STING-deficient 
autoimmune-prone mice compared with STING-sufficient littermates. As a result,
STING-deficient autoimmune-prone mice had significantly shorter lifespans than
controls. Importantly, Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent systemic inflammation
during 2,6,10,14-tetramethylpentadecane (TMPD)-mediated peritonitis was similarly
aggravated in STING-deficient mice. Mechanistically, STING-deficient macrophages 
failed to express negative regulators of immune activation and thus were
hyperresponsive to TLR ligands, producing abnormally high levels of
proinflammatory cytokines. This hyperreactivity corresponds to dramatically
elevated numbers of inflammatory macrophages and granulocytes in vivo.
Collectively these findings reveal an unexpected negative regulatory role for
STING, having important implications for STING-directed therapies.

PMCID: PMC4343138
PMID: 25646421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Nature. 2015 Apr 23;520(7548):553-7. doi: 10.1038/nature14156. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Mitochondrial DNA stress primes the antiviral innate immune response.

West AP(1), Khoury-Hanold W(2), Staron M(2), Tal MC(2), Pineda CM(1), Lang SM(1),
Bestwick M(1), Duguay BA(3), Raimundo N(1), MacDuff DA(4), Kaech SM(5), Smiley
JR(3), Means RE(1), Iwasaki A(5), Shadel GS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06520, USA. (2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA. (3)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, Department of
Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G
2S2, Canada. (4)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University
School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. (5)1] Department of
Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA [2]
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland 20815-6789, USA. (6)1]
Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520,
USA [2] Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut
06520, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 Mar;15(3):134.
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2015 May-Jun;93(5):427-8.
    Cell Metab. 2015 Jun 2;21(6):793-4.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is normally present at thousands of copies per cell and
is packaged into several hundred higher-order structures termed nucleoids. The
abundant mtDNA-binding protein TFAM (transcription factor A, mitochondrial)
regulates nucleoid architecture, abundance and segregation. Complete mtDNA
depletion profoundly impairs oxidative phosphorylation, triggering
calcium-dependent stress signalling and adaptive metabolic responses. However,
the cellular responses to mtDNA instability, a physiologically relevant stress
observed in many human diseases and ageing, remain poorly defined. Here we show
that moderate mtDNA stress elicited by TFAM deficiency engages cytosolic
antiviral signalling to enhance the expression of a subset of
interferon-stimulated genes. Mechanistically, we find that aberrant mtDNA
packaging promotes escape of mtDNA into the cytosol, where it engages the DNA
sensor cGAS (also known as MB21D1) and promotes STING (also known as
TMEM173)-IRF3-dependent signalling to elevate interferon-stimulated gene
expression, potentiate type I interferon responses and confer broad viral
resistance. Furthermore, we demonstrate that herpesviruses induce mtDNA stress,
which enhances antiviral signalling and type I interferon responses during
infection. Our results further demonstrate that mitochondria are central
participants in innate immunity, identify mtDNA stress as a cell-intrinsic
trigger of antiviral signalling and suggest that cellular monitoring of mtDNA
homeostasis cooperates with canonical virus sensing mechanisms to fully engage
antiviral innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC4409480
PMID: 25642965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Immunobiology. 2015 Jun;220(6):823-32. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2014.12.011. Epub
2014 Dec 30.

Scavenger receptor SREC-I promotes double stranded RNA-mediated TLR3 activation
in human monocytes.

Murshid A(1), Gong J(2), Ahmad R(1), Borges TJ(3), Calderwood SK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, United States. (2)Boston University
Medical Center, United States. (3)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, United
States; School of Biosciences and Biomedical Research Institute, Pontifícia
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, United States. Electronic address:
scalderw@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Scavenger receptor associated with endothelial cells (SREC-I) was previously
shown to be expressed by immune cells and to play a role in CD8(+)-mediated T
cell immunity. SREC-I was also shown to modulate the function of Toll like
receptors with essential roles in innate immunity. Here we have shown that SREC-I
enhanced double stranded RNA (dsRNA)-mediated Toll like receptor-3 (TLR3)
activation. Viral double stranded RNA (dsRNA) was demonstrated to be a pathogen
associated molecular pattern (PAMP) signaling viral infection. We found that in
human monocyte/macrophage THP1 cells as well as murine bone marrow derived
macrophages SREC-I led to elevated responses to the dsRNA-like molecule
polyinosine-polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C) and enhanced production of inflammatory
cytokines. Our data also showed that intracellular/endocytic TLR3 could directly 
interact with SREC-I in the presence of Poly I:C. The internalized ligand, along 
with TLR3 and SREC-I localized in endosomes within macrophages and in HEK293
cells engineered to express TLR3 and SREC-I. SREC-I also stimulated
dsRNA-mediated TLR3 activation of signaling through the NF<U+03BA>ß, MAP kinase and
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) pathways leading to expression of
cytokines, most notably interleukin-8 and interferon-ß. We therefore hypothesized
that SREC-I could be a receptor capable of internalizing Poly I:C, boosting TLR3 
mediated inflammatory signaling and stimulating cytokine production in
macrophages.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4424133 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25641411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Curr Opin Virol. 2015 Jun;12:1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.coviro.2015.01.007. Epub 2015
Jan 29.

Functions of the influenza A virus NS1 protein in antiviral defense.

Krug RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Center for Infectious Disease, Institute 
for Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX,
USA. Electronic address: rkrug@austin.utexas.edu.

Influenza A viruses counteract host antiviral activities, especially the
production of interferons (IFNs) and the activities of IFN-induced proteins that 
inhibit virus replication. The viral NS1 protein is largely responsible for
countering these IFN antiviral responses, but there are functional differences
between the NS1 proteins of different virus strains. The NS1 protein inhibits IFN
production by two mechanisms: inhibition of the activation of IRF3 and IFN
transcription; and inhibition of the processing of IFN pre-mRNAs. The NS1
proteins of several virus strains do not inhibit IRF3 activation, and the NS1
protein of one virus strain does not inhibit the processing of IFN pre-mRNAs.
Many issues remain concerning the mechanisms of action of the various NS1
proteins in countering the IFN response.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4470714 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25638592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Science. 2015 Mar 13;347(6227):aaa2630. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa2630. Epub 2015
Jan 29.

Phosphorylation of innate immune adaptor proteins MAVS, STING, and TRIF induces
IRF3 activation.

Liu S(1), Cai X(1), Wu J(1), Cong Q(2), Chen X(3), Li T(1), Du F(3), Ren J(1), Wu
YT(1), Grishin NV(4), Chen ZJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. (2)Departments of Biophysics and
Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9148, USA. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. Howard Hughes Medical
Institute (HHMI), University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9148, USA. (4)Departments of Biophysics and Biochemistry, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. Howard Hughes
Medical Institute (HHMI), University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. (5)Department of Molecular Biology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. Howard Hughes
Medical Institute (HHMI), University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. zhijian.chen@utsouthwestern.edu.

During virus infection, the adaptor proteins MAVS and STING transduce signals
from the cytosolic nucleic acid sensors RIG-I and cGAS, respectively, to induce
type I interferons (IFNs) and other antiviral molecules. Here we show that MAVS
and STING harbor two conserved serine and threonine clusters that are
phosphorylated by the kinases IKK and/or TBK1 in response to stimulation.
Phosphorylated MAVS and STING then bind to a positively charged surface of
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and thereby recruit IRF3 for its
phosphorylation and activation by TBK1. We further show that TRIF, an adaptor
protein in Toll-like receptor signaling, activates IRF3 through a similar
phosphorylation-dependent mechanism. These results reveal that phosphorylation of
innate adaptor proteins is an essential and conserved mechanism that selectively 
recruits IRF3 to activate the type I IFN pathway.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25636800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Can J Microbiol. 2015 Mar;61(3):201-8. doi: 10.1139/cjm-2014-0540. Epub 2014 Dec 
8.

Effects of Toll-like receptor 3 on herpes simplex virus type-1-infected mouse
neural stem cells.

Sun X(1), Shi L, Zhang H, Li R, Liang R, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, Weifang Medical University, Shandong 261053,
People's Republic of China.

In this study, we aimed to investigate the effect of herpes simplex virus type-1 
(HSV-1) infection on the phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
and the expression of interferon-ß (IFN-ß), as well as to clarify the functions
of toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) in mouse neural stem cells (NSCs) infected with
HSV-1. In HSV-1-infected cultured NSCs, immunofluorescence, reverse transcription
- polymerase chain reaction, Western blot, and ELISA were performed to reveal the
expression patterns of TLR3, IRF3, and IFN-ß. Then, lentivirus-mediated RNA
interference (RNAi) was used to block the expression of TLR3, and its effect on
host resistance to HSV-1 infection was investigated. Under uninfected conditions,
NSCs expressed TLR3 and phosphorylated IRF3, but after infection, the expression 
level of TLR3 was upregulated and the phosphorylation level of IRF3 in the
nucleus was significantly enhanced, while IFN-ß was also expressed. After TLR3
expression was blocked by lentivirus-mediated RNAi, IRF3 phosphorylation and
IFN-ß expression were downregulated. Therefore, HSV-1 upregulated the expression 
of TLR3 in NSCs and promoted nuclear translocation after IRF3 was phosphorylated 
to induce IFN-ß expression. TLR3 exhibited an anti-HSV-1 infection capacity via
innate immune functions.

PMID: 25633775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Diabetes Res. 2014;2014:790902. doi: 10.1155/2014/790902. Epub 2014 Dec 31.

Hyperglycemia induces Toll-like receptor-2 and -4 expression and activity in
human microvascular retinal endothelial cells: implications for diabetic
retinopathy.

Rajamani U(1), Jialal I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Atherosclerosis and Metabolic Research, Division of
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Pathology, University of
California Davis Medical Center, Research Building 1, Room 3000, 4635 Second
Avenue, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. (2)Laboratory for Atherosclerosis and
Metabolic Research, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism,
Department of Pathology, University of California Davis Medical Center, Research 
Building 1, Room 3000, 4635 Second Avenue, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA ; Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Mather, CA 95655, USA.

Diabetic retinopathy (DR) causes visual impairment in working age adults and
hyperglycemia-mediated inflammation is central in DR. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) 
play a key role in innate immune responses and inflammation. However, scanty data
is available on their role in DR. Hence, in this study, we examined TLR2 and TLR4
mRNA and protein expression and activity in hyperglycemic human retinal
endothelial cells (HMVRECs). HMVRECs were treated with hyperglycemia (HG) or
euglycemia and mRNA and protein levels of TLR-2, TLR-4, MyD88, IRF3, and TRIF as 
well as NF-<U+03BA>B p65 activation were measured. IL-8, IL-1ß, TNF-a and MCP-1, ICAM-1,
and VCAM-1 as well as monocyte adhesion to HMVRECs were also assayed. HG (25<U+2009>mM) 
significantly induced TLR2 and TLR4 mRNA and protein in HMVRECs. It also
increased both MyD88 and non-MyD88 pathways, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B),
biomediators, and monocyte adhesion. This inflammation was attenuated by TLR-4 or
TLR-2 inhibition, and dual inhibition by a TLR inhibitory peptide as well as TLR2
and 4 siRNA. Additionally, antioxidant treatment reduced TLR-2 and TLR4
expression and downstream inflammatory markers. Collectively, our novel data
suggest that hyperglycemia induces TLR-2 and TLR-4 activation and downstream
signaling mediating increased inflammation possibly via reactive oxygen species
(ROS) and could contribute to DR.

PMCID: PMC4293793
PMID: 25610879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Virol. 2015 Apr;89(7):3804-18. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02959-14. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Tom70 mediates Sendai virus-induced apoptosis on mitochondria.

Wei B(1), Cui Y(1), Huang Y(1), Liu H(1), Li L(1), Li M(2), Ruan KC(1), Zhou
Q(3), Wang C(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China. (2)The Division of Molecular Nephrology and the
Creative Training Center for Undergraduates, The M.O.E. Key Laboratory of
Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, The College of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China. (3)The Division of Molecular Nephrology and
the Creative Training Center for Undergraduates, The M.O.E. Key Laboratory of
Laboratory Medical Diagnostics, The College of Laboratory Medicine, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China zhouqin@cqmu.edu.cn cwang01@sibcb.ac.cn.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China zhouqin@cqmu.edu.cn cwang01@sibcb.ac.cn.

Virus infection triggers immediate innate immune responses. Apoptosis represents 
another effective means to restrict virus invasion, besides robust expression of 
host cytokines and chemokines. IRF3 was recently demonstrated to be indispensable
for Sendai virus (SeV)-induced apoptosis, but the underlying mechanism is not
fully understood. Here we report that a dynamic protein complex,
Tom70/Hsp90/IRF3/Bax, mediates SeV-induced apoptosis. The cytosolic proapoptotic 
protein Bax interacts specifically with IRF3 upon virus infection. The
mitochondrial outer membrane protein Tom70 recruits IRF3 to mitochondria via
Hsp90. Consequently, the relocation of Bax onto mitochondria induces the leakage 
of cytochrome c into the cytosol and initiates the corresponding apoptosis.
Interestingly, IKK-i is essential for this apoptosis, whereas TBK1 is
dispensable. Collectively, our study characterizes a novel protein complex that
is important for SeV-induced apoptosis.IMPORTANCE: Apoptosis is an effective
means of sacrificing virus-infected cells and restraining the spread of virus. In
this study, we demonstrate that IRF3 associates with Bax upon virus infection.
Tom70 recruits this protein complex to the mitochondrial outer membrane through
Hsp90, which thus induces the release of cytochrome c into the cytosol,
initiating virus-induced apoptosis. Interestingly, IKK-i plays an essential role 
in this activation. This study uncovers a novel mechanism of SeV-induced
apoptosis.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4403418
PMID: 25609812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Virol. 2015 Apr;89(7):3819-32. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03061-14. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Interleukin-1- and type I interferon-dependent enhanced immunogenicity of an
NYVAC-HIV-1 Env-Gag-Pol-Nef vaccine vector with dual deletions of type I and type
II interferon-binding proteins.

Delaloye J(1), Filali-Mouhim A(2), Cameron MJ(2), Haddad EK(2), Harari A(3),
Goulet JP(2), Gomez CE(4), Perdiguero B(4), Esteban M(4), Pantaleo G(3), Roger
T(1), Sékaly RP(2), Calandra T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (2)Vaccine and Gene Therapy
Institute, Port St. Lucie, Florida, USA. (3)Division of Immunology and Allergy,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (4)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Infectious Diseases Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Thierry.Calandra@chuv.ch.

NYVAC, a highly attenuated, replication-restricted poxvirus, is a safe and
immunogenic vaccine vector. Deletion of immune evasion genes from the poxvirus
genome is an attractive strategy for improving the immunogenic properties of
poxviruses. Using systems biology approaches, we describe herein the enhanced
immunological profile of NYVAC vectors expressing the HIV-1 clade C env, gag,
pol, and nef genes (NYVAC-C) with single or double deletions of genes encoding
type I (<U+0394>B19R) or type II (<U+0394>B8R) interferon (IFN)-binding proteins.
Transcriptomic analyses of human monocytes infected with NYVAC-C, NYVAC-C with
the B19R deletion (NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B19R), or NYVAC-C with B8R and B19R deletions
(NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B8RB19R) revealed a concerted upregulation of innate immune pathways
(IFN-stimulated genes [ISGs]) of increasing magnitude with NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B19R and
NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B8RB19R than with NYVAC-C. Deletion of B8R and B19R resulted in an
enhanced activation of IRF3, IRF7, and STAT1 and the robust production of type I 
IFNs and of ISGs, whose expression was inhibited by anti-type I IFN antibodies.
Interestingly, NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B8RB19R induced the production of much higher levels of
proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor [TNF], interleukin-6 [IL-6], and
IL-8) than NYVAC-C or NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B19R as well as a strong inflammasome response
(caspase-1 and IL-1ß) in infected monocytes. Top network analyses showed that
this broad response mediated by the deletion of B8R and B19R was organized around
two upregulated gene expression nodes (TNF and IRF7). Consistent with these
findings, monocytes infected with NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B8RB19R induced a stronger type I
IFN-dependent and IL-1-dependent allogeneic CD4(+) T cell response than monocytes
infected with NYVAC-C or NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B19R. Dual deletion of type I and type II IFN
immune evasion genes in NYVAC markedly enhanced its immunogenic properties via
its induction of the increased expression of type I IFNs and IL-1ß and make it an
attractive candidate HIV vaccine vector.IMPORTANCE: NYVAC is a
replication-deficient poxvirus developed as a vaccine vector against HIV. NYVAC
expresses several genes known to impair the host immune defenses by interfering
with innate immune receptors, cytokines, or interferons. Given the crucial role
played by interferons against viruses, we postulated that targeting the type I
and type II decoy receptors used by poxvirus to subvert the host innate immune
response would be an attractive approach to improve the immunogenicity of NYVAC
vectors. Using systems biology approaches, we report that deletion of type I and 
type II IFN immune evasion genes in NYVAC poxvirus resulted in the robust
expression of type I IFNs and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), a strong
activation of the inflammasome, and upregulated expression of IL-1ß and
proinflammatory cytokines. Dual deletion of type I and type II IFN immune evasion
genes in NYVAC poxvirus improves its immunogenic profile and makes it an
attractive candidate HIV vaccine vector.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4403427
PMID: 25609807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Yi Chuan. 2015 Jan;37(1):63-9. doi: 10.16288/j.yczz.2015.01.009.

Gene expression analysis of porcine peripheral blood mononuclear cell in response
to immune stimulation of Poly I:C.

Yanping W(1), Huaizhong W(1), Jianfeng G(1), Haifei W(2), Jianfeng L(2), Jiying
W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong Key Laboratory of Animal Disease Control and Breeding, Institute of
Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Jinan 250100, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics, Breeding and
Reproduction, Ministry of Agriculture, College of Animal Science and
Technology,China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.

Polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C) is an analogue of natural double
strand RNA (dsRNA), which can simulate the viral dsRNA and stimulate the immune
response. In the present study, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were
isolated from piglets of Dapulian and Landrace with different disease resistance,
and stimulated with 20 µg/mL Poly I:C for 24 hours in vitro culture. The
expression of several cytokines (IL6, IL8, TNFa, IL10, IRF3, IFNa and IFN<U+03B3>) and
three pattern recognition receptors (TLR3, TLR4 and RIG1) was determined by
qRT-PCR. The results showed that, most of the cytokines or receptors had obvious 
expression change compared with the control (without Poly I:C stimulation),
especially the three cytokine genes IL6, IL8 and IL10, whose average expression
change times were 20.71, 10.87 and 5.18, respectively. Expression comparison
between breeds and among individuals of the same breed indicated that there was
obvious difference not only between Dapulain and Landrace (Dapulain higher than
Landrace) but also among the three individuals of the same breed. Our study
simulated the infection of dsRNA to host cells using Poly I:C, and provided
experimental foundation for further study on selecting the immune genes in
response to Poly I:C stimulation and identifying the unique disease-resistance
genes of Dapulian.

PMID: 25608815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Expert Opin Biol Ther. 2015;15 Suppl 1:S223-9. doi:
10.1517/14712598.2015.1005597. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Evidence for ProTa-TLR4/MD-2 binding: molecular dynamics and gravimetric assay
studies.

Omotuyi O(1), Matsunaga H, Ueda H.

Author information: 
(1)Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Department of
Pharmacology and Therapeutic Innovation , 1-14 Bunkyo-machi, Nagasaki 852-8521 , 
Japan +81 95 819 2421; +81 95 819 2420; ueda@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: During preconditioning, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) selectively activates
TLR4/MD-2/Toll/IL-1 receptor-domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-ß (TRIF)
pathway instead of pro-inflammatory myeloid differentiation protein-88
(MyD88)/MyD88-adaptor-like protein (MAL) pathway. Extracellular prothymosin alpha
(ProTa) is also known to selectively activate the TLR4/MD2/TRIF-IRF3 pathway in
certain diseased conditions. In the current study, biophysical evidence for
ProTa/TLR4/MD-2 complex formation and its interaction dynamics have been studied.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Gravimetric assay was used to investigate
ProTa/TLR4/MD-2 complex formation while molecular dynamics (MD) simulation was
used to study its interaction dynamics.
RESULTS: Through electrostatic interaction, full-length ProTa (F-ProTa)
C-terminal peptide (aa 91 - 111) superficially interacts with similar TLR4/MD-2
(KD = 273.36 nm vs 16.07 µg/ml [LPS]) conformation with LPS at an overlapping
three-dimensional space while F-ProTa is hinged to the TLR4 scaffold by one-amino
acid shift-Mosoian domain (aa-51 - 90). Comparatively, F-ProTa better stabilizes 
MD-2 metastable states transition and mediates higher TLR4/MD-2 interaction than 
LPS.
CONCLUSIONS: ProTa via its C-terminal peptide (aa 91 - 111) exhibits in vitro
biophysical contact with TLR4/MD-2 complex conformation recognized by LPS at
overlapping LPS-binding positions.

PMID: 25604147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Ethnopharmacol. 2015 Mar 13;162:287-95. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.01.002. Epub
2015 Jan 12.

Antiviral effects of Jinxin oral liquid against respiratory syncytial virus
infection in the BALB/c mice model.

Chen ZG(1), Luo H(2), Wang SC(3), Xu JY(1), Li JX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Institution of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing
210029, China; Jingsu Key Laboratory of Pediatric Respiratory Disease, Nanjing
210029, China. (2)Traditional Chinese Medicine Department of Children<U+05F3>s Hospital 
of Zhengzhou, Zhengzhou 450000, China. (3)Pediatric Institution of Nanjing
University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing 210029, China; Jingsu Key Laboratory of
Pediatric Respiratory Disease, Nanjing 210029, China. Electronic address:
wscnj2014@126.com. (4)Traditional Chinese Medicine Department of Shenzhen
Children<U+05F3>s Hospital, Shenzhen 518000, China.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Jinxin oral liquid (JOL) is used in traditional
Chinese medicine (TCM) to treat influenza, cough, asthma, and viral pneumonia, on
the basis of Ma Xing Shi Gan Tang (MXSGT) and the clinical experience of
Professor Wang Shouchuan, one of the most prestigious pediatricians in China.
AIM OF STUDY: To investigate the anti-inflammatory and antiviral activities of
JOL in mice infected with respiratory syncytial virus (RSV).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mice were orally administered JOL at doses of 27.6 g
kg(-1) d(-1) and 55.2 g kg(-1) d(-1) for 1, 3, or 6d after RSV challenge. The
viral loads in the lung tissue were measured by real-time RT-PCR. The levels of
IFN-ß in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BLAF) and lung tissue were detected by
ELISA and real-time RT-PCR, respectively. The mRNA and protein expression of
TLR3, IRF3, and SOCS1 were detected by real-time RT-PCR and western blot,
respectively. The protein expression of phoshorylated-IRF3 (p-IRF3) was detected 
by western blot.
RESULTS: JOL significantly ameliorated lung inflammation in RSV-infected mice,
and significantly reduced the viral load in the lung tissues. On days 2 and 4
after infection, the mRNA and protein expression of IFN-ß, TLR3, IRF3 (p-IRF3),
and SOCS1 were significantly downregulated in RSV-infected mice treated with JOL.
However, 7d after infection, JOL significantly upregulated the RSV-induced
decrease in IFN-ß, TLR3, and IRF3 (p-IRF3), but reduced SOCS1 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: JOL ameliorated lung inflammation and inhibited virus replication
significantly in RSV-infected mice. During early stage infection, the effect of
JOL was improved through inhibition of the TLR3-IRF3-IFN-ß signaling pathway and 
the expression of SOCS1, whereas during the later stage of infection, JOL
upregulated the expression of key signaling molecules in the TLR3 signaling
pathway and downregulated the expression of SOCS1.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25593018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cytokine. 2015 Mar;72(1):63-70. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.12.008. Epub 2015 Jan
10.

A Src-family-tyrosine kinase, Lyn, is required for efficient IFN-ß expression in 
pattern recognition receptor, RIG-I, signal pathway by interacting with IPS-1.

Lim YJ(1), Koo JE(2), Hong EH(2), Park ZY(1), Lim KM(3), Bae ON(4), Lee JY(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju 
500-712, Republic of Korea. (2)Integrated Research Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, College of Pharmacy, The Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon 420-743,
Republic of Korea. (3)College of Pharmacy, Ewha Womans University, 52
Ewhayeodae-gil, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-808, Republic of Korea. (4)College of
Pharmacy, Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hanyang University, Ansan,
Gyeonggido 426-791, Republic of Korea. (5)Integrated Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, The Catholic University of Korea,
Bucheon 420-743, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: joolee@catholic.ac.kr.

Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) plays an important role in antiviral
immunity as a cytosolic receptor recognizing invading viruses. The activation of 
downstream signaling pathways led by IFN-ß promoter stimulator-1 (IPS-1), an
adaptor, is known to culminate in the activation of IRFs and the expression of
type I interferons. However, the role of Src-family-tyrosine kinases (STKs) in
the RIG-I signaling pathway has not been fully evaluated. Through a combined
approach of immunoprecipitation and micro reversed phase liquid
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (RPLC-MS/MS) analysis, we established
that Lyn, one of the STKs, is associated with RIG-I in macrophages. The
association of Lyn and RIG-I was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation study with
293T cells overexpressing Lyn and RIG-I. Suppression of Lyn by siRNA knockdown or
a pharmacological inhibitor (PP2) resulted in the attenuation of IRF3 activation 
and IFN-ß expression induced by short poly I:C, a RIG-I agonist, in macrophages. 
Lyn activation, as determined by phosphorylation of Tyr396 residue, was observed 
upon short poly I:C stimulation in the mitochondria of macrophages. Short poly
I:C induced the formation of speckle-like aggregates of Lyn, which are prominent 
in mitochondria. Lyn associated with IPS-1, an adaptor protein of RIG-I, which
resides on mitochondria membrane. Helicase domain of RIG-I and CARD of IPS-1 are 
responsible for the interaction with Lyn while SH3 and SH2 domains in Lyn are
required for the association with RIG-I and IPS-1. Collectively, our results
indicate that Lyn plays a positive regulatory role in RIG-I-mediated interferon
expression as a downstream component of IPS-1. They provide further information
as to how tyrosine kinases such as STKs play a role in the regulation of
antiviral immunity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25585356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Microvasc Res. 2015 Mar;98:68-73. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2015.01.003. Epub 2015 Jan
9.

Poly I:C enhances production of nitric oxide in response to interferon-<U+03B3> via
upregulation of interferon regulatory factor 7 in vascular endothelial cells.

Mori D(1), Koide N(2), Tsolmongyn B(2), Nagata H(1), Sano T(1), Nonami T(1),
Yokochi T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, 
Aichi 480-1195, Japan. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi
Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi Medical University School of 
Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan. Electronic address:
yokochi@aichi-med-u.ac.jp.

The effect of poly I:C on interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>-induced nitric oxide (NO) production
in vascular endothelial cells was examined using murine aortic endothelial END-D 
cells. Poly I:C augmented IFN-<U+03B3>-induced NO production although it alone did not
induce the NO production. Poly I:C augmented the NO production via enhanced
expression of an inducible NO synthase protein. Poly I:C did not affect the
activation of Janus kinase (JAK) 1/2, and signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 1 in IFN-<U+03B3> signaling. Moreover, there was no significant
difference in the IFN-<U+03B3>-induced interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 1 expression
between the presence and absence of poly I:C. Poly I:C led to the activation of
IRF7 in END-D cells. Inhibition of poly I:C signaling by amlexanox, an inhibitor 
of TANK-binding kinase (TBK) 1 and I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK) e, abolished the augmentation
of IFN-<U+03B3>-induced NO production. Therefore, poly I:C was suggested to augment
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced NO production at the transcriptional level via enhanced IRF7
activation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25582076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 27;290(9):5470-83. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.601625. Epub 2015 
Jan 7.

Transfected poly(I:C) activates different dsRNA receptors, leading to apoptosis
or immunoadjuvant response in androgen-independent prostate cancer cells.

Palchetti S(1), Starace D(2), De Cesaris P(3), Filippini A(1), Ziparo E(1),
Riccioli A(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Department of Anatomy, 
Histology, Forensic Medicine, and Orthopedics, Section of Histology and Medical
Embryology, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome, Italy and. (2)From the Istituto 
Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Department of Anatomy, Histology, Forensic
Medicine, and Orthopedics, Section of Histology and Medical Embryology,
"Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome, Italy and donatella.starace@uniroma1.it.
(3)the Department of Biotechnological and Applied Clinical Sciences, University
of L'Aquila, L'Aquila, Italy. (4)From the Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci
Bolognetti, Department of Anatomy, Histology, Forensic Medicine, and Orthopedics,
Section of Histology and Medical Embryology, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome,
Italy and anna.riccioli@uniroma1.it.

Despite the effectiveness of surgery or radiation therapy for the treatment of
early-stage prostate cancer (PCa), there is currently no effective strategy for
late-stage disease. New therapeutic targets are emerging; in particular, dsRNA
receptors Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and cytosolic helicases expressed by cancer
cells, once activated, exert a pro-apoptotic effect in different tumors. We
previously demonstrated that the synthetic analog of dsRNA poly(I:C) induces
apoptosis in the androgen-dependent PCa cell line LNCaP in a TLR3-dependent
fashion, whereas only a weak apoptotic effect is observed in the more aggressive 
and androgen-independent PCa cells PC3 and DU145. In this paper, we characterize 
the receptors and the signaling pathways involved in the remarkable apoptosis
induced by poly(I:C) transfected by Lipofectamine (in-poly(I:C)) compared with
the 12-fold higher free poly(I:C) concentration in PC3 and DU145 cells. By using 
genetic inhibition of different poly(I:C) receptors, we demonstrate the crucial
role of TLR3 and Src in in-poly(I:C)-induced apoptosis. Therefore, we show that
the increased in-poly(I:C) apoptotic efficacy is due to a higher binding of
endosomal TLR3. On the other hand, we show that in-poly(I:C) binding to cytosolic
receptors MDA5 and RIG-I triggers IRF3-mediated signaling, leading uniquely to
the up-regulation of IFN-ß, which likely in turn induces increased TLR3, MDA5,
and RIG-I proteins. In summary, in-poly(I:C) activates two distinct antitumor
pathways in PC3 and DU145 cells: one mediated by the TLR3/Src/STAT1 axis, leading
to apoptosis, and the other one mediated by MDA5/RIG-I/IRF3, leading to
immunoadjuvant IFN-ß expression.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4342463
PMID: 25568326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Bing Du Xue Bao. 2014 Sep;30(5):579-86.

[Current research on picornavirus 3C protease].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang H(1), Xie GC, Duan ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.

The picornavirus family comprises many small viruses, several of which are
important pathogens of humans and livestock. The 3C protease (3Cpro) of different
species and genera of picornavirus contains the classic G-X-C-G motif and
Cys-His-Asp/Glu catalytic triad. 3Cpro conducts maturation cleavage in the
regions of VP2-VP3 and VP3-VP1 in P1, 2A-2B and 2B-2C in P2 and the whole P3.
Picornavirus 3Cpro has been shown to have significant substrate preference in
Q-G/S/A/V/H/R and E-S/G/R/M as well as species and genera specificity through
analyses of the maturation cleavage of picornavirus polyproteins. Innate immune
adaptors such as TRIF, MAVS, IRF3, IRF7 and NEMO have various potential cleavage 
sites in picornavirus 3Cpro (TRIF and NEMO show considerable diversity in their
cleavage sites). Useful information will be provided for the development of
broad-spectrum antiviral agents as well as evasion mechanisms of the innate
immune system against picornavirus 3Cpro through continued research of
picornavirus 3Cpro.

PMID: 25562970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 27;290(9):5661-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.618835. Epub 2015 
Jan 2.

Efficient delivery and functional expression of transfected modified mRNA in
human embryonic stem cell-derived retinal pigmented epithelial cells.

Hansson ML(1), Albert S(2), González Somermeyer L(3), Peco R(2), Mejía-Ramírez
E(2), Montserrat N(2), Izpisua Belmonte JC(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona, 08003 Barcelona, Spain,
magnus.l.hansson@ki.se. (2)From the Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona,
08003 Barcelona, Spain. (3)From the Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona,
08003 Barcelona, Spain, the Universitat de Barcelona, 08007 Barcelona, Spain,
and. (4)the Gene Expression Laboratory, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, 92037 California belmonte@salk.edu.

Gene- and cell-based therapies are promising strategies for the treatment of
degenerative retinal diseases such as age-related macular degeneration, Stargardt
disease, and retinitis pigmentosa. Cellular engineering before transplantation
may allow the delivery of cellular factors that can promote functional
improvements, such as increased engraftment or survival of transplanted cells. A 
current challenge in traditional DNA-based vector transfection is to find a
delivery system that is both safe and efficient, but using mRNA as an alternative
to DNA can circumvent these major roadblocks. In this study, we show that both
unmodified and modified mRNA can be delivered to retinal pigmented epithelial
(RPE) cells with a high efficiency compared with conventional plasmid delivery
systems. On the other hand, administration of unmodified mRNA induced a strong
innate immune response that was almost absent when using modified mRNA.
Importantly, transfection of mRNA encoding a key regulator of RPE gene
expression, microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF), confirmed the 
functionality of the delivered mRNA. Immunostaining showed that transfection with
either type of mRNA led to the expression of roughly equal levels of MITF,
primarily localized in the nucleus. Despite these findings, quantitative RT-PCR
analyses showed that the activation of the expression of MITF target genes was
higher following transfection with modified mRNA compared with unmodified mRNA.
Our findings, therefore, show that modified mRNA transfection can be applied to
human embryonic stem cell-derived RPE cells and that the method is safe,
efficient, and functional.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4342478
PMID: 25555917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Immunol. 2015 Apr;64(2):244-51. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 
Dec 27.

TMEM126A, a CD137 ligand binding protein, couples with the TLR4 signal
transduction pathway in macrophages.

Kim EC(1), Moon JH(1), Kang SW(2), Kwon B(2), Lee HW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oral Biology, School of Dentistry, Kyung Hee University, Seoul
130-701, Republic of Korea. (2)School of Biological Sciences, University of
Ulsan, Ulsan 680-749, Republic of Korea. (3)Institute of Oral Biology, School of 
Dentistry, Kyung Hee University, Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: hyeonwoo@khu.ac.kr.

We showed previously that a novel protein, transmembrane protein 126A (TMEM126A),
binds to CD137 ligand (CD137L, 4-1BBL) and couples with its reverse signals in
macrophages. Here, we present data showing that TMEM126A relays TLR4 signaling.
Thus, up-regulation of CD54 (ICAM-1), MHC II, CD86 and CD40 expression in
response to TLR4 activation was diminished in TMEM126A-deficient macrophages.
Moreover in TMEM126A-deficient RAW264.7 cells, LPS/TLR4-induced late-phase
JNK/SAPK and IRF-3 phosphorylation was abolished. These findings indicate that
TMEM126A contributes to the TLR4 signal up-regulating the expression of genes
whose products are involved in antigen presentation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25549946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Ginseng Res. 2015 Jan;39(1):61-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jgr.2014.06.002. Epub 2014 Jun
19.

Molecular mechanism of protopanaxadiol saponin fraction-mediated
anti-inflammatory actions.

Yang Y(1), Lee J(2), Rhee MH(3), Yu T(1), Baek KS(1), Sung NY(1), Kim Y(1), Yoon 
K(1), Kim JH(1), Kwak YS(4), Hong S(1), Kim JH(5), Cho JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea.
(2)Department of Dermatological Health Management, Eulji University, Seongnam,
Korea. (3)College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu,
Korea. (4)Ginseng Corporation Central Research Institute, Daejeon, Korea.
(5)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Biosafety
Research Institute, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Korean Red Ginseng (KRG) is a representative traditional herbal
medicine with many different pharmacological properties including anticancer,
anti-atherosclerosis, anti-diabetes, and anti-inflammatory activities. Only a few
studies have explored the molecular mechanism of KRG-mediated anti-inflammatory
activity.
METHODS: We investigated the anti-inflammatory mechanisms of the protopanaxadiol 
saponin fraction (PPD-SF) of KRG using in vitro and in vivo inflammatory models.
RESULTS: PPD-SF dose-dependently diminished the release of inflammatory mediators
[nitric oxide (NO), tumor necrosis factor-a, and prostaglandin E2], and
downregulated the mRNA expression of their corresponding genes (inducible NO
synthase, tumor necrosis factor-a, and cyclooxygenase-2), without altering cell
viability. The PPD-SF-mediated suppression of these events appeared to be
regulated by a blockade of p38, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and TANK (TRAF
family member-associated NF-kappa-B activator)-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), which are
linked to the activation of activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) and
interferon regulatory transcription factor 3 (IRF3). Moreover, this fraction also
ameliorated HCl/ethanol/-induced gastritis via suppression of phospho-JNK2
levels.
CONCLUSION: These results strongly suggest that the anti-inflammatory action of
PPD-SF could be mediated by a reduction in the activation of p38-, JNK2-, and
TANK-binding-kinase-1-linked pathways and their corresponding transcription
factors (ATF2 and IRF3).

PMCID: PMC4268567
PMID: 25535478  [PubMed]


221. Cell Mol Immunol. 2016 Jan;13(1):65-72. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2014.125. Epub 2014 Dec 
22.

Krüppel-like factor 4 negatively regulates cellular antiviral immune response.

Luo WW, Lian H, Zhong B, Shu HB, Li S.

Viral infection triggers activation of the transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3, 
which collaborate to induce the expression of type I interferons (IFNs) and
elicit innate antiviral response. In this report, we identified Krüppel-like
factor 4 (KLF4) as a negative regulator of virus-triggered signaling.
Overexpression of KLF4 inhibited virus-induced activation of ISRE and IFN-ß
promoter in various types of cells, while knockdown of KLF4 potentiated viral
infection-triggered induction of IFNB1 and downstream genes and attenuated viral 
replication. In addition, KLF4 was found to be localized in the cytosol and
nucleus, and viral infection promoted the translocation of KLF4 from cytosol to
nucleus. Upon virus infection, KLF4 was bound to the promoter of IFNB gene and
inhibited the recruitment of IRF3 to the IFNB promoter. Our study thus suggests
that KLF4 negatively regulates cellular antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC4711676
PMID: 25531393  [PubMed - in process]


222. Virology. 2015 Feb;476:92-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.12.005. Epub 2014 Dec 19.

HTLV-1 Tax protein recruitment into IKKe and TBK1 kinase complexes enhances IFN-I
expression.

Diani E(1), Avesani F(2), Bergamo E(3), Cremonese G(4), Bertazzoni U(5),
Romanelli MG(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences, Section of Biology and Genetics,
University of Verona, Strada le Grazie 8, 37134 Verona, Italy. Electronic
address: erica.diani@univr.it. (2)Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences,
Section of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Strada le Grazie 8, 37134 
Verona, Italy. Electronic address: francesca.avesani@gmail.com. (3)Department of 
Life and Reproduction Sciences, Section of Biology and Genetics, University of
Verona, Strada le Grazie 8, 37134 Verona, Italy. Electronic address:
elisa.bergamo@univr.it. (4)Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences, Section 
of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Strada le Grazie 8, 37134 Verona, 
Italy. Electronic address: giorgia.cremonese@gmail.com. (5)Department of Life and
Reproduction Sciences, Section of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona,
Strada le Grazie 8, 37134 Verona, Italy. Electronic address:
umberto.bertazzoni@univr.it. (6)Department of Life and Reproduction Sciences,
Section of Biology and Genetics, University of Verona, Strada le Grazie 8, 37134 
Verona, Italy. Electronic address: mariagrazia.romanelli@univr.it.

The Tax protein expressed by human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) plays a 
pivotal role in the deregulation of cellular pathways involved in the immune
response, inflammation, cell survival, and cancer. Many of these effects derive
from Tax multiple interactions with host factors, including the subunits of the
IKK-complex that are required for NF-<U+03BA>B activation. IKK<U+025B> and TBK1 are two
IKK-related kinases that allow the phosphorylation of interferon regulatory
factors that trigger IFN type I gene expression. We observed that IKK<U+025B> and TBK1
recruit Tax into cellular immunocomplexes. We also found that TRAF3, which
regulates cell receptor signaling effectors, forms complexes with Tax.
Transactivation analyses revealed that expression of Tax, in presence of IKK<U+025B> and
TBK1, enhances IFN-ß promoter activity, whereas the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B promoter 
is not modified. We propose that Tax may be recruited into the TBK1/IKK<U+025B>
complexes as a scaffolding-adaptor protein that enhances IFN-I gene expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25531185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Apr;45(4):1159-69. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445132. Epub 2015 Feb 
5.

TLR9 and STING agonists synergistically induce innate and adaptive type-II IFN.

Temizoz B(1), Kuroda E, Ohata K, Jounai N, Ozasa K, Kobiyama K, Aoshi T, Ishii
KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Vaccine Science, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center
(iFReC), Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Agonists for TLR9 and Stimulator of IFN Gene (STING) act as vaccine adjuvants
that induce type-1 immune responses. However, currently available CpG
oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) (K-type) induces IFNs only weakly and STING ligands
rather induce type-2 immune responses, limiting their potential therapeutic
applications. Here, we show a potent synergism between TLR9 and STING agonists.
Together, they make an effective type-1 adjuvant and an anticancer agent. The
synergistic effect between CpG ODN (K3) and STING-ligand cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP), 
culminating in NK cell IFN-<U+03B3> (type-II IFN) production, is due to the concurrent
effects of IL-12 and type-I IFNs, which are differentially regulated by IRF3/7,
STING, and MyD88. The combination of CpG ODN with cGAMP is a potent type-1
adjuvant, capable of inducing strong Th 1-type responses, as demonstrated by
enhanced antigen-specific IgG2c and IFN-<U+03B3> production, as well as cytotoxic CD8(+)
T-cell responses. In our murine tumor models, intratumoral injection of CpG ODN
and cGAMP together reduced tumor size significantly compared with the singular
treatments, acting as an antigen-free anticancer agent. Thus, the combination of 
CpG ODN and a STING ligand may offer therapeutic application as a potent type-II 
IFN inducer.

© 2014 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4671267
PMID: 25529558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Mol Cell. 2014 Dec 18;56(6):723-37. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.11.027.

Innate antiviral host defense attenuates TGF-ß function through IRF3-mediated
suppression of Smad signaling.

Xu P(1), Bailey-Bucktrout S(2), Xi Y(3), Xu D(2), Du D(4), Zhang Q(5), Xiang
W(5), Liu J(4), Melton A(6), Sheppard D(6), Chapman HA(3), Bluestone JA(2),
Derynck R(7).

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Institute and Innovation Center for Cell Biology, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, China; Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, Department of Cell and Tissue
Biology, University of California at San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic
address: xupl@zju.edu.cn. (2)Diabetes Center and the Department of Medicine,
University of California at San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (3)Department of
Medicine and Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California at San
Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (4)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine
and Stem Cell Research, Department of Cell and Tissue Biology, University of
California at San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (5)Life Sciences Institute and
Innovation Center for Cell Biology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang
310058, China. (6)Lung Biology Center and the Department of Medicine, University 
of California at San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (7)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of 
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, Department of Cell and Tissue
Biology, University of California at San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic
address: rik.derynck@ucsf.edu.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2014 Dec 18;56(6):719-20.

TGF-ß signaling is essential in many processes, including immune surveillance,
and its dysregulation controls various diseases, including cancer, fibrosis, and 
inflammation. Studying the innate host defense, which functions in most cell
types, we found that RLR signaling represses TGF-ß responses. This regulation is 
mediated by activated IRF3, using a dual mechanism of IRF3-directed suppression. 
Activated IRF3 interacts with Smad3, thus inhibiting TGF-ß-induced Smad3
activation and, in the nucleus, disrupts functional Smad3 transcription complexes
by competing with coregulators. Consequently, IRF3 activation by innate antiviral
signaling represses TGF-ß-induced growth inhibition, gene regulation and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and the generation of Treg effector
lymphocytes from naive CD4(+) lymphocytes. Conversely, silencing IRF3 expression 
enhances epithelial-mesenchymal transition, TGF-ß-induced Treg cell
differentiation upon virus infection, and Treg cell generation in vivo.
We present a mechanism of regulation of TGF-ß signaling by the antiviral defense,
with evidence for its role in immune tolerance and cancer cell behavior.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4273650
PMID: 25526531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Cell. 2014 Dec 18;56(6):719-20. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.12.010.

Resemble and Inhibit: when RLR meets TGF-ß.

Zhu S(1), Li HB(1), Flavell RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA. (2)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University, New
Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address: richard.flavell@yale.edu.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2014 Dec 18;56(6):723-37.

In this issue, Xu et al. (2014) show that innate antiviral RIG-I-like receptors
(RLR) signaling represses TGF-ß-induced growth inhibition, epithelial-mesenchyme 
transition (EMT), and regulatory T cell (Treg) differentiation via IRF3-mediated 
Smads function.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25526529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Dec 18;10(12):e1004566. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004566.
eCollection 2014.

Cellular oxidative stress response controls the antiviral and apoptotic programs 
in dengue virus-infected dendritic cells.

Olagnier D(1), Peri S(2), Steel C(1), van Montfoort N(1), Chiang C(1), Beljanski 
V(1), Slifker M(2), He Z(1), Nichols CN(1), Lin R(3), Balachandran S(2), Hiscott 
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine & Gene Therapy Institute of Florida, Port St. Lucie, Florida, United
States of America. (2)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America. (3)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Dengue virus (DENV) is a re-emerging arthropod borne flavivirus that infects more
than 300 million people worldwide, leading to 50,000 deaths annually. Because
dendritic cells (DC) in the skin and blood are the first target cells for DENV,
we sought to investigate the early molecular events involved in the host response
to the virus in primary human monocyte-derived dendritic cells (Mo-DC). Using a
genome-wide transcriptome analysis of DENV2-infected human Mo-DC, three major
responses were identified within hours of infection - the activation of
IRF3/7/STAT1 and NF-<U+03BA>B-driven antiviral and inflammatory networks, as well as the
stimulation of an oxidative stress response that included the stimulation of an
Nrf2-dependent antioxidant gene transcriptional program. DENV2 infection resulted
in the intracellular accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that was
dependent on NADPH-oxidase (NOX). A decrease in ROS levels through chemical or
genetic inhibition of the NOX-complex dampened the innate immune responses to
DENV infection and facilitated DENV replication; ROS were also essential in
driving mitochondrial apoptosis in infected Mo-DC. In addition to stimulating
innate immune responses to DENV, increased ROS led to the activation of bystander
Mo-DC which up-regulated maturation/activation markers and were less susceptible 
to viral replication. We have identified a critical role for the transcription
factor Nrf2 in limiting both antiviral and cell death responses to the virus by
feedback modulation of oxidative stress. Silencing of Nrf2 by RNA interference
increased DENV-associated immune and apoptotic responses. Taken together, these
data demonstrate that the level of oxidative stress is critical to the control of
both antiviral and apoptotic programs in DENV-infected human Mo-DC and highlight 
the importance of redox homeostasis in the outcome of DENV infection.

PMCID: PMC4270780
PMID: 25521078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Virol. 2015 Mar;89(5):2628-42. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02458-14. Epub 2014 Dec 17.

Ataxia telangiectasia mutated kinase mediates NF-<U+03BA>B serine 276 phosphorylation
and interferon expression via the IRF7-RIG-I amplification loop in paramyxovirus 
infection.

Fang L(1), Choudhary S(2), Tian B(2), Boldogh I(3), Yang C(4), Ivanciuc T(5), Ma 
Y(5), Garofalo RP(6), Brasier AR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Institute for
Translational Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
USA. (3)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA Institute for Translational Sciences, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. (4)Department of
Radiation Oncology, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Weill Cornell
University, Houston, Texas, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. (6)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Institute for
Translational Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA
Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
USA. (7)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, USA Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Institute for Translational Sciences,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA arbrasie@utmb.edu.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a primary etiological agent of childhood
lower respiratory tract disease. Molecular patterns induced by active infection
trigger a coordinated retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-Toll-like receptor
(TLR) signaling response to induce inflammatory cytokines and antiviral mucosal
interferons. Recently, we discovered a nuclear oxidative stress-sensitive pathway
mediated by the DNA damage response protein, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM),
in cytokine-induced NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA Ser 276 phosphorylation. Here we observe that ATM 
silencing results in enhanced single-strand RNA (ssRNA) replication of RSVand
Sendai virus, due to decreased expression and secretion of type I and III
interferons (IFNs), despite maintenance of IFN regulatory factor 3
(IRF3)-dependent IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). In addition to enhanced oxidative
stress, RSV replication enhances foci of phosphorylated histone 2AX variant
(<U+03B3>H2AX), Ser 1981 phosphorylation of ATM, and IKK<U+03B3>/NEMO-dependent ATM nuclear
export, indicating activation of the DNA damage response. ATM-deficient cells
show defective RSV-induced mitogen and stress-activated kinase 1 (MSK-1) Ser 376 
phosphorylation and reduced RelA Ser 276 phosphorylation, whose formation is
required for IRF7 expression. We observe that RelA inducibly binds the native IFN
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) promoter in an ATM-dependent manner, and IRF7
inducibly binds to the endogenous retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)
promoter. Ectopic IRF7 expression restores RIG-I expression and type I/III IFN
expression in ATM-silenced cells. We conclude that paramyxoviruses trigger the
DNA damage response, a pathway required for MSK1 activation of phospho Ser 276
RelA formation to trigger the IRF7-RIG-I amplification loop necessary for mucosal
IFN production. These data provide the molecular pathogenesis for defects in the 
cellular innate immunity of patients with homozygous ATM mutations.IMPORTANCE:
RNA virus infections trigger cellular response pathways to limit spread to
adjacent tissues. This "innate immune response" is mediated by germ line-encoded 
pattern recognition receptors that trigger activation of two, largely
independent, intracellular NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 transcription factors. Downstream,
expression of protective antiviral interferons is amplified by positive-feedback 
loops mediated by inducible interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) and retinoic
acid inducible gene (RIG-I). Our results indicate that a nuclear oxidative
stress- and DNA damage-sensing factor, ATM, is required to mediate a cross talk
pathway between NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF7 through mediating phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B. Our
studies provide further information about the defects in cellular and innate
immunity in patients with inherited ATM mutations.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4325710
PMID: 25520509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Immunity. 2014 Nov 20;41(5):830-42. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.10.017. Epub 2014 
Nov 5.

STING-dependent cytosolic DNA sensing mediates innate immune recognition of
immunogenic tumors.

Woo SR(1), Fuertes MB(1), Corrales L(1), Spranger S(1), Furdyna MJ(1), Leung
MY(1), Duggan R(2), Wang Y(3), Barber GN(4), Fitzgerald KA(5), Alegre ML(3),
Gajewski TF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Chicago, 929 E57th Street GCIS
W423H, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (2)Flow Cytometry Core Facility, The University of
Chicago, 924 E57th Street r022, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. (3)Department of
Medicine, The University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland Avenue, MC6092, Chicago,
IL 60637, USA. (4)Department of Cell Biology, University of Miami, Rosenstiel
Medical Science Building, 4th Floor 1600 N.W. 10th Avenue, Miami, FL 33136, USA. 
(5)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts,
364 Plantation Street, LRB, Worcester, MA 01605, USA. (6)Department of Pathology,
The University of Chicago, 929 E57th Street GCIS W423H, Chicago, IL 60637, USA;
Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland Avenue,
MC6092, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address:
tgajewsk@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu.

Erratum in
    Immunity. 2015 Jan 20;42(1):199.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2014 Nov 20;41(5):679-81.

Spontaneous T cell responses against tumors occur frequently and have prognostic 
value in patients. The mechanism of innate immune sensing of immunogenic tumors
leading to adaptive T cell responses remains undefined, although type I
interferons (IFNs) are implicated in this process. We found that spontaneous
CD8(+) T cell priming against tumors was defective in mice lacking stimulator of 
interferon genes complex (STING), but not other innate signaling pathways,
suggesting involvement of a cytosolic DNA sensing pathway. In vitro, IFN-?
production and dendritic cell activation were triggered by tumor-cell-derived
DNA, via cyclic-GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS), STING, and interferon regulatory factor 
3 (IRF3). In the tumor microenvironment in vivo, tumor cell DNA was detected
within host antigen-presenting cells, which correlated with STING pathway
activation and IFN-? production. Our results demonstrate that a major mechanism
for innate immune sensing of cancer occurs via the host STING pathway, with major
implications for cancer immunotherapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4384884
PMID: 25517615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. MAbs. 2014;6(5):1327-39. doi: 10.4161/mabs.29978.

Interference of HCV replication by cell penetrable human monoclonal scFv specific
to NS5B polymerase.

Thueng-in K(1), Thanongsaksrikul J, Jittavisutthikul S, Seesuay W, Chulanetra M, 
Sakolvaree Y, Srimanote P, Chaicumpa W.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Microbiology and Immunology; Faculty of Veterinary Medicine ; 
Kasetsart University ; Bangkok , Thailand.

A new class of hepatitis C virus (HCV)-targeted therapeutics that is safe,
broadly effective and can cope with virus mutations is needed. The HCV's NS5B is 
highly conserved and different from human protein, and thus it is an attractive
target for anti-HCV therapeutics development. In this study, NS5B bound-phage
clones selected from a human single chain variable antibody fragment (scFv) phage
display library were used to transform appropriate E. coli bacteria. Two scFv
inhibiting HCV polymerase activity were selected. The scFvs were linked to a cell
penetrating peptide to make cell penetrable scFvs. The transbodies reduced the
HCV RNA and infectious virus particles released into the culture medium and
inside hepatic cells transfected with a heterologous HCV replicon. They also
rescued the innate immune response of the transfected cells. Phage mimotope
search and homology modeling/molecular docking revealed the NS5B subdomains and
residues bound by the scFvs. The scFv mimotopes matched residues of the NS5B,
which are important for nucleolin binding during HCV replication, as well as
residues that interconnect the fingers and thumb domains for forming a polymerase
active groove. Both scFvs docked on several residues at the thumb armadillo-like 
fold that could be the polymerase interactive sites of other viral/host proteins 
for the formation of the replication complex and replication initiation. In
conclusion, human transbodies that inhibited HCV RdRp activity and HCV
replication and restored the host innate immune response were produced. They are 
potentially future interferon-free anti-HCV candidates, particularly in
combination with other cognates that are specific to NS5B epitopes and other HCV 
enzymes.

PMCID: PMC4622650
PMID: 25517317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 15;9(12):e114874. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114874.
eCollection 2014.

HSPD1 interacts with IRF3 to facilitate interferon-beta induction.

Lin L(1), Pan S(1), Zhao J(2), Liu C(3), Wang P(2), Fu L(2), Xu X(2), Jin M(1),
Zhang A(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, Hubei, China; College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China. (3)College of Agriculture,
Liaocheng University, Liaocheng, Shandong, China.

The production of IFN- I (IFN-a/ß) is one of the earliest and most important
host-protective responses. Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is a critical
transcriptional factor in the IFN-ß signaling pathway. Although significant
progress has been achieved in the regulation of IRF3, the process may be more
complicated than previously considered. In the present study, heat shock protein 
60 (HSP60, HSPD1) was identified as a novel IRF3-interacting protein.
Overexpression of HSPD1 facilitated the phosphorylation and dimerization of IRF3 
and enhanced IFN-ß induction induced by SeV infection. In contrast, knockdown of 
endogenous HSPD1 significantly inhibited the signaling pathway. Furthermore,
HSPD1 enhanced activation of the IFN-ß promoter mediated by RIG-I, MDA-5, MAVS,
TBK1 and IKKe but not IRF3/5D, a mock phosphorylated form of IRF3. The present
study indicated that HSPD1 interacted with IRF3 and it contributed to the
induction of IFN-ß.

PMCID: PMC4266637
PMID: 25506707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 6;290(6):3209-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.593426. Epub 2014
Dec 11.

A role for the adaptor proteins TRAM and TRIF in toll-like receptor 2 signaling.

Nilsen NJ(1), Vladimer GI(2), Stenvik J(3), Orning MP(4), Zeid-Kilani MV(3),
Bugge M(3), Bergstroem B(3), Conlon J(2), Husebye H(3), Hise AG(5), Fitzgerald
KA(4), Espevik T(6), Lien E(7).

Author information: 
(1)From the Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer
Research and Molecular Medicine, and the KG Jebsen Center for Myeloma Research,
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, N-7489 Trondheim, Norway,
nadra.nilsen@ntnu.no. (2)the Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious
Diseases and Immunology, Program in Innate Immunity, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, and. (3)From the Centre of
Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer Research and Molecular
Medicine, and. (4)From the Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department 
of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, and the Department of Medicine,
Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Program in Innate Immunity,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, and. 
(5)the Center for Global Health and Diseases and Department of Pathology, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106. (6)From the Centre of
Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer Research and Molecular
Medicine, and the KG Jebsen Center for Myeloma Research, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology, N-7489 Trondheim, Norway. (7)From the Centre of Molecular
Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, and 
the Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
Program in Innate Immunity, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, and Egil.Lien@umassmed.edu.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are involved in sensing invading microbes by host
innate immunity. TLR2 recognizes bacterial lipoproteins/lipopeptides, and
lipopolysaccharide activates TLR4. TLR2 and TLR4 signal via the
Toll/interleukin-1 receptor adaptors MyD88 and MAL, leading to NF-<U+03BA>B activation. 
TLR4 also utilizes the adaptors TRAM and TRIF, resulting in activation of
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3. Here, we report a new role for TRAM and
TRIF in TLR2 regulation and signaling. Interestingly, we observed that
TLR2-mediated induction of the chemokine Ccl5 was impaired in TRAM or TRIF
deficient macrophages. Inhibition of endocytosis reduced Ccl5 release, and the
data also suggested that TRAM and TLR2 co-localize in early endosomes, supporting
the hypothesis that signaling may occur from an intracellular compartment. Ccl5
release following lipoprotein challenge additionally involved the kinase Tbk-1
and Irf3, as well as MyD88 and Irf1. Induction of Interferon-ß and Ccl4 by
lipoproteins was also partially impaired in cells lacking TRIF cells. Our results
show a novel function of TRAM and TRIF in TLR2-mediated signal transduction, and 
the findings broaden our understanding of how Toll/interleukin-1 receptor adaptor
proteins may participate in signaling downstream from TLR2.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4318996
PMID: 25505250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Virol. 2015 Feb;89(4):2287-300. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02760-14. Epub 2014 Dec 10.

Hepatitis B virus polymerase disrupts K63-linked ubiquitination of STING to block
innate cytosolic DNA-sensing pathways.

Liu Y(1), Li J(2), Chen J(2), Li Y(2), Wang W(2), Du X(2), Song W(2), Zhang W(2),
Lin L(2), Yuan Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China. (2)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(3)Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Shanghai Medical 
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China
zhyuan@shaphc.org.

The cellular innate immune system recognizing pathogen infection is essential for
host defense against viruses. In parallel, viruses have developed a variety of
strategies to evade the innate immunity. The hepatitis B virus (HBV), a DNA virus
that causes chronic hepatitis, has been shown to inhibit RNA helicase
RIG-I-mediated interferon (IFN) induction. However, it is still unknown whether
HBV could affect the host DNA-sensing pathways. Here we report that in
transiently HBV-transfected Huh7 cells, the stably HBV-producing cell line
HepAD38, and HBV-infected HepaRG cells and primary human hepatocytes, HBV
markedly interfered with IFN-ß induction and antiviral immunity mediated by the
stimulator of interferon genes (STING), which has been identified as a central
factor in foreign DNA recognition and antiviral innate immunity. Screening
analysis demonstrated that the viral polymerase (Pol), but not other HBV-encoded 
proteins, was able to inhibit STING-stimulated interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) activation and IFN-ß induction. Moreover, the reverse transcriptase (RT)
and the RNase H (RH) domains of Pol were identified to be responsible for the
inhibitory effects. Furthermore, Pol was shown to physically associate with STING
and dramatically decrease the K63-linked polyubiquitination of STING via its RT
domain without altering the expression level of STING. Taken together, these
observations suggest that besides its inherent catalytic function, Pol has a role
in suppression of IFN-ß production by direct interaction with STING and
subsequent disruption of its K63-linked ubiquitination, providing a new mechanism
for HBV to counteract the innate DNA-sensing pathways.IMPORTANCE: Although
whether and how HBV infection induces the innate immune responses are still
controversial, it has become increasingly clear that HBV has developed strategies
to counteract the pattern recognition receptor-mediated signaling pathways.
Previous studies have shown that type I IFN induction activated by the host RNA
sensors could be inhibited by HBV. However, it remains unknown whether HBV as a
DNA virus utilizes evasion mechanisms against foreign DNA-elicited antiviral
signaling. In recent years, the cytosolic DNA sensor and key adaptor STING has
been demonstrated to be essential in multiple foreign DNA-elicited innate immune 
signalings. Here, for the first time, we report STING as a new target of HBV to
antagonize IFN induction and identify the viral polymerase responsible for the
inhibitory effect, thus providing an additional molecular mechanism by which HBV 
evades the innate immunity; this implies that in addition to its inherent
catalytic function, HBV polymerase is a multifunctional immunomodulatory protein.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4338878
PMID: 25505063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Nat Commun. 2014 Dec 15;5:5811. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6811.

Constitutive and ligand-induced EGFR signalling triggers distinct and mutually
exclusive downstream signalling networks.

Chakraborty S(1), Li L(1), Puliyappadamba VT(1), Guo G(1), Hatanpaa KJ(2), Mickey
B(3), Souza RF(4), Vo P(5), Herz J(1), Chen MR(6), Boothman DA(7), Pandita TK(5),
Wang DH(4), Sen GC(8), Habib AA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. (2)Department of
Pathology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, 
USA. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. (4)1] Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA [2]
Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA [3] Esophageal Diseases Center, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA [4] VA North Texas
Health Care System, Dallas, Texas 75216, USA. (5)Department of Radiation
Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390,
USA. (6)Department of Microbiology, Graduate Institute, National Taiwan
University, Taipei 100, Taiwan. (7)1] Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA [2]
Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA [3] Department of Pharmacology, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. (8)Department of
Molecular Genetics, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA. (9)1]
Department of Neurology and Neurotherapeutics, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA [2] Simmons Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA [3] VA 
North Texas Health Care System, Dallas, Texas 75216, USA.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) overexpression plays an important
oncogenic role in cancer. Regular EGFR protein levels are increased in cancer
cells and the receptor then becomes constitutively active. However, downstream
signals generated by constitutively activated EGFR are unknown. Here we report
that the overexpressed EGFR oscillates between two distinct and mutually
exclusive modes of signalling. Constitutive or non-canonical EGFR signalling
activates the transcription factor IRF3 leading to expression of IFI27, IFIT1 and
TRAIL. Ligand-mediated activation of EGFR switches off IRF3-dependent
transcription, activates canonical extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)
and Akt signals, and confers sensitivity to chemotherapy and virus-induced cell
death. Mechanistically, the distinct downstream signals result from a switch of
EGFR-associated proteins. EGFR constitutively complexes with IRF3 and TBK1
leading to TBK1 and IRF3 phosphorylation. Addition of epidermal growth factor
dissociates TBK1, IRF3 and EGFR leading to a loss of IRF3 activity, Shc-EGFR
association and ERK activation. Finally, we provide evidence for non-canonical
EGFR signalling in glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4268886
PMID: 25503978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Virol J. 2014 Dec 7;11:209. doi: 10.1186/s12985-014-0209-9.

The SARS coronavirus papain like protease can inhibit IRF3 at a post activation
step that requires deubiquitination activity.

Matthews K(1), Schäfer A(2), Pham A(3,)(4), Frieman M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland at
Baltimore, 685 West Baltimore St., Room 380, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA.
kmatthews@som.umaryland.edu. (2)Department of Epidemiology, University of North
Carolina, 3304 Michael Hooker Research Building, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599, USA.
aschaefe@email.unc.edu. (3)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mt. Sinai, New York, NY, 10029, USA. alissapham@gmail.com. (4)Current Address:
NYU Langone Medical Center, Department of Pathology, 538 Medical Science
Building, New York, NY, 10016, USA. alissapham@gmail.com. (5)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland at Baltimore, 685 West
Baltimore St., Room 380, Baltimore, MD, 21201, USA. mfrieman@som.umaryland.edu.

BACKGROUND: The outcome of a viral infection is regulated by complex interactions
of viral and host factors. SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) engages and regulates
several innate immune response pathways during infection. We have previously
shown that the SARS-CoV Papain-like Protease (PLpro) inhibits type I interferon
(IFN) by inhibiting IRF3 phosphorylation thereby blocking downstream Interferon
induction. This finding prompted us to identify other potential mechanisms of
inhibition of PLpro on IFN induction.
METHODS: We have used plasmids expressing PLpro and IRF3 including an IRF3 mutant
that is constitutively active, called IRF3(5D). In these experiments we utilize
transfections, chromatin immunoprecipitation, Electro-mobility Shift Assays
(EMSA) and protein localization to identify where IRF3 and IRF3(5D) are inhibited
by PLpro.
RESULTS: Here we show that PLpro also inhibits IRF3 activation at a step after
phosphorylation and that this inhibition is dependent on the de-ubiquitination
(DUB) activity of PLpro. We found that PLpro is able to block the type I IFN
induction of a constitutively active IRF3, but does not inhibit IRF3
dimerization, nuclear localization or DNA binding. However, inhibition of PLpro's
DUB activity by mutagenesis blocked the IRF3 inhibition activity of PLpro,
suggesting a role for IRF3 ubiquitination in induction of a type I IFN innate
immune response.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate an additional mechanism that PLpro is able 
to inhibit IRF3 signaling. These data suggest novel innate immune antagonism
activities of PLpro that may contribute to SARS-CoV pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4272517
PMID: 25481026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Feb;97(2):307-20. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2A0114-059RR. Epub 2014
Dec 3.

MAP kinase p38a regulates type III interferon (IFN-<U+03BB>1) gene expression in human
monocyte-derived dendritic cells in response to RNA stimulation.

Jiang M(1), Österlund P(2), Fagerlund R(2), Rios DN(2), Hoffmann A(2), Poranen
MM(2), Bamford DH(2), Julkunen I(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Virology Unit, Department of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control,
National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland; Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA; Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, 
Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biosciences, University of
California, Los Angeles, California, USA; Institute of Biotechnology and
Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Finland; and Department of
Virology, University of Turku, Finland miao.jiang@helsinki.fi miao.jiang@thl.fi
ilkka.julkunen@thl.fi ilkka.julkunen@utu.fi. (2)*Virology Unit, Department of
Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control, National Institute for Health and
Welfare, Helsinki, Finland; Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA; Department of Microbiology, 
Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, Institute for Quantitative and Computational 
Biosciences, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA; Institute of
Biotechnology and Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Finland; and
Department of Virology, University of Turku, Finland.

Recognition of viral nucleic acids leads to type I and type III IFN gene
expression and activation of host antiviral responses. At present, type III IFN
genes are the least well-characterized IFN types. Here, we demonstrate that the
p38 MAPK signaling pathway is involved in regulating IFN-<U+03BB>1 gene expression in
response to various types of RNA molecules in human moDCs. Inhibition of p38 MAPK
strongly reduced IFN gene expression, and overexpression of p38a MAPK enhanced
IFN-<U+03BB>1 gene expression in RNA-stimulated moDCs. The regulation of IFN gene
expression by p38 MAPK signaling was independent of protein synthesis and thus, a
direct result of RNA stimulation. Moreover, the RIG-I/MDA5-MAVS-IRF3 pathway was 
required for p38a MAPK to up-regulate IFN-<U+03BB>1 promoter activation, whereas the
MyD88-IRF7 pathway was not needed, and the regulation was not involved directly
in IRF7-dependent IFN-a1 gene expression. The stimulatory effect of p38a MAPK on 
IFN-<U+03BB>1 mRNA expression in human moDCs did not take place directly via the
activating TBK1/IKKe complex, but rather, it occurred through some other parallel
pathways. Furthermore, mutations in ISRE and NF-<U+03BA>B binding sites in the promoter 
region of the IFN-<U+03BB>1 gene led to a significant reduction in p38a MAPK-mediated
IFN responses after RNA stimulation. Altogether, our data suggest that the p38a
MAPK pathway is linked with RLR signaling pathways and regulates the expression
of early IFN genes after RNA stimulation cooperatively with IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B to
induce antiviral responses further.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 25473098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Clin Exp Nephrol. 2015 Oct;19(5):761-70. doi: 10.1007/s10157-014-1060-4. Epub
2014 Dec 4.

Toll-like receptor 3 signaling contributes to the expression of a neutrophil
chemoattractant, CXCL1 in human mesangial cells.

Imaizumi T(1), Aizawa T(2), Segawa C(1), Shimada M(3), Tsuruga K(2), Kawaguchi
S(4), Matsumiya T(1), Yoshida H(1), Joh K(5), Tanaka H(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of
Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki, 036-8562, Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Hirosaki University Hospital, 53 Hon-cho, Hirosaki, 036-8563, Japan.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Respiratory Medicine and Nephrology, Hirosaki
University Graduate School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki, 036-8562, Japan.
(4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hematology, Hirosaki University Graduate
School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki, 036-8562, Japan. (5)Department of
Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, 980-8575,
Japan. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Hospital, 53 Hon-cho,
Hirosaki, 036-8563, Japan. hirotana@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp. (7)Department of School 
Health Science, Faculty of Education, Hirosaki University, 1 Bunkyo-cho,
Hirosaki, 036-8560, Japan. hirotana@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Mesangial proinflammatory chemokine/cytokine expressions via innate
immunity play a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of glomerulonephritis.
CXCL1/GROa is a strong neutrophil chemoattractant cytokine and reportedly plays
an important role in regional inflammatory reactions. However, detailed signaling
of mesangial CXCL1 expression induced by viral or "pseudoviral" immunity remains 
to be determined.
METHODS: We treated normal human mesangial cells (MCs) in culture with
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly IC), an authentic double-stranded RNA, and 
analyzed the expression of CXCL1 by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), real-time quantitative RT-PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assay. To elucidate the poly IC-induced signaling pathway for CXCL1 expression,
we subjected the cells to RNA interference against Toll-like receptor (TLR) 3,
retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I), melanoma differentiation-associated gene 
5 (MDA5), interferon (IFN)-ß, nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B p65 and IFN regulatory
factor (IRF) 3. We also conducted an immunofluorescence study to examine
mesangial CXCL1 expression in biopsy specimens from patients with lupus nephritis
(LN) and IgA nephropathy (IgAN).
RESULTS: We found that activation of TLR3 signaling could induce the expression
of CXCL1 in MCs. NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF3 and IFN-ß, but neither RIG-I nor MDA5, were found to
be involved in mesangial CXCL1 expression in this setting. Induction of CXCL1 by 
poly IC was inhibited by pretreatment of cells with dexamethasone. Intense
glomerular CXCL1 expression was observed in biopsy specimens from patients with
LN, whereas only a trace staining occurred in specimens from patients with IgAN.
CONCLUSION: TLR3 signaling also contributes to the CXCL1 expression in MCs. These
observations further support the implication of viral and "pseudoviral" immunity 
in the pathogenesis of inflammatory renal diseases, especially in LN.

PMID: 25471749  [PubMed - in process]


237. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Dec;23(2):649-57.

Hydroxysafflor yellow A ameliorates lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury 
in mice via modulating toll-like receptor 4 signaling pathways.

Liu YL, Liu YJ, Liu Y, Li XS, Liu SH, Pan YG, Zhang J, Liu Q, Hao YY.

Hydroxysafflor yellow A (HSYA) is a main bio-active compound important of a
traditional Chinese medicine named Carthamus tinctorius L. and has been shown to 
possess various effects, especially anti-inflammatory benefits and potential
protections against acute lung injury (ALI) in previous studies. Therefore, in
this present study, we aimed to evaluating effects of HSYA on lipopolysaccharide 
(LPS)-induced ALI in mice. ALI was induced by intratracheal instillation of LPS
into lung, and dexamethasone was used as a positive control. Results demonstrated
that HSYA abated LPS-induced pathological change and attenuated lung vascular
permeability and edema. HSYA down-regulated both the ability of myeloperoxidase
(MPO) in lung tissues and levels of inflammatory mediators including tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-a, interleukin (IL)-1ß, IL-6 and IFN(interferon)-ß in
serum. Moreover, HSYA prevented toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), myeloid
differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) and TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing
interferon-ß (TRIF) protein up-expressions. In addition, the activations of
mitogen-activated protein kinases including p38, extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK), c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) were blocked by HSYA. And also, the
phosphorylations of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), translocation of
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B)/p65 and inhibitory kappa B (I<U+03BA>B)-a were inhibited 
by HSYA. In conclusion, HSYA attenuated inflammatory response in ALI mice through
inhibition of TLR 4-dependent signaling pathways.

PMID: 25466274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Feb;42(2):345-52. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.11.025.
Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Identification of orange-spotted grouper (Epinephelus coioides) interferon
regulatory factor 3 involved in antiviral immune response against fish RNA virus.

Huang Y(1), Huang X(1), Cai J(1), OuYang Z(1), Wei S(1), Wei J(1), Qin Q(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, South China Sea
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road,
Guangzhou 510301, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and
Ecology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou 510301, China. Electronic address:
qinqw@scsio.ac.cn.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is an important transcription factor which 
regulates the expression of interferon (IFN) and IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs)
following virus recognition. In this study, a novel IRF3 gene was cloned from
grouper Epinephelus coioides (EcIRF3) and its effects against Singapore grouper
iridovirus (SGIV) and red spotted grouper nervous necrosis virus (RGNNV) was
investigated. The full-length of EcIRF3 cDNA was composed of 2513 bp and encoded 
a polypeptide of 458 amino acids which shared 82% identity with European seabass 
(Dicentrarchus labrax). EcIRF3 contained three conserved domains including a
DNA-binding domain (DBD), an IRF associated domain (IAD) and a serine-rich
domain. Expression profile analysis revealed that EcIRF3 was abundant in head
kidney, kidney, spleen and gill. Upon different stimuli in vitro, the transcript 
of EcIRF3 was significantly up-regulated after RGNNV infection or treatment with 
polyinosin-polycytidylic acid (poly I:C). During SGIV infection, the increase of 
the EcIRF3 transcription was only detected at the late stage, suggesting that
EcIRF3 was differently regulated by different stimuli. Immune fluorescence assay 
indicated that the fluorescence signal of EcIRF3 was increased significantly
after infection with RGNNV or treatment with poly I:C, but moderately at the late
stage of SGIV infection. Reporter gene assay showed that EcIRF3 activated
zebrafish type I IFN and type III IFN promoter in vitro. The viral gene
transcription and virus production of RGNNV were significantly decreased in
EcIRF3 overexpressing cells. However, the ectopic expression of EcIRF3 did not
affect the gene transcription and virus production of SGIV. Moreover, the mRNA
expression levels of type I IFN and IFN-inducible genes (MxI, ISG15 and ISG56)
were increased in RGNNV infected EcIRF3 overexpressing cells compared to empty
vector transfected cells. Together, our results demonstrated that IFN immune
response mediated by grouper IRF3 was exerted crucial roles for fish RNA virus,
but not for DNA virus replication.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Feb;42(2):249-55. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.11.008.
Epub 2014 Nov 15.

Promoter analysis and transcriptional regulation of a Gig2 gene in grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idella).

Chen H(1), Sun C(1), Liu W(1), Gu M(1), Lin G(1), Liu Y(1), Mi Y(1), Fan L(1),
Wang B(1), Hu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. Electronic address:
hucy2008@163.com.

Grass carp reovirus (GCRV)-induced gene 2 (Gig2) is recognized as a new antiviral
factor involved in response to viral infection. However, little is known about
the mechanisms behind the transcriptional regulation of Gig2 when infected by
virus. In this study, the upstream promoter region of grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idella) Gig2 gene (CiGig2) was identified by homology cloning
strategy. CiGig2 promoter sequence was found to be 859 bp in length and contained
three scattered IFN-stimulated response elements (ISRE). In addition, some grass 
carp IRFs (CiIRF1, CiIRF2 and CiIRF3) ORF sequences were subcloned into the
expression plasmids pET-32a and expressed in Escherichia coli BL21, then the
expressed proteins were purified by affinity chromatography with the Ni-NTA
His-Bind Resin. Gel mobility shift assay was employed to screen the
transcriptional regulatory factor for CiGig2. The results revealed that the
recombinant polypeptides of CiIRF1, CiIRF2 and CiIRF3 bound to CiGig2 promoter
with high affinity; indicating that IRF1, IRF2 and IRF3 could be the potential
transcriptional regulatory factors for Gig2. Subsequently, CiGig2 promoter
sequence was cloned into pGL3-Basic vector and the ORFs of CiIRF1, CiIRF2 and
CiIRF3 were cloned into the expression plasmids pcDNA3.1 (+). Then, pGL3-CiGig2
promoter sequence and pcDNA3.1-CiIRFs were co-transfected into C. idella kidney
(CIK) cells. The in vivo effects of CiIRFs on CiGig2 promoter were measured by
dual-luciferase assays in the transfected CIK cells. Our results showed that the 
roles of CiIRFs were diversified in regulating CiGig2 transcription, e.g., CiIRF3
played a positive role in during this process; on the contrary CiIRF1 worked as a
suppressor; however the effect of CiIRF2 on CiGig2 transcription was not obvious.
For further study the roles of the three ISREs in CiGig2 transcription, we cloned
three mutant CiGig2 promoters called ISRE1mut-luc (deleted ISRE1), ISRE2mut-luc
(deleted ISRE2) and ISRE3mut-luc (deleted ISRE3), respectively. In vitro, gel
mobility shift assays showed that all three mutant promoters also were combined
with CiIRFs. CIK cells were co-transfected with CiGig2 promoter mutants
(ISRE1mut-luc, ISRE2mut-luc or ISRE3mut-luc, respectively) and pcDNA3.1-IRFs. The
results suggested that different ISRE played the diverse roles. ISRE2 is more
important than ISRE1 and ISRE3 to the transcription of CiGig2 induced by CiIRF1. 
ISRE1 and ISRE3 are important to the transcription of CiGig2 induced by CiIRF2
and CiIRF3.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25463285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Infect Genet Evol. 2015 Jan;29:146-55. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2014.11.009. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

Hantaan virus can infect human keratinocytes and activate an interferon response 
through the nuclear translocation of IRF-3.

Ye W(1), Xu Y(2), Wang Y(1), Dong Y(1), Xi Q(1), Cao M(1), Yu L(1), Zhang L(1),
Cheng L(1), Wu X(1), Xu Z(1), Lei Y(3), Zhang F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Preclinical Medicine, The Fourth
Military Medical University, Xian, Shaanxi 710032, China. (2)Department of
Microbiology, Faculty of Preclinical Medicine, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xian, Shaanxi 710032, China; Clinical Laboratory, 323 Hospital of The
People's Liberation Army, Lanzhou Military Region, Xian, Shaanxi 710054, China.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Preclinical Medicine, The Fourth
Military Medical University, Xian, Shaanxi 710032, China. Electronic address:
yflei@fmmu.edu.cn. (4)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Preclinical
Medicine, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xian, Shaanxi 710032, China.
Electronic address: flzhang@fmmu.edu.cn.

Hantaan virus (HTNV) is a rodent-borne virus that causes hemorrhagic fever with
renal syndrome (HFRS) in Asia and can be transmitted to humans through bites or
the inhalation of aerosolized urine, droppings, or saliva of infected rodents.
Keratinocytes predominate in the epidermis and reportedly serve as a replication 
site for multiple vector-borne viruses, little is known about the susceptibility 
of human skin cells to HTNV infection. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate whether
human keratinocytes support HTNV replication and elicit an immune response
against HTNV infection. We found that a human keratinocyte cell line, HaCaT,
supports HTNV replication. In addition, retinoic acid inducible gene-I (RIG-I)
and melanoma differentiation associated gene-5 (MDA5) play key roles in the
detection of HTNV infection in HaCaT cells and in the up-regulation of interferon
(IFN)-ß expression, which subsequently leads to the production of a large amount 
of antiviral interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and other chemokines used for
immune cell recruitment. Furthermore, we suggest that interferon regulatory
factor (IRF)-3, as opposed to NF-<U+03BA>B/p65 or IRF-7, is translocated to the nucleus 
to induce IFN-ß. However, the early induction of chemokine CXCL10 was a direct
result of HaCaT cells counteracting HTNV infection and was not due to the
induction of IFN. Overall, our data demonstrate, for the first time, the
permissiveness of human keratinocytes to HTNV infection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25461845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Vet Microbiol. 2014 Dec 5;174(3-4):391-8. doi: 10.1016/j.vetmic.2014.09.027. Epub
2014 Oct 17.

Effects of the nuclear localization of the N(pro) protein of classical swine
fever virus on its virulence in pigs.

Li Y(1), Shen L(1), Sun Y(1), Wang X(1), Li C(1), Huang J(1), Chen J(1), Li L(1),
Zhao B(1), Luo Y(1), Li S(2), Qiu HJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, PR China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, PR China.
Electronic address: lisu@hvri.ac.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary
Biotechnology, Harbin Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Harbin 150001, PR China. Electronic address:
huajiqiu@hvri.ac.cn.

The N(pro) protein of classical swine fever virus (CSFV) is localized in the
cytoplasm and nucleus. However, it is unknown whether the nuclear localization of
N(pro) correlates with the virulence of CSFV in the host. Previously, we showed
that the N(pro) protein fused with interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) was
present only in the cytoplasm. Here, we generated and evaluated a recombinant
CSFV vSM-IRF3 harboring the IRF3 gene inserted into the N(pro) gene of the highly
virulent CSFV Shimen strain. Compared to the even nuclear and cytoplasmic
distribution of the enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)-N(pro) fusion
expressed by the recombinant CSFV EGFP-CSFV, vSM-IRF3 expressed an IRF3-N(pro)
fusion protein that only was localized in the cytoplasm. vSM-IRF3 was markedly
attenuated in vitro and in vivo, and the inoculated pigs were completely
protected from lethal CSFV challenge, whereas the parental virus as well as
EGFP-CSFV exhibited a typical virulent phenotype. Taken together, the nuclear
localization of N(pro) plays a significant role in the CSFV replication and
virulence.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25457365  [PubMed - in process]


242. Antiviral Res. 2014 Dec;112:103-12. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.10.008. Epub
2014 Oct 23.

Toll-like receptor 3 signaling inhibits simian immunodeficiency virus replication
in macrophages from rhesus macaques.

Sang M(1), Liu JB(2), Dai M(3), Wu JG(4), Ho WZ(5).

Author information: 
(1)ABSL-III Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan University
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China; State Key
Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China;
Hubei Key Laboratory of Wudang Local Chinese Medicine Research, College of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, People's Republic of
China. (2)ABSL-III Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan
University School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China;
State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of
China. (3)ABSL-III Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan
University School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China;
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States. (4)State Key Laboratory of Virology,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. (5)ABSL-III Laboratory at
the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan University School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China; State Key Laboratory of Virology,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China; Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA,
United States. Electronic address: wenzheho@temple.edu.

Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) recognizes double-stranded RNA and induces multiple
intracellular events responsible for innate antiviral immunity against viral
infections. Here we demonstrate that TLR3 signaling of monocyte-derived
macrophages (MDM) from rhesus monkeys by poly I:C inhibited simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection and replication. Investigation of the
mechanisms showed that TLR3 activation resulted in the induction of type I and
type III interferons (IFNs) and IFN-inducible antiviral factors, including
APOBEC3G (A3G), tetherin and SAMHD1. In addition, poly I:C-treated macaque
macrophages expressed increased levels of CC chemokines including CCL3, CCL4 and 
CCL5, the ligands for HIV or SIV coreceptor CCR5. Furthermore, TLR3 signaling of 
macaque macrophages induced the expression of cellular microRNAs (miR-29a, -29b, 
-146a and -9), the newly identified intracellular SIV restriction factors. TLR3
activation-mediated anti-SIV effect could be compromised by the knockdown of IRF3
and IRF7. These findings indicate that TLR3-mediated induction of multiple viral 
restriction factors contribute to the inhibition of SIV infection in macaque
macrophages, which support future preclinical studies using rhesus macaques to
determine whether in vivo TLR3 activation is safe and beneficial for treating
people infected with HIV.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4258448
PMID: 25453343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 May;50(1):49-57. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.10.008. Epub 2014
Oct 22.

Porcine interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 3, poIFIT3,
inhibits swine influenza virus replication and potentiates IFN-ß production.

Li Y(1), Wen Z(1), Zhou H(1), Wu S(1), Jia G(1), Qian W(1), Jin M(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China. (2)State Key Laboratory
of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China. Electronic address:
jinmeilin@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Porcine interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 3 (poIFIT3) is 
one of the genes most abundantly induced by IFN-a/ß and swine influenza virus
(SIV). However, little information is available about the role of poIFIT3 in host
defense among pigs. In this study, we detected the upregulation of poIFIT3 in
porcine alveolar macrophages (PAM) infected with SIV and subsequently cloned
poIFIT3 from poly(I:C)-treated PAM cells. The overexpression of poIFIT3 can
efficiently suppress the replication of SIV, whereas knockdown of poIFIT3
increases SIV replication. Further experiments on the functional domains showed
that the C-terminal of poIFIT3 plays the main role in the antiviral activity of
poIFIT3. Moreover, poIFIT3 can significantly enhance poly(I:C)-induced IFN-ß
promoter activity through both IRF3- and NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated signaling pathways.
poIFIT3 potentiates IFN-ß production by targeting MAVS, which was further
verified by co-immunoprecipitation. This study suggests that poIFIT3 plays a
significant role in the clearance of SIV in pigs and potentiates IFN-ß
production.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 25451299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Dec 5;744:164-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2014.10.030. Epub
2014 Oct 28.

Anesthetic agent propofol inhibits myeloid differentiation factor 88-dependent
and independent signaling and mitigates lipopolysaccharide-mediated reactive
oxygen species production in human neutrophils in vitro.

Ren X(1), Lv F(2), Fang B(1), Liu S(3), Lv H(4), He G(1), Ma H(1), Cao Y(5), Wang
Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, the First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University, 155 Nanjing Street, Heping District, Shenyang 110001, Liaoning
Province, China. (2)The College of Clinical Medicine, China Medical University,
92 North Street, Heping District, Shenyang 110001, Liaoning Province, China.
(3)Department of Psychology, Jilin Medical College, 5 Jilin Avenue, Fengman
District, Jilin 132013, China. (4)Department of Anesthesiology, the First
Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, 155 Nanjing Street, Heping
District, Shenyang 110001, Liaoning Province, China. Electronic address:
lvhuangweimed@163.com. (5)Department of Immunology, Foundational Institute of
China Medical University, 92 North Street, Heping District, Shenyang 110001,
Liaoning Province, China. (6)Laboratory of Hematology, the First Affiliated
Hospital of China Medical University, 155 Nanjing Street, Heping District,
Shenyang 110001, Liaoning Province, China.

Engagement of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) can activate the myeloid
differentiation factor 88 (MyD88)/toll-interleukin-1-resistance domain-containing
adapter-inducing interferon-ß (TRIF) dependent pathways, inducing production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) in neutrophils. Propofol (PPF) has both
anti-oxidant and anti-inflammatory properties. However, the molecular mechanism
by which PPF influences human neutrophil function is yet to be elucidated. This
study aimed to investigate the influence of PPF on lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced reactive oxygen species production in human neutrophils. We
isolated neutrophils from the peripheral blood of 10 healthy male donors. Neither
1 µg/ml LPS nor 10-150 µmol/L PPF influenced the rate of neutrophil apoptosis,
but PPF significantly inhibited LPS-mediated reactive oxygen species production
in a dose-dependent manner. PPF inhibited LPS-induced expression of MyD88, tumor 
necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6, and TRIF, but not the expression of
interferon regulatory factor 3 or phosphorylation of p47(phox),
p38-mitogen-activated protein kinase, and nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B, particularly in
the neutrophils in which MyD88 or TRIF had been silenced by siRNA. The inhibitory
effect of PPF on LPS-induced activation of p47(phox), p38-mitogen-activated
protein kinase, and NF-<U+03BA>B was partially antagonized by over-expression of MyD88
or TRIF in neutrophils. These observations provide insights into the mechanisms
responsible for the anti-inflammatory properties of PPF. PPF reduces LPS-induced 
production of reactive oxygen species in neutrophils via inhibiting expression of
MyD88 and TRIF signaling.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Jan;24(1):36-41. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.10.033.
Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Suppressive effects of 1-[4-fluoro-2-(2-nitrovinyl)phenyl]pyrrolidine on the
Toll-like receptor signaling pathways.

Ahn SI(1), Lim SJ(2), Gu GJ(1), Hong CY(2), Kim JS(1), Jeong HJ(3), Koh KO(3),
Mang JY(3), Kim DY(3), Youn HS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medical Science, College of Medical Sciences, SoonChunHyang
University, Chungnam, Asan 336-745, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences, SoonChunHyang
University, Chungnam, Asan 336-745, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Chemistry, College of Natural Sciences, Soonchunhyang University, Asan-Si,
Chungnam 336-745, Republic of Korea. (4)Departments of Medical Science, College
of Medical Sciences, SoonChunHyang University, Chungnam, Asan 336-745, Republic
of Korea; Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical
Sciences, SoonChunHyang University, Chungnam, Asan 336-745, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: hyoun@sch.ac.kr.

When various pathogens invade a host, toll-like receptors (TLRs) play a
significant role in recognizing the pathogen-associated molecular patterns
carried by the pathogens to induce innate immune reaction, followed by acquired
immunity reaction. TLRs have two downstream signaling pathways, the myeloid
differential factor 88 (MyD88)-dependent and toll-interleukin-1 receptor
domain-containing adapter inducing interferon-ß (TRIF)-dependent pathways. To
evaluate the therapeutic potential of
1-[4-fluoro-2-(2-nitrovinyl)phenyl]pyrrolidine (FPP), previously synthesized in
our laboratory, its effect on signal transduction via the TLR signaling pathways 
was examined. FPP inhibited the activation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) induced by TLR agonists, as well as
inhibited the expression of cyclooxygenase-2, inducible nitric oxide synthase,
and interferon inducible protein-10. FPP also inhibited the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B
and IRF3 when induced by the overexpression of downstream signaling components of
the TLRs. As a result, FPP has potential to become a new therapeutic drug for
many inflammatory diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Virus Res. 2015 Jan 22;196:113-21. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.11.018. Epub 2014
Nov 24.

Infectious pancreatic necrosis virus proteins VP2, VP3, VP4 and VP5 antagonize
IFNa1 promoter activation while VP1 induces IFNa1.

Lauksund S(1), Greiner-Tollersrud L(1), Chang CJ(1), Robertsen B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Norwegian College of Fishery Science, University of Tromsø, 9037 Tromsø,
Norway. (2)Norwegian College of Fishery Science, University of Tromsø, 9037
Tromsø, Norway. Electronic address: borre.robertsen@uit.no.

Infectious pancreatic necrosis virus (IPNV) is one of the major viral pathogens
causing disease in farmed Atlantic salmon worldwide. In the present work we show 
that several of the IPN proteins have powerful antagonistic properties against
type I IFN induction in Atlantic salmon. Each of the five IPNV genes cloned into 
an expression vector were tested for the ability to influence activation of the
Atlantic salmon IFNa1 promoter by the interferon promoter inducing protein one
(IPS-1) or interferon regulatory factors (IRF). This showed that preVP2, VP3 and 
VP5 inhibited activation of both promoters, while VP4 only antagonized activation
of the IFNa1 promoter. The viral protease VP4 was the most potent inhibitor of
IFN induction, apparently targeting the IRF1 and IRF3 branch of the signaling
cascade. VP4 antagonism is independent of its protease activity since the
catalytically dead mutant VP4K674A inhibited activation of the IFNa1 promoter to 
a similar extent as wild type VP4. In contrast to the other IPNV proteins, the
RNA-dependent RNA polymerase VP1 activated the IFNa1 promoter. The ability to
activate the IFN response was disrupted in the mutant VP1S163A, which has lost
the ability to produce dsRNA. VP1 also exhibited synergistic effects with IRF1
and IRF3 in inducing an IFNa1-dependent antiviral state in cells. Taken together 
these results suggest that IPNV has developed multiple IFN antagonistic
properties to prevent IFN-induction by VP1 and its dsRNA genome.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Feb;19(2):327-39. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12379. Epub 2014 Dec 2.

TLR3 engagement induces IRF-3-dependent apoptosis in androgen-sensitive prostate 
cancer cells and inhibits tumour growth in vivo.

Gambara G(1), Desideri M, Stoppacciaro A, Padula F, De Cesaris P, Starace D,
Tubaro A, Del Bufalo D, Filippini A, Ziparo E, Riccioli A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Department of Anatomy,
Histology, Forensic Medicine and Orthopedics, Section of Histology and Medical
Embryology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a family of highly conserved transmembrane
proteins expressed in epithelial and immune cells that recognize pathogen
associated molecular patterns. Besides their role in immune response against
infections, numerous studies have shown an important role of different TLRs in
cancer, indicating these receptors as potential targets for cancer therapy. We
previously demonstrated that the activation of TLR3 by the synthetic
double-stranded RNA analogue poly I:C induces apoptosis of androgen-sensitive
prostate cancer (PCa) LNCaP cells and, much less efficiently, of the more
aggressive PC3 cell line. Therefore, in this study we selected LNCaP cells to
investigate the mechanism of TLR3-mediated apoptosis and the in vivo efficacy of 
poly I:C-based therapy. We show that interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3)
signalling plays an essential role in TLR3-mediated apoptosis in LNCaP cells
through the activation of the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptotic pathways.
Interestingly, hardly any apoptosis was induced by poly I:C in normal prostate
epithelial cells RWPE-1. We also demonstrate for the first time the direct
anticancer effect of poly I:C as a single therapeutic agent in a well-established
human androgen-sensitive PCa xenograft model, by showing that tumour growth is
highly impaired in poly I:C-treated immunodeficient mice. Immunohistochemical
analysis of PCa xenografts highlights the antitumour role of poly I:C in vivo
both on cancer cells and, indirectly, on endothelial cells. Notably, we show the 
presence of TLR3 and IRF-3 in both human normal and PCa clinical samples,
potentially envisaging poly I:C-based therapy for PCa.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4407608
PMID: 25444175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2015 Jan 15;163(1-2):57-66. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2014.11.008. Epub 2014 Nov 20.

Mycoplasma ovipneumoniae induces inflammatory response in sheep airway epithelial
cells via a MyD88-dependent TLR signaling pathway.

Xue D(1), Ma Y(1), Li M(1), Li Y(1), Luo H(1), Liu X(1), Wang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Conservation and Utilization of
Special Biological Resources in the Western China, China; College of Life
Science, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750021, China. (2)Key Laboratory
of Ministry of Education for Conservation and Utilization of Special Biological
Resources in the Western China, China; College of Life Science, Ningxia
University, Yinchuan, Ningxia 750021, China. Electronic address: wyj@nxu.edu.cn.

Mycoplasma ovipneumoniae (M. ovipneumoniae) is a bacterium that specifically
infects sheep and goat and causes ovine infectious pleuropneumonia. In an effort 
to understand the pathogen-host interaction between the M. ovipneumoniae and
airway epithelial cells, we investigated the host inflammatory response using a
primary air-liquid interface (ALI) epithelial culture model generated from
bronchial epithelial cells of Ningxia Tan sheep (Ovis aries). The ALI culture of 
sheep bronchial epithelial cells showed a fully differentiated epithelium
comprising distinct epithelial types, including the basal, ciliated and goblet
cells. Exposure of ALI cultures to M. ovipneumoniae led to increased expression
of Toll-like receptors (TLRs), and components of the myeloid differentiation
factor 88 (MyD88)-dependent TLR signaling pathway, including the MyD88, TNF
receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), IL-1 receptor-associated kinases (IRAKs)
and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B), as well as subsequent pro-inflammatory
cytokines in the epithelial cells. Of interest, infection with M. ovipneumoniae
failed to induce the expression of TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), TRAF3 and
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), key components of the MyD88-independent
signaling pathway. These results suggest that the MyD88-dependent TLR pathway may
play a crucial role in sheep airway epithelial cells in response to M.
ovipneumoniae infection, which also indicate that the ALI culture system may be a
reliable model for investigating pathogen-host interactions between M.
ovipneumoniae and airway epithelial cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25440083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jan 2;456(1):327-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.11.080. Epub 2014 Nov 28.

DEAD-box RNA helicase DDX3X inhibits DENV replication via regulating type one
interferon pathway.

Li G(1), Feng T(2), Pan W(1), Shi X(1), Dai J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology and Medical Sciences, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Infection
and Immunity, Soochow University, Suzhou City, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China. (2)Institute of Biology and Medical Sciences, Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Soochow University, Suzhou City, Jiangsu
Province, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: ttfeng@suda.edu.cn.
(3)Institute of Biology and Medical Sciences, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Infection
and Immunity, Soochow University, Suzhou City, Jiangsu Province, People's
Republic of China. Electronic address: daijianfeng@suda.edu.cn.

Dengue virus (DENV) is a mosquito-borne virus that threatens approximately 2.5
billion people worldwide. Vaccines against DENV are currently unavailable.
DEAD-box RNA helicases (DDXs) have been reported to participate in viral
replication and host innate immune response. In the present study, we analyzed
the role of 40 DDX proteins during DENV replication. Among these proteins, DDX3X 
showed antiviral effect against DENV infection. Viral replication significantly
increased in DDX3X-silenced cells compared with the controls. The interferon
(IFN)-ß transcription level decreased during the early stage of DENV infection in
DDX3X-silenced cells compared with that in the controls. DDX3X could stimulate
IFN-ß transcription through the IRF3 and the NF<U+03BA>B branches in DENV-infected
cells. Our data imply that DDX3X, a member of DEAD-box RNA helicase, is necessary
for IFN production and could inhibit DENV replication.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25437271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Science. 2015 Jan 16;347(6219):266-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1258025. Epub 2014 Nov
27.

Commensal microbes and interferon-<U+03BB> determine persistence of enteric murine
norovirus infection.

Baldridge MT(1), Nice TJ(1), McCune BT(1), Yokoyama CC(1), Kambal A(1), Wheadon
M(1), Diamond MS(2), Ivanova Y(1), Artyomov M(1), Virgin HW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Immunology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Departments
of Medicine and Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. virgin@wustl.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2015 Jan 16;347(6219):233-4.

The capacity of human norovirus (NoV), which causes >90% of global epidemic
nonbacterial gastroenteritis, to infect a subset of people persistently may
contribute to its spread. How such enteric viruses establish persistent
infections is not well understood. We found that antibiotics prevented persistent
murine norovirus (MNoV) infection, an effect that was reversed by replenishment
of the bacterial microbiota. Antibiotics did not prevent tissue infection or
affect systemic viral replication but acted specifically in the intestine. The
receptor for the antiviral cytokine interferon-<U+03BB>, Ifnlr1, as well as the
transcription factors Stat1 and Irf3, were required for antibiotics to prevent
viral persistence. Thus, the bacterial microbiome fosters enteric viral
persistence in a manner counteracted by specific components of the innate immune 
system.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4409937
PMID: 25431490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):6124-34. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401869. Epub 2014 
Nov 10.

STING-mediated DNA sensing promotes antitumor and autoimmune responses to dying
cells.

Klarquist J(1), Hennies CM(1), Lehn MA(1), Reboulet RA(1), Feau S(2), Janssen
EM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229; and.
(2)Division of Developmental Immunology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and
Immunology, La Jolla, CA 92037. (3)Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH 45229; and Edith.Janssen@cchmc.org.

Adaptive immune responses to Ags released by dying cells play a critical role in 
the development of autoimmunity, allograft rejection, and spontaneous as well as 
therapy-induced tumor rejection. Although cell death in these situations is
considered sterile, various reports have implicated type I IFNs as drivers of the
ensuing adaptive immune response to cell-associated Ags. However, the mechanisms 
that underpin this type I IFN production are poorly defined. In this article, we 
show that dendritic cells (DCs) can uptake and sense nuclear DNA-associated
entities released by dying cells to induce type I IFN. Remarkably, this molecular
pathway requires STING, but not TLR or NLR function, and results in the
activation of IRF3 in a TBK1-dependent manner. DCs are shown to depend on STING
function in vivo to efficiently prime IFN-dependent CD8(+) T cell responses to
tumor Ags. Furthermore, loss of STING activity in DCs impairs the generation of
follicular Th cells and plasma cells, as well as anti-nuclear Abs, in an
inducible model of systemic lupus erythematosus. These findings suggest that the 
STING pathway could be manipulated to enable the rational design of
immunotherapies that enhance or diminish antitumor and autoimmune responses,
respectively.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4258444
PMID: 25385820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):6090-102. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401605. Epub 2014
Nov 10.

TRAM is required for TLR2 endosomal signaling to type I IFN induction.

Stack J(1), Doyle SL(2), Connolly DJ(1), Reinert LS(3), O'Keeffe KM(1),
McLoughlin RM(1), Paludan SR(3), Bowie AG(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; (2)School of Medicine, Trinity College
Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; The National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's
Children's Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland; and. (3)Department of
Biomedicine, Aarhus University, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. (4)School of
Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; agbowie@tcd.ie.

Detection of microbes by TLRs on the plasma membrane leads to the induction of
proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-a, via activation of NF-<U+03BA>B. Alternatively, 
activation of endosomal TLRs leads to the induction of type I IFNs via IFN
regulatory factors (IRFs). TLR4 signaling from the plasma membrane to NF-<U+03BA>B via
the Toll/IL-1R (TIR) adaptor protein MyD88 requires the TIR sorting adaptor Mal, 
whereas endosomal TLR4 signaling to IRF3 via the TIR domain-containing
adaptor-inducing IFN-ß (TRIF) requires the TRIF-related adaptor molecule (TRAM). 
Similar to TLR4 homodimers, TLR2 heterodimers can also induce both
proinflammatory cytokines and type I IFNs. TLR2 plasma membrane signaling to
NF-<U+03BA>B is known to require MyD88 and Mal, whereas endosomal IRF activation by TLR2
requires MyD88. However, it was unclear whether TLR2 requires a sorting adaptor
for endosomal signaling, like TLR4 does. In this study, we show that
TLR2-dependent IRF7 activation at the endosome is both Mal- and TRAM-dependent,
and that TRAM is required for the TLR2-dependent movement of MyD88 to endosomes
following ligand engagement. TRAM interacted with both TLR2 and MyD88, suggesting
that TRAM can act as a bridging adapter between these two molecules. Furthermore,
infection of macrophages lacking TRAM with herpes viruses or the bacterium
Staphylococcus aureus led to impaired induction of type I IFN, indicating a role 
for TRAM in TLR2-dependent responses to human pathogens. Our work reveals that
TRAM acts as a sorting adaptor not only for TLR4, but also for TLR2, to
facilitate signaling to IRF7 at the endosome, which explains how TLR2 is capable 
of causing type I IFN induction.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4258402
PMID: 25385819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Fish Biol. 2015 Jan;86(1):74-91. doi: 10.1111/jfb.12541. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Identification and expression of the laboratory of genetics and physiology 2 gene
in common carp Cyprinus carpio.

Cao XL(1), Chen JJ, Cao Y, Nie GX, Wan QY, Wang LF, Su JG.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling
712100, People's Republic of China; College of Fisheries, Henan Normal
University, Xinxiang 453007, People's Republic of China.

In this study, a laboratory of genetics and physiology 2 gene (lgp2) from common 
carp Cyprinus carpio was isolated and characterized. The full-length
complementary (c)DNA of lgp2 was 3061<U+2009>bp and encoded a polypeptide of 680 amino
acids, with an estimated molecular mass of 77 341·2<U+2009>Da and a predicted
isoelectric point of 6·53. The predicted protein included four main overlapping
structural domains: a conserved restriction domain of bacterial type III
restriction enzyme, a DEAD-DEAH box helicase domain, a helicase super family
C-terminal domain and a regulatory domain. Real-time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) showed widespread expression of lgp2, mitochondrial
antiviral signalling protein (mavs) and interferon transcription factor 3 (irf3) 
in tissues of nine organs. lgp2, mavs and irf3 expression levels were
significantly induced in all examined organs by infection with koi herpesvirus
(KHV). lgp2, mavs and irf3 messenger (m)RNA levels were significantly
up-regulated in vivo after KHV infection, and lgp2 transcripts were also
significantly enhanced in vitro after stimulation with synthetic, double-stranded
RNA polyinosinic polycytidylic [poly(I:C)]. These findings suggest that lgp2 is
an inducible protein involved in the innate immune defence against KHV in C.
carpio. These results provide the basis for further research into the role and
mechanisms of lgp2 in fishes.

© 2014 The Fisheries Society of the British Isles.

PMID: 25359511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(5):1556-65. doi: 10.1159/000366359. Epub 2014 Oct
27.

Expression and function of RIG-I in oral keratinocytes and fibroblasts.

Ohta K(1), Fukui A, Shigeishi H, Ishida Y, Nishi H, Tobiume K, Takechi M, Kamata 
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Division of
Cervico-Gnathostmatology, Programs for Applied Biomedicine, Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-Ku, Hiroshima,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Innate immune response by oral mucosal cells may be the first line of
host defense against viral infection. Retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I)
recognizes viral dsRNA in the cytoplasm, and RIG-I-mediated signaling regulates
antiviral type I IFN, and inflammatory chemokine production. Here, we tested the 
hypothesis that oral mucosal cell participation in host defense against viral
infection via RIG-I.
METHODS: RIG-I expression was detected in immortalized oral keratinocytes (RT7), 
oral fibroblasts (GT1) using and RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. RT7 and GT1
were exposed to dsRNA virus mimic Poly I:C-LMW/LyoVec (PLV). Expression of IFN-ß 
and CXCL10 via RIG-I was examined by Real-time RT-PCR and ELISA. Phosphorylation 
of IRF3 and STAT1 were detected by western blotting.
RESULTS: RT7 and GT1 constitutively expressed RIG-I in the cytoplasm.
Furthermore, PLV increased IFN-ß and CXCL10 productions in both RT7 and GT1 via
RIG-I concurrent with phosphorylation of IRF3 and STAT1. PLV-induced CXCL10
production was attenuated by neutralization of IFN-ß and blocking of IFN-a/ß
receptor (IFNAR), indicating primal IFN-ß production via the RIG-I-IRF3 axis,
which eventually induces CXCL10 production via the IFNAR -STAT1 axis.
CONCLUSION: We propose that RIG-I in oral keratinocytes and fibroblasts may
cumulatively develop host-defense mechanisms against viral infection in oral
mucosa.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25359319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2014 Dec 19;289(51):35102-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.597062. Epub
2014 Oct 28.

HIV-1 Vpu accessory protein induces caspase-mediated cleavage of IRF3
transcription factor.

Park SY(1), Waheed AA(2), Zhang ZR(1), Freed EO(2), Bonifacino JS(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cell Biology and Metabolism Program, Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892 and. (2)the HIV Drug
Resistance Program, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, National Institutes of
Health, Frederick, Maryland 21702. (3)From the Cell Biology and Metabolism
Program, Eunice Kennedy Shriver NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892 and bonifacinoj@helix.nih.gov.

Vpu is an accessory protein encoded by HIV-1 that interferes with multiple
host-cell functions. Herein we report that expression of Vpu by transfection into
293T cells causes partial proteolytic cleavage of interferon regulatory factor 3 
(IRF3), a key transcription factor in the innate anti-viral response. Vpu-induced
IRF3 cleavage is mediated by caspases and occurs mainly at Asp-121. Cleavage
produces a C-terminal fragment of ~37 kDa that comprises the IRF dimerization and
transactivation domains but lacks the DNA-binding domain. A similar cleavage is
observed upon infection of the Jurkat T-cell line with vesicular stomatitis virus
G glycoprotein (VSV-G)-pseudotyped HIV-1. Two other HIV-1 accessory proteins, Vif
and Vpr, also contribute to the induction of IRF3 cleavage in both the
transfection and the infection systems. The C-terminal IRF3 fragment interferes
with the transcriptional activity of full-length IRF3. Cleavage of IRF3 under all
of these conditions correlates with cleavage of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase, an
indicator of apoptosis. We conclude that Vpu contributes to the attenuation of
the anti-viral response by partial inactivation of IRF3 while host cells undergo 
apoptosis.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4271200
PMID: 25352594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Mar;19(3):555-65. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12456. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Poly (I:C) therapy decreases cerebral ischaemia/reperfusion injury via
TLR3-mediated prevention of Fas/FADD interaction.

Zhang X(1), Ha T, Lu C, Lam F, Liu L, Schweitzer J, Kalbfleisch J, Kao RL,
Williams DL, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Quillen College of Medicine, East Tennessee State
University, Johnson City, TN, USA.

Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated signalling plays a role in cerebral
ischaemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury. Modulation of TLRs has been reported to
protect against cerebral I/R injury. This study examined whether modulation of
TLR3 with poly (I:C) will induce protection against cerebral I/R injury. Mice
were treated with or without Poly (I:C) (n = 8/group) 1 hr prior to cerebral
ischaemia (60 min.) followed by reperfusion (24 hrs). Poly (I:C) pre-treatment
significantly reduced the infarct volume by 57.2% compared with untreated I/R
mice. Therapeutic administration of Poly (I:C), administered 30 min. after
cerebral ischaemia, markedly decreased infarct volume by 34.9%. However, Poly
(I:C)-induced protection was lost in TLR3 knockout mice. In poly (I:C)-treated
mice, there was less neuronal damage in the hippocampus compared with untreated
I/R mice. Poly (I:C) treatment induced IRF3 phosphorylation, but it inhibited
NF-<U+03BA>B activation in the brain. Poly (I:C) also decreased I/R-induced apoptosis by
attenuation of Fas/FasL-mediated apoptotic signalling. In addition, Poly (I:C)
treatment decreased microglial cell caspase-3 activity. In vitro data showed that
Poly (I:C) prevented hypoxia/reoxygenation (H/R)-induced interaction between Fas 
and FADD as well as caspase-3 and -8 activation in microglial cells. Importantly,
Poly (I:C) treatment induced co-association between TLR3 and Fas. Our data
suggest that Poly (I:C) decreases in cerebral I/R injury via TLR3 which
associates with Fas, thereby preventing the interaction of Fas and FADD, as well 
as microglial cell caspase-3 and -8 activities. We conclude that TLR3 modulation 
by Poly (I:C) could be a potential approach for protection against ischaemic
stroke.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4369813
PMID: 25351293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 28;9(10):e111061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111061.
eCollection 2014.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms within interferon signaling pathway genes are
associated with colorectal cancer susceptibility and survival.

Lu S(1), Pardini B(2), Cheng B(1), Naccarati A(3), Huhn S(1), Vymetalkova V(4),
Vodickova L(5), Buchler T(6), Hemminki K(7), Vodicka P(4), Försti A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Human Genetics Foundation (HuGeF), Turin, Italy. 
(3)Human Genetics Foundation (HuGeF), Turin, Italy; Department of Molecular
Biology of Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. (4)Department of Molecular Biology of
Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Prague, Czech Republic; Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st 
Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. (5)Department of
Molecular Biology of Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic; Institute of Biology and 
Medical Genetics, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech
Republic; Biomedical Centre, Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University in
Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic. (6)Department of Oncology, Thomayer Hospital,
Prague, Czech Republic. (7)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; Center of Primary Health Care
Research, Clinical Research Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

Interferon (IFN) signaling has been suggested to play an important role in
colorectal carcinogenesis. Our study aimed to examine potentially functional
genetic variants in interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), IRF5, IRF7, type I and
type II IFN and their receptor genes with respect to colorectal cancer (CRC) risk
and clinical outcome. Altogether 74 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
covered by the 34 SNPs genotyped in a hospital-based case-control study of 1327
CRC cases and 758 healthy controls from the Czech Republic. We also analyzed
these SNPs in relation to overall survival and event-free survival in a subgroup 
of 483 patients. Seven SNPs in IFNA1, IFNA13, IFNA21, IFNK, IFNAR1 and IFNGR1
were associated with CRC risk. After multiple testing correction, the
associations with the SNPs rs2856968 (IFNAR1) and rs2234711 (IFNGR1) remained
formally significant (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0015 and P<0.0001, respectively). Multivariable
survival analyses showed that the SNP rs6475526 (IFNA7/IFNA14) was associated
with overall survival of the patients (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.041 and event-free survival among
patients without distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.034). The
hazard ratios (HRs) for rs6475526 remained statistically significant even after
adjustment for age, gender, grade and stage (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.029 and P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.036,
respectively), suggesting that rs6475526 is an independent prognostic marker for 
CRC. Our data suggest that genetic variation in the IFN signaling pathway genes
may play a role in the etiology and survival of CRC and further studies are
warranted.

PMCID: PMC4211713
PMID: 25350395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. FASEB J. 2015 Jan;29(1):250-62. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-255992. Epub 2014 Oct 23.

Injury-induced MRP8/MRP14 stimulates IP-10/CXCL10 in monocytes/macrophages.

Wang J(1), Vodovotz Y(2), Fan L(3), Li Y(4), Liu Z(5), Namas R(4), Barclay D(4), 
Zamora R(4), Billiar TR(2), Wilson MA(6), Fan J(7), Jiang Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Key Laboratory of
Transcriptomics and Proteomics, Ministry of Education of China, Key Laboratory of
Proteomics of Guangdong Province, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China; 
Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA; (2)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; McGowan Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA. (3)University 
of Pittsburgh School of Arts and Science, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; and.
(4)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; (5)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research,
Key Laboratory of Transcriptomics and Proteomics, Ministry of Education of China,
Key Laboratory of Proteomics of Guangdong Province, Southern Medical University, 
Guangzhou, China; (6)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Research and Development, Veterans
Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; (7)State Key
Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Key Laboratory of Transcriptomics and
Proteomics, Ministry of Education of China, Key Laboratory of Proteomics of
Guangdong Province, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China; Department of 
Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
USA; Research and Development, Veterans Affairs Pittsburgh Healthcare System,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; McGowan Institute for Regenerative Medicine,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA jiang48231@163.com
jif7@pitt.edu. (8)State Key Laboratory of Organ Failure Research, Key Laboratory 
of Transcriptomics and Proteomics, Ministry of Education of China, Key Laboratory
of Proteomics of Guangdong Province, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
China; jiang48231@163.com jif7@pitt.edu.

Trauma/hemorrhagic shock is associated with morbidity and mortality due to
dysregulated inflammation, which is driven in part by monocytes/macrophages
stimulated by injury-induced release of damage-associated molecular pattern
(DAMP) molecules. MRP8/MRP14 is an endogenous DAMP involved in various
inflammatory diseases, though its mechanism of action is unclear. Circulating
MRP8/MRP14 levels in human blunt trauma nonsurvivors were significantly lower
than those of survivors (P < 0.001). Human monocytic THP-1 cells stimulated with 
MRP8/MRP14 expressed the chemokine IFN-<U+03B3> inducible protein 10 (IP-10)/CXCL10.
Circulating IP-10 levels in human blunt trauma patients were correlated
positively with MRP8/MRP14 levels (r = 0.396, P < 0.001), and were significantly 
lower in trauma nonsurvivors than in survivors (P < 0.001). We therefore sought
to determine the mechanisms by which MRP8/MRP14 stimulates IP-10 in
monocytes/macrophages, and found that induction of IP-10 by MRP8/MRP14 required
Toll-like receptor 4 and TRIF but not MyD88. Full induction of IP-10 by
MRP8/MRP14 required synergy between the transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B and IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). The receptor for IP-10 is CXCR3, and
MRP8/MRP14-induced chemotaxis of CXCR3(+) cells was dependent on the production
of IP-10 in monocytes/macrophages. Furthermore, in vivo study with a mouse
trauma/hemorrhagic shock model showed that administration of neutralizing
antibody against MRP8 prevented activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 as well as IP-10
production. Thus, the current study identified a novel signaling mechanism that
controls IP-10 expression in monocytes/macrophages by MRP8/MRP14, which may play 
an important role in injury-induced inflammation.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4285539
PMID: 25342131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Cell Host Microbe. 2014 Oct 8;16(4):450-61. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2014.09.006.

The ER-associated protein ZDHHC1 is a positive regulator of DNA virus-triggered, 
MITA/STING-dependent innate immune signaling.

Zhou Q(1), Lin H(1), Wang S(2), Wang S(1), Ran Y(2), Liu Y(1), Ye W(1), Xiong
X(1), Zhong B(1), Shu HB(3), Wang YY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Institute, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 
430072, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. (3)Medical Research Institute, 
College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China. Electronic
address: shuh@whu.edu.cn. (4)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of
Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. Electronic address:
wangyy@wh.iov.cn.

Viral DNA sensing within the cytosol of infected cells activates type I
interferon (IFN) expression. MITA/STING plays an essential role in this pathway
by acting as both a sensor for the second messenger cGAMP and as an adaptor for
downstream signaling components. In an expression screen for proteins that can
activate the IFNB1 promoter, we identified the ER-associated protein ZDHHC1 as a 
positive regulator of virus-triggered, MITA/STING-dependent immune signaling.
Zdhhc1(-/-) cells failed to effectively produce IFNs and other cytokines in
response to infection with DNA but not RNA viruses. Zdhhc1(-/-) mice infected
with the neurotropic DNA virus HSV-1 exhibited lower cytokine levels and higher
virus titers in the brain, resulting in higher lethality. ZDHHC1 constitutively
associated with MITA/STING and mediates dimerization/aggregation of MITA/STING
and recruitment of the downstream signaling components TBK1 and IRF3. These
findings support a role for ZDHHC1 in mediating MITA/STING-dependent innate
immune response against DNA viruses.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25299331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Virol. 2014 Dec;88(24):14426-39. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02608-14. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

Unabated adenovirus replication following activation of the cGAS/STING-dependent 
antiviral response in human cells.

Lam E(1), Falck-Pedersen E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Molecular Biology Graduate Program, New York, New York, USA. (2)Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Molecular Biology Graduate Program, New York, New York, USA
efalckp@med.cornell.edu.

The cGAS/STING DNA sensing complex has recently been established as a predominant
pathogen recognition receptor (PRR) for DNA-directed type I interferon (IFN)
innate immune activation. Using replication-defective adenovirus vectors and
replication-competent wild-type adenovirus, we have modeled the influence of the 
cGAS/STING cascade in permissive human cell lines (A549, HeLa, ARPE19, and THP1).
Wild-type adenovirus induced efficient early activation of the cGAS/STING cascade
in a cell-specific manner. In all responsive cell lines, cGAS/STING short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) knockdown resulted in a loss of TBK1 and interferon response factor 3
(IRF3) activation, a lack of beta interferon transcript induction, loss of
interferon-dependent STAT1 activation, and diminished induction of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). Adenoviruses that infect through the
coxsackievirus-adenovirus receptor (CAR) (Ad2 and Ad5) and the CD46 (Ad35) and
desmoglein-2 (Ad7) viral receptors all induce the cGAS/STING/TBK1/IRF3 cascade.
The magnitude of the IRF3/IFN/ISG antiviral response was strongly influenced by
serotype, with Ad35>Ad7>Ad2. For each serotype, no enhancement of viral DNA
replication or virus production occurred in cGAS or STING shRNA-targeted cell
line pools. We found no replication advantage in permissive cell lines that do
not trigger the cGAS/STING cascade following infection. The cGAS/STING/TBK1/IRF3 
cascade was not a direct target of viral antihost strategies, and we found no
evidence that Ad stimulation of the cGAS/STING DNA response had an impact on
viral replication efficiency.IMPORTANCE: This study shows for the first time that
the cGAS DNA sensor directs a dominant IRF3/IFN/ISG antiviral response to
adenovirus in human cell lines. Activation of cGAS occurs with viruses that
infect through different high-affinity receptors (CAR, CD46, and desmoglein-2),
and the magnitude of the cGAS/STING DNA response cascade is influenced by
serotype-specific functions. Furthermore, activation of the cGAS cascade occurred
in a cell-specific manner. Activation of the cGAS/STING response did not impact
viral replication, and viral immune evasion strategies did not target the
cGAS/STING/TBK1/IRF3 cascade. These studies provide novel insight into the early 
innate recognition response to adenovirus.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4249147
PMID: 25297994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:479395. doi: 10.1155/2014/479395. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

TLR4-mediated blunting of inflammatory responses to eccentric exercise in young
women.

Fernandez-Gonzalo R(1), De Paz JA(2), Rodriguez-Miguelez P(2), Cuevas MJ(2),
González-Gallego J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine (IBIOMED), University of León, Campus Universitario, 
24071 León, Spain ; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm 171 77, Sweden. (2)Institute of Biomedicine (IBIOMED),
University of León, Campus Universitario, 24071 León, Spain.

This study assessed the inflammatory response mediated by the toll-like receptor 
4 (TLR4) signaling pathway after acute eccentric exercise before and after an
eccentric training program in women. Twenty women performed two acute eccentric
bouts using a squat machine over a ~9 week interval. The training group (TG)
carried out an eccentric training program during 6 weeks, while the control group
(CG) did not follow any training. Protein content of markers involved in the
TLR4-mediated activation of several nuclear transcription factors, such as
nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), and interferon regulatory transcription factor 3
(IRF3), was analyzed. The inflammatory response after the first acute bout was
similar between TG and CG, showing an upregulation of all the markers analyzed,
with the exception of IRF3. After the second bout, the upregulation of TLR4
signaling pathway was blunted in TG, but not in CG, through both the myeloid
differentiation factor 88- and toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain containing
adapter inducing interferon-ß-dependent pathways. These results highlight the
role of the TLR4 in controlling the exercise-induced inflammatory response in
young women. More importantly, these data suggest eccentric training may help to 
prevent TLR4 activation principally through NF-<U+03BA>B, and perhaps IRF3, downstream
signaling in this population.

PMCID: PMC4175753
PMID: 25294957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Dec;41(2):507-16. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.09.030.
Epub 2014 Oct 5.

A RING finger protein 114 (RNF114) homolog from Chinese sturgeon (Acipenser
sinensis) possesses immune-regulation properties via modulating RIG-I signaling
pathway-mediated interferon expression.

Liao Z(1), Chen X(2), Nie D(3), Wang J(2), Wu M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Water Environment and Marine Biological
Resources Protection, College of Life and Environmental Science, Wenzhou
University, Wenzhou 325035, China. Electronic address: zyliap@163.com.
(2)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory for Water Environment and Marine Biological
Resources Protection, College of Life and Environmental Science, Wenzhou
University, Wenzhou 325035, China. (3)Department of Chemistry and Chemical
Engineering, Hunan Institute of Science and Technology, Yueyang 414006, China.

Ubiquitin ligases play important roles in immune regulation. The human RNF114
(RING finger protein 114), an ubiquitin ligase, was recently reported to be
involved in immune response to double-stranded RNA in disease pathogenesis. Here,
we identified a RNF114 homolog in Chinese sturgeon (Acipenser sinensis) and
investigated its potential role in immune response. The full-length cDNA of
Chinese sturgeon RNF114 (csRNF114) contains an open reading frame (ORF) of 681
nucleotides coding a protein of 227 amino acids. csRNF114 shares the highest
identity of 76% at amino acid level to other RNF114 homologs, clustering with
bony fish RNF114s based on phylogenetic analysis. The main structural features of
csRNF114, including a C3HC4 (Cys3-His-Cys4) RING domain, a C2HC
(Cys2-His-Cys)-type zinc finger motif, a C2H2 (Cys2-His2)-type zinc finger motif,
and a UIM (ubiquitin-interacting motif), take csRNF114 as an ubiquitin ligase.
csRNF114 mRNA was widely expressed in various tissues and significantly
up-regulated in poly(I:C)-treated Chinese sturgeon. Over-expression of csRNF114
in HEK293T cells significantly promoted both basal and poly(I:C)-induced
activation of interferon regulatory transcription factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) downstream retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I) signaling
pathway and expression of target genes type I interferon (IFN), which was nearly 
abolished by knockdown of RIG-I with specific human siRNA and by mutation of the 
C3HC4 RING domain (C28A/C31A) in csRNF114 as well. Furthermore, csRNF114
associated with ubiquitinated proteins in HEK293T cells, for which the C3HC4 RING
domain was essential. These data suggested that an ubiquitin ligase RNF114
homolog with a potential role in antiviral response possibly through modulating
RIG-I signaling pathway was cloned from Chinese sturgeon, which might contribute 
to our understanding of the immune biology of Chinese sturgeon.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25290666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Immunol Cell Biol. 2015 Feb;93(2):147-57. doi: 10.1038/icb.2014.83. Epub 2014 Oct
7.

p204-Mediated innate antiviral responses in mouse adipose cells and their effects
on cell functions.

Yu L(1), Liu P(2), Liu Z(2), Zhu W(2), Yan K(2), Chen Q(2), Han D(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China [2] Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, China. (2)Department of Cell
Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Viruses can infect adipose tissues. However, innate antiviral responses in
adipose cells and their effects on adipocyte function have not yet been
intensively investigated. In this study, p204-initiated innate antiviral
responses in mouse adipose cells were examined. Cytosolic DNA sensor p204 and its
signaling adaptor stimulator of interferon (IFN) genes (STING) were
constitutively expressed in primary preadipocytes. Synthetic herpes simplex viral
DNA (HSV60), a p204 ligand, induced type I IFN expression by activating IFN
regulatory factor 3. Major antiviral proteins, including IFN-stimulating gene 15,
2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase and Mx GTPase 1, in preadipocytes were
upregulated by HSV60. HSV60-triggered innate antiviral responses were
significantly reduced by inhibition of p204 signaling with specific small
interfering RNA targeting p204 or STING. HSV60 inhibited the differentiation of
preadipocytes to mature adipocytes and enhanced the proliferation of adipose
cells. Moreover, HSV60 induced innate antiviral responses in mature adipocytes
and inhibited expressions of several adipokines, including leptin, adiponectin
and resistin. These results indicated that p204 initiated innate antiviral
responses in adipose cells, thereby modulating adipocyte function.

PMID: 25287442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Sep 28;20(36):12908-33. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i36.12908.

New advances in molecular mechanisms and emerging therapeutic targets in
alcoholic liver diseases.

Williams JA(1), Manley S(1), Ding WX(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jessica A Williams, Sharon Manley, Wen-Xing Ding, Department of Pharmacology, 
Toxicology and Therapeutics, The University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, KS 66160, United States.

Alcoholic liver disease is a major health problem in the United States and
worldwide. Chronic alcohol consumption can cause steatosis, inflammation,
fibrosis, cirrhosis and even liver cancer. Significant progress has been made to 
understand key events and molecular players for the onset and progression of
alcoholic liver disease from both experimental and clinical alcohol studies. No
successful treatments are currently available for treating alcoholic liver
disease; therefore, development of novel pathophysiological-targeted therapies is
urgently needed. This review summarizes the recent progress on animal models used
to study alcoholic liver disease and the detrimental factors that contribute to
alcoholic liver disease pathogenesis including miRNAs, S-adenosylmethionine, Zinc
deficiency, cytosolic lipin-1ß, IRF3-mediated apoptosis, RIP3-mediated necrosis
and hepcidin. In addition, we summarize emerging adaptive protective effects
induced by alcohol to attenuate alcohol-induced liver pathogenesis including
FoxO3, IL-22, autophagy and nuclear lipin-1a.

PMCID: PMC4177473
PMID: 25278688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 30;9(9):e108777. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108777.
eCollection 2014.

An image-based genetic assay identifies genes in T1D susceptibility loci
controlling cellular antiviral immunity in mouse.

Liao J(1), Jijon HB(2), Kim IR(3), Goel G(3), Doan A(1), Sokol H(4), Bauer H(5), 
Herrmann BG(5), Lassen KG(1), Xavier RJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America; Center for
Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Broad
Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America; Center for Computational and 
Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Gastrointestinal Unit, Center
for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (3)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of
America; Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America; Gastrointestinal Unit, Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel
Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (4)Center for Computational and
Integrative Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Gastrointestinal Unit, Center
for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Gastroenterology Department, Saint Antoine Hospital, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux
de Paris, Paris, France. (5)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, 
Germany.

The pathogenesis of complex diseases, such as type 1 diabetes (T1D), derives from
interactions between host genetics and environmental factors. Previous studies
have suggested that viral infection plays a significant role in initiation of T1D
in genetically predisposed individuals. T1D susceptibility loci may therefore be 
enriched in previously uncharacterized genes functioning in antiviral defense
pathways. To identify genes involved in antiviral immunity, we performed an
image-based high-throughput genetic screen using short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs)
against 161 genes within T1D susceptibility loci. RAW 264.7 cells transduced with
shRNAs were infected with GFP-expressing herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and 
fluorescent microscopy was performed to assess the viral infectivity by
fluorescence reporter activity. Of the 14 candidates identified with high
confidence, two candidates were selected for further investigation, Il27 and
Tagap. Administration of recombinant IL-27 during viral infection was found to
act synergistically with interferon gamma (IFN-<U+03B3>) to activate expression of type 
I IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines, and to enhance the activities of interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Consistent with a role in antiviral immunity,
Tagap-deficient macrophages demonstrated increased viral replication, reduced
expression of proinflammatory chemokines and cytokines, and decreased production 
of IFN-ß. Taken together, our unbiased loss-of-function genetic screen identifies
genes that play a role in host antiviral immunity and delineates roles for IL-27 
and Tagap in the production of antiviral cytokines.

PMCID: PMC4182575
PMID: 25268627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 29;9(9):e108578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108578.
eCollection 2014.

Pathway analysis of genetic factors associated with spontaneous preterm birth and
pre-labor preterm rupture of membranes.

Capece A(1), Vasieva O(2), Meher S(1), Alfirevic Z(1), Alfirevic A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Institute of Translational
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom. (2)Institute of
Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Molecular and Clinical Pharmacology, Institute of Translational 
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Pre-term birth (PTB) remains the leading cause of infant mortality
and morbidity. Its etiology is multifactorial, with a strong genetic component.
Genetic predisposition for the two subtypes, spontaneous PTB with intact
membranes (sPTB) and preterm prelabor rapture of membranes (PPROM), and
differences between them, have not yet been systematically summarised.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Our literature search identified 15 association studies
conducted in 3,600 women on 2175 SNPs in 274 genes. We used Ingenuity software to
impute gene pathways and networks related to sPTB and PPROM. Detailed insight in 
the defined functional ontologies clearly separated integrated datasets for sPTB 
and PPROM. Our analysis of upstream regulators of genes suggests that
glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1), peroxisome proliferator activated receptor <U+03B3>
(PPARG) and interferon regulating factor 3 (IRF3) may be sPTB specific.
PPROM-specific genes may be regulated by estrogen receptor2 (ESR2) and signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT1). The inflammatory transcription
factor NF<U+03BA>B is linked to both sPTB and PPROM, however, their inflammatory
response is distinctly different.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our analyses, we propose an autoimmune/hormonal regulation 
axis for sPTB, whilst pathways implicated in the etiology of PPROM include
hematologic/coagulation function disorder, collagen metabolism, matrix
degradation and local inflammation. Our hypothesis generating study has
identified new candidate genes in the pathogenesis of PPROM and sPTB, which
should be validated in large cohorts.

PMCID: PMC4181300
PMID: 25264875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Sep 25;10(9):e1004358. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004358.
eCollection 2014.

RNF26 temporally regulates virus-triggered type I interferon induction by two
distinct mechanisms.

Qin Y(1), Zhou MT(1), Hu MM(1), Hu YH(1), Zhang J(1), Guo L(1), Zhong B(1), Shu
HB(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Medical Research Institute, College of Life 
Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Viral infection triggers induction of type I interferons (IFNs), which are
critical mediators of innate antiviral immune response. Mediator of IRF3
activation (MITA, also called STING) is an adapter essential for virus-triggered 
IFN induction pathways. How post-translational modifications regulate the
activity of MITA is not fully elucidated. In expression screens, we identified
RING finger protein 26 (RNF26), an E3 ubiquitin ligase, could mediate
polyubiquitination of MITA. Interestingly, RNF26 promoted K11-linked
polyubiquitination of MITA at lysine 150, a residue also targeted by RNF5 for
K48-linked polyubiquitination. Further experiments indicated that RNF26 protected
MITA from RNF5-mediated K48-linked polyubiquitination and degradation that was
required for quick and efficient type I IFN and proinflammatory cytokine
induction after viral infection. On the other hand, RNF26 was required to limit
excessive type I IFN response but not proinflammatory cytokine induction by
promoting autophagic degradation of IRF3. Consistently, knockdown of RNF26
inhibited the expression of IFNB1 gene in various cells at the early phase and
promoted it at the late phase of viral infection, respectively. Furthermore,
knockdown of RNF26 inhibited viral replication, indicating that RNF26 antagonizes
cellular antiviral response. Our findings thus suggest that RNF26 temporally
regulates innate antiviral response by two distinct mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4177927
PMID: 25254379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cell Signal. 2014 Dec;26(12):2930-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.09.007. Epub
2014 Sep 17.

Protein phosphatase PP1 negatively regulates the Toll-like receptor- and
RIG-I-like receptor-triggered production of type I interferon by inhibiting IRF3 
phosphorylation at serines 396 and 385 in macrophage.

Gu M(1), Zhang T(1), lin W(1), Liu Z(1), Lai R(1), Xia D(1), Huang H(1), Wang
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China. (2)Institute of Immunology, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310058, China. Electronic address:
wangxiaojian@cad.zju.edu.cn.

The production of type I interferon must be tightly regulated, and the aberrant
production of this protein is harmful or even fatal to the host. The
transcription factor IRF3 phosphorylation is a central regulator of type I
interferon meditated antiviral response. Protein phosphatase-1 (PP1) has been
reported to be important in many cell functions, including development,
differentiation, and tumorigenesis. However, the roles of PP1 in Toll-like
receptor (TLR)- or retinoic acid-inducible gene I like receptor (RLR)-triggered
IRF-3 activation remain unclear. Here, we show that the activity of PP1 is
downregulated in macrophages upon stimulation with TLR or RLR ligands, including 
lipopolysaccharide, and poly(I:C), or vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV),
respectively. The overexpression of PP1 selectively inhibits TLR- and VSV-induced
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activation but has no substantial effect on
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1),<U+039A>B kinase e (IKKe) activation. Conversely, RNA
interference of PP1 significantly promotes IRF3 activation. Consistently, The
overexpression of PP1 inhibits TLR- and VSV-triggered IFN-ß production while PP1 
knockdown significantly increases the production of IFN-ß in macrophages. We
further demonstrate that PP1 directly interacts with IRF3 and dephosphorylates
IRF3 at Ser385 and Ser396, resulting in the suppression of TLR- and RLR-triggered
IFN-ß production. Thus, PP1 functions as a negative feedback regulator of TLR-
and RLR-triggered antiviral immune responses by acting as an IRF3 phosphatase.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25239187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 18;5:4963. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5963.

Primate-specific miR-576-3p sets host defense signalling threshold.

Yarbrough ML(1), Zhang K(1), Sakthivel R(1), Forst CV(2), Posner BA(3), Barber
GN(4), White MA(1), Fontoura BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, Texas 75390-9039, USA. (2)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences,
Institute for Genomics and Multiscale Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
New York, New York 10029-6574, USA. (3)Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9039, USA. (4)Department
of Cell Biology and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to regulate viral infection, but the miRNAs
that target intracellular sensors and adaptors of innate immunity have not been
fully uncovered. Here we conduct an miRNA mimic screen and validation with miRNA 
inhibitors in cells infected with vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) to identify
miRNAs that regulate viral-host interactions. We identify miR-576-3p as a robust 
regulator of infection by VSV and other RNA and DNA viruses. While an miR-576-3p 
mimic sensitizes cells to viral replication, inhibition of endogenous miR-576-3p 
prevents infection. miR-576-3p is induced by IRF3 concomitantly with interferon
and targets STING, MAVS and TRAF3, which are critical factors for interferon
expression. Interestingly, miR-576-3p and its binding sites are primate-specific 
and miR-576-3p levels are reduced in inflammatory diseases. These findings
indicate that induction of miR-576-3p by IRF3 triggers a feedback mechanism to
reduce interferon expression and set an antiviral response threshold to likely
avoid excessive inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4170571
PMID: 25232931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Innate Immun. 2015;7(2):153-64. doi: 10.1159/000365971. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

ECSIT bridges RIG-I-like receptors to VISA in signaling events of innate
antiviral responses.

Lei CQ(1), Zhang Y, Li M, Jiang LQ, Zhong B, Kim YH, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Medical Research
Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Upon binding to RNA structures from invading viruses, RIG-I and MDA5 are
recruited to mitochondria to interact with VISA and initiate antiviral type I
interferon (IFN) responses. How this process is mediated is less understood. In
this report, we demonstrate that ECSIT is an essential scaffolding protein that
mediates the association of VISA and RIG-I or MDA5. Overexpression of ECSIT
potentiated virus-triggered activation of IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and
expression of IFNB1, whereas knockdown of ECSIT impaired viral infection-induced 
activation of IRF3 and expression of IFNB1 as well as cellular antiviral
responses. Mechanistically, ECSIT was associated with VISA on mitochondria and
important for bridging RIG-I and MDA5 to VISA. Our findings suggest that ECSIT
mediates virus-triggered type I IFN induction by bridging RIG-I and MDA5 to the
VISA complex, and provide new insights into the molecular events of innate
antiviral immune responses.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25228397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 15;193(8):4137-48. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401290. Epub 2014
Sep 15.

Serine cluster phosphorylation liberates the C-terminal helix of IFN regulatory
factor 7 to bind histone acetyltransferase p300.

Lee KJ(1), Ye JS(1), Choe H(2), Nam YR(1), Kim N(1), Lee U(1), Joo CH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul
138-736, Korea; (2)Bio-Medical Institute of Technology, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea; Department of Physiology, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea; and. (3)Department of
Microbiology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea; Cell
Dysfunction Research Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul
138-736, Korea chjoo@amc.seoul.kr.

IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a major regulator of type I (aß) IFN secretion.
A growing body of evidence shows that IRF7 is involved in a wide variety of
pathologic conditions in addition to infections; however, the detailed mechanism 
of IRF7 transactivation remains elusive. Our current knowledge of IRF7
transactivation is based on studies of IRF3, another major regulator of IFN-ß
secretion. IRF3 and IRF7 are closely related homologs with high sequence
similarity in their C-terminal regions, and both proteins are activated by
phosphorylation of a specific serine cluster (SC). Nevertheless, the functional
domains of the two proteins are arranged in an inverted manner. We generated a
model structure of the IRF7 C-terminal region using homology modeling and used it
to guide subsequent functional domain studies. The model structure led to the
identification of a tripod-helix structure containing the SC. Based on the model 
and experimental data, we hypothesized that phosphorylation-mediated IRF7
transactivation is controlled by a tripod-helix structure. Inducible I<U+03BA>B kinase
binds a tripod-helix structure. Serial phosphorylation of the SC by the kinase
liberates C-terminal helix from an inhibitory hydrophobic pocket. A histone
acetyltransferase P300 binds the liberated helix. The difference in the P300
binding sites explains why the domain arrangement of IRF7 is inverted relative to
that of IRF3.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25225665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Dec;41(2):222-30. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.09.002.
Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Fish MAVS is involved in RLR pathway-mediated IFN response.

Zhang J(1), Zhang YB(2), Wu M(1), Wang B(1), Chen C(1), Gui JF(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and 
Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. Electronic address:
ybzhang@ihb.ac.cn. (3)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and
Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. Electronic address:
jfgui@ihb.ac.cn.

Mammalian mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) is an essential
adapter involved in retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I)-like receptor
(RLR)-triggered interferon (IFN) antiviral immunity. Fish MAVS homologues have
been identified in several fish species; however, the signaling pathway involving
fish MAVS-mediated IFN response remains to be investigated. In the present study,
we report identification of a fish MAVS orthologue from crucian carp Carassius
auratus blastulae embryonic (CAB) cells and its function role in fish RLR
signaling. Crucian carp MAVS is constitutively expressed in CAB cells and is not 
transcriptionally induced by cytosolic poly (I:C) and IFN. Overexpression of
crucian carp MAVS results in activation of fish IFN promoter and ISRE-containing 
promoter as well as transcriptional expression of IFN and ISGs including PKR and 
Mx1, which is impaired by functional blockade of signaling molecules TBK1 and
IRF3/7. Either cytosolic poly (I:C)-induced or RIG-I-induced IFN response is
attenuated by functional blockade of crucian carp MAVS. These results together
indicate that fish MAVS contributes to IFN antiviral immunity downstream of
cytosolic poly (I:C) and RIG-I and upstream of TBK1 and IRF3/7. Moreover, we
provide evidence that apart from crucian carp MAVS, crucian carp MITA is also
involved in cytosolic poly (I:C)- and RIG-I-induced IFN response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25219369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 11;9(9):e107141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107141.
eCollection 2014.

The TIR-domain containing adaptor TRAM is required for TLR7 mediated RANTES
production.

Shevlin E(1), Miggin SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Department of Biology, National University of Ireland
Maynooth, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland.

Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) plays a vital role in the immune response to ssRNA
viruses such as human rhinovirus (HRV) and Influenza, against which there are
currently no treatments or vaccines with long term efficacy available. Clearly, a
more comprehensive understanding of the TLR7 signaling axis will contribute to
its molecular targeting. TRIF related adaptor molecule (TRAM) plays a vital role 
in TLR4 signaling by recruiting TRIF to TLR4, followed by endosomal trafficking
of the complex and initiation of IRF3 dependent type I interferon production as
well as NF-<U+03BA>B dependent pro-inflammatory cytokine production. Towards
understanding the molecular mechanisms that regulate TLR7 functionality, we found
that TRAM(-/-) murine macrophages exhibited a transcriptional and translational
impairment in TLR7 mediated RANTES, but not TNFa, production. Suppression of TRAM
expression in human macrophages also resulted in an impairment in TLR7 mediated
CCL5 and IFN-ß, but not TNFa, gene induction. Furthermore, suppression of
endogenous human TRAM expression in human macrophages significantly impaired RV16
induced CCL5 and IFNß, but not TNFa gene induction. Additionally, TRAM-G2A
dose-dependently inhibited TLR7 mediated activation of CCL5, IFNß and IFNa
reporter genes. TLR7-mediated phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF3
was impaired in TRAM(-/-) cells. Finally, co-immunoprecipitation studies
indicated that TRAM physically interacts with MyD88 upon TLR7 stimulation, but
not under basal conditions. Our results clearly demonstrate that TRAM plays a,
hitherto unappreciated, role in TLR7 signaling through a novel signaling axis
containing, but not limited to, MyD88, TRAM and IRF3 towards the activation of
anti-viral immunity.

PMCID: PMC4161432
PMID: 25211222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Sep 4;10(9):e1004319. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004319.
eCollection 2014.

Distinct dictation of Japanese encephalitis virus-induced neuroinflammation and
lethality via triggering TLR3 and TLR4 signal pathways.

Han YW(1), Choi JY(1), Uyangaa E(1), Kim SB(1), Kim JH(2), Kim BS(1), Kim K(3),
Eo SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine and Bio-Safety Research Institute, College of
Natural Science, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Biology, College of Natural Science, Chonbuk National
University, Jeonju, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Pharmacology, School of
Medicine, Pusan National University, Yangsan, Republic of Korea.

Japanese encephalitis (JE) is major emerging neurologic disease caused by JE
virus. To date, the impact of TLR molecules on JE progression has not been
addressed. Here, we determined whether each TLR modulates JE, using several
TLR-deficient mouse strains (TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, TLR7, TLR9). Surprisingly, among
the tested TLR-deficient mice there were contrasting results in TLR3(-/-) and
TLR4(-/-) mice, i.e. TLR3(-/-) mice were highly susceptible to JE, whereas
TLR4(-/-) mice showed enhanced resistance to JE. TLR3 ablation induced severe CNS
inflammation characterized by early infiltration of inflammatory
CD11b(+)Ly-6Chigh monocytes along with profoundly increased viral burden,
proinflammatory cytokine/chemokine expression as well as BBB permeability. In
contrast, TLR4(-/-) mice showed mild CNS inflammation manifested by reduced viral
burden, leukocyte infiltration and proinflammatory cytokine expression.
Interestingly, TLR4 ablation provided potent in vivo systemic type I IFN innate
response, as well as ex vivo type I IFN production associated with strong
induction of antiviral PRRs (RIG-I, MDA5), transcription factors (IRF-3, IRF-7), 
and IFN-dependent (PKR, Oas1, Mx) and independent ISGs (ISG49, ISG54, ISG56) by
alternative activation of IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B in myeloid-derived DCs and macrophages, 
as compared to TLR3(-/-) myeloid-derived cells which were more permissive to
viral replication through impaired type I IFN innate response. TLR4 ablation also
appeared to mount an enhanced type I IFN innate and humoral, CD4(+) and CD8(+) T 
cell responses, which were mediated by altered immune cell populations (increased
number of plasmacytoid DCs and NK cells, reduced CD11b(+)Ly-6C(high) monocytes)
and CD4(+)Foxp3(+) Treg number in lymphoid tissue. Thus, potent type I IFN innate
and adaptive immune responses in the absence of TLR4 were closely coupled with
reduced JE lethality. Collectively, these results suggest that a balanced
triggering of TLR signal array by viral components during JE progression could be
responsible for determining disease outcome through regulating negative and
positive factors.

PMCID: PMC4154777
PMID: 25188232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Immunology. 2015 Feb;144(2):321-32. doi: 10.1111/imm.12375.

Carbon monoxide down-modulates Toll-like receptor 4/MD2 expression on innate
immune cells and reduces endotoxic shock susceptibility.

Riquelme SA(1), Bueno SM, Kalergis AM.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Institute on Immunology and Immunotherapy, Departamento de Genética
Molecular y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Pontificia
Universidad Católica de Chile, Santiago, Chile; INSERM, UMR 1064, Nantes, France.

Carbon monoxide (CO) has been recently reported as the main anti-inflammatory
mediator of the haem-degrading enzyme haem-oxygenase 1 (HO-1). It has been shown 
that either HO-1 induction or CO treatment reduces the ability of monocytes to
respond to inflammatory stimuli, such as lipopolysaccharide (LPS), due to an
inhibition of the signalling pathways leading to nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B,
mitogen-activated protein kinases and interferon regulatory factor 3 activation. 
Hence, it has been suggested that CO impairs the stimulation of the Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4)/myeloid differentiation factor-2 (MD2) complex located on the
surface of immune cells. However, whether CO can negatively modulate the surface 
expression of the TLR4/MD2 complex in immune cells remains unknown. Here we
report that either HO-1 induction or treatment with CO decreases the surface
expression of TLR4/MD2 in dendritic cells (DC) and neutrophils. In addition, in a
septic shock model of mice intraperitoneally injected with lipopolysaccharide
(LPS), prophylactic treatment with CO protected animals from hypothermia, weight 
loss, mobility loss and death. Further, mice pre-treated with CO and challenged
with LPS showed reduced recruitment of DC and neutrophils to peripheral blood,
suggesting that this gas causes a systemic tolerance to endotoxin challenge. No
differences in the amount of innate cells in lymphoid tissues were observed in
CO-treated mice. Our results suggest that CO treatment reduces the expression of 
the TLR4/MD2 complex on the surface of myeloid cells, which renders them
resistant to LPS priming in vitro, as well as in vivo in a model of endotoxic
shock.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4298426
PMID: 25179131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Virology. 2014 Nov;468-470:133-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.07.019. Epub 2014 Aug
28.

Aedes aegypti salivary protein "aegyptin" co-inoculation modulates dengue virus
infection in the vertebrate host.

McCracken MK(1), Christofferson RC(1), Grasperge BJ(1), Calvo E(2), Chisenhall
DM(1), Mores CN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Skip Bertman Drive, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, United
States. (2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institutes of
Health, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway, Rockville, MD 20852, United States.
(3)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Skip Bertman Drive, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, United
States. Electronic address: cmores@lsu.edu.

Dengue virus (DENV) is transmitted in the saliva of the mosquito vector Aedes
aegypti during blood meal acquisition. This saliva is composed of numerous
proteins with the capacity to disrupt hemostasis or modulate the vertebrate
immune response. One such protein, termed "aegyptin," is an allergen and
inhibitor of clot formation, and has been found in decreased abundance in the
saliva of DENV-infected mosquitoes. To examine the influence of aegyptin on DENV 
infection of the vertebrate, we inoculated IRF-3/7(-/- -/-) mice with DENV
serotype 2 strain 1232 with and without co-inoculation of aegyptin. Mice that
received aegyptin exhibited decreased DENV titers in inoculation sites and in
circulation, as well as increased concentrations of GM-CSF, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-5, and
IL-6, at 48 h post-inoculation when compared to mice that received inoculation of
DENV alone. These and other data suggest that aegyptin impacts DENV perpetuation 
via elevated induction of the immune response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4254699
PMID: 25173089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Dokl Biol Sci. 2014 Jul;457(1):255-7. doi: 10.1134/S0012496614040073. Epub 2014
Aug 30.

The NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF3, and SAPK/JNK signaling cascades of animal immune cells and their
role in the progress of type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Novoselova EG(1), Khrenov MO, Parfenyuk SB, Novoselova TV, Lunin SM, Fesenko EE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biophysics, Russian Academy of Sciences, Pushchino, Moscow
oblast, Russia, elenanov_06@mail.ru.

PMID: 25172595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Nov;76:116-25. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.08.012. Epub
2014 Aug 25.

Toll-like receptor 4 activation promotes cardiac arrhythmias by decreasing the
transient outward potassium current (Ito) through an IRF3-dependent and
MyD88-independent pathway.

Monnerat-Cahli G(1), Alonso H(2), Gallego M(2), Alarcón ML(1), Bassani RA(3),
Casis O(2), Medei E(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biofísica Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. (2)Departamento de Fisiología, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad
del País Vasco UPV/EHU, Vitoria, Spain. (3)Centro de Engenharia Biomédica,
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. (4)Instituto de Biofísica
Carlos Chagas Filho, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. Electronic
address: emedei70@biof.ufrj.br.

Cardiac arrhythmias are one of the main causes of death worldwide. Several
studies have shown that inflammation plays a key role in different cardiac
diseases and Toll-like receptors (TLRs) seem to be involved in cardiac
complications. In the present study, we investigated whether the activation of
TLR4 induces cardiac electrical remodeling and arrhythmias, and the signaling
pathway involved in these effects. Membrane potential was recorded in Wistar rat 
ventricle. Ca(2+) transients, as well as the L-type Ca(2+) current (ICaL) and the
transient outward K(+) current (Ito), were recorded in isolated myocytes after 24
h exposure to the TLR4 agonist, lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 1 µg/ml). TLR4
stimulation in vitro promoted a cardiac electrical remodeling that leads to
action potential prolongation associated with arrhythmic events, such as delayed 
afterdepolarization and triggered activity. After 24 h LPS incubation, Ito
amplitude, as well as Kv4.3 and KChIP2 mRNA levels were reduced. The Ito decrease
by LPS was prevented by inhibition of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), but 
not by inhibition of interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 4 (IRAK4) or
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B). Extrasystolic activity was present in 25% of the 
cells, but apart from that, Ca(2+) transients and ICaL were not affected by LPS; 
however, Na(+)/Ca(2+) exchanger (NCX) activity was apparently increased. We
conclude that TLR4 activation decreased Ito, which increased AP duration via a
MyD88-independent, IRF3-dependent pathway. The longer action potential,
associated with enhanced Ca(2+) efflux via NCX, could explain the presence of
arrhythmias in the LPS group.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25169970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Oct;134(4):848-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.07.018. 
Epub 2014 Aug 23.

Identification of novel gene signatures in patients with atopic dermatitis
complicated by eczema herpeticum.

Bin L(1), Edwards MG(2), Heiser R(1), Streib JE(1), Richers B(1), Hall CF(1),
Leung DY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo. (2)Division of
Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, University
of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colo. (3)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish
Health, Denver, Colo; Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, Colo. Electronic address: leungd@njhealth.org.

BACKGROUND: A subset of patients with atopic dermatitis (AD) is prone to
disseminated herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection (ie, atopic dermatitis with a
history of eczema herpeticum [ADEH+]). Biomarkers that identify ADEH+ are
lacking.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to search for novel ADEH+ gene signatures in PBMCs.
METHODS: An RNA-sequencing approach was applied to evaluate global
transcriptional changes by using PBMCs from patients with ADEH+ and patients with
atopic dermatitis without a history of eczema herpeticum (ADEH-). Candidate genes
were confirmed by means of quantitative PCR or ELISA.
RESULTS: PBMCs from patients with ADEH+ had distinct changes to the transcriptome
when compared with those from patients with ADEH- after HSV-1 stimulation: 792
genes were differentially expressed at a false discovery rate of less than 0.05
(ANOVA), and 15 type I and type III interferon genes were among the top 20 most
downregulated genes in patients with ADEH+. We further validated that IFN-a and
IL-29 mRNA and protein levels were significantly decreased in HSV-1-stimulated
PBMCs from patients with ADEH+ compared with those from patients with ADEH- and
healthy subjects. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis demonstrated that the upstream
regulators of type I and type III interferons, interferon regulatory factor (IRF)
3 and IRF7, were significantly inhibited in patients with ADEH+ based on the
downregulation of their target genes. Furthermore, we found that gene expression 
of IRF3 and IRF7 was significantly decreased in HSV-1-stimulated PBMCs from
patients with ADEH+.
CONCLUSIONS: PBMCs from patients with ADEH+ have a distinct immune response after
HSV-1 exposure compared with those from patients with ADEH-. Inhibition of the
IRF3 and IRF7 innate immune pathways in patients with ADEH+ might be an important
mechanism for increased susceptibility to disseminated viral infection.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4186924
PMID: 25159465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Immunology. 2015 Feb;144(2):312-20. doi: 10.1111/imm.12373.

Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and Akt are required for RIG-I-mediated anti-viral 
signalling through cross-talk with IPS-1.

Yeon SH(1), Song MJ, Kang HR, Lee JY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Integrated Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
The Catholic University of Korea, Bucheon, Korea.

Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) is a cytosolic pattern-recognition
receptor that recognizes viruses and triggers anti-viral immune responses.
Activation of intracellular RIG-I signalling is mediated through interferon-ß
(IFN-ß) promoter stimulator-1 (IPS-1), an adaptor of RIG-I, which induces IFN
regulatory factor (IRF) 3 activation and type I IFN expression. The
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt pathway is activated in host immune 
cells upon viral infection. However, the mechanism as to how they work in RIG-I
signalling has not been fully elucidated. Therefore, we investigated the role of 
PI3K and Akt in the regulation of RIG-I-mediated IRF3 activation and type I IFN
expression in macrophages. Our results show that Sendai virus infection, which is
recognized by RIG-I, led to IRF3 activation and IFN-ß expression and these
responses were attenuated by the PI3K inhibitor (LY294002) and an Akt
dominant-negative mutant in the macrophage cell line(RAW264.7). IRF3
phosphorylation and dimerization as well as IFN-ß expression induced by a
synthetic RIG-I agonist, short poly(I:C), were suppressed by LY294002 or
siRNA-Akt in bone marrow-derived macrophages. Suppression of PI3K and Akt using a
dominant-negative mutant and siRNA knockdown resulted in attenuation of IRF3
activation and IFN-ß expression induced by RIG-I itself or its adaptor, IPS-1.
Association of Akt with IPS-1 increased with short poly(I:C) stimulation and
required the pleckstrin homology domain of Akt and caspase-recruitment domain in 
IPS-1. Collectively, our results show that PI3K and Akt are required downstream
of IPS-1 for RIG-I-mediated anti-viral immune responses. The results describe a
novel, interactive relationship between RIG-I downstream signalling molecules
resulting in efficient anti-viral immunity.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4298425
PMID: 25158146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(21):12765-76. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02037-14. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Lysine 63-linked TANK-binding kinase 1 ubiquitination by mindbomb E3 ubiquitin
protein ligase 2 is mediated by the mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein.

Ye JS(1), Kim N(1), Lee KJ(1), Nam YR(1), Lee U(1), Joo CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Cell Dysfunction Research Center, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Microbiology, Cell Dysfunction Research Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea chjoo@amc.seoul.kr.

Beta interferon (IFN-ß) is involved in a wide range of cellular functions, and
its secretion must be tightly controlled to inhibit viral spreading while
minimizing cellular damage. Intracellular viral replication triggers cellular
signaling cascades leading to the activation of the transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B
and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7 (IRF3/7), which
synergistically bind to the IFN-ß gene promoter to induce its expression. The
mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) is a governing adaptor protein
that mediates signaling communications between virus-sensing proteins and
transcription factors. The activity of MAVS in the regulation of IFN-ß secretion 
is affected by many cellular factors. However, the mechanism of MAVS-mediated
IRF3/7 activation is not completely understood. Here, we identified a highly
conserved DLAIS motif at amino acid positions 438 to 442 of MAVS that is
indispensable for IRF3/7 activation. Specifically, the L439S and A440R mutations 
suppress IRF3/7 activation. Pulldown experiments using wild-type and mutant MAVS 
showed that mindbomb E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 2 (MIB2) binds to the DLAIS
motif. Furthermore, the DLAIS motif was found to be critical for MIB2 binding,
the ligation of K63-linked ubiquitin to TANK-binding kinase 1, and
phosphorylation-mediated IRF3/7 activation. Our results suggest that MIB2 plays a
putative role in MAVS-mediated interferon signaling.IMPORTANCE: Mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) mediates signaling from virus-sensing proteins
to transcription factors for the induction of beta interferon. However, the
mechanism underlying activation of MAVS-mediated interferon regulatory factors 3 
and 7 (IRF3/7) is not completely understood. We found a highly conserved DLAIS
motif in MAVS that is indispensable for IRF3/7 activation through TANK-binding
kinase 1 (TBK1) and identified it as the binding site for mindbomb E3 ubiquitin
protein ligase 2 (MIB2). The mutations that targeted the DLAIS motif abolished
MIB2 binding, attenuated the K63-linked ubiquitination of TBK1, and decreased the
phosphorylation-mediated activation of IRF3/7.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4248951
PMID: 25142606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014 Dec;178(3):428-37. doi: 10.1111/cei.12429.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 as key element of the interferon signature in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells from systemic lupus erythematosus patients: novel
genetic associations in the Mexican mestizo population.

Santana-de Anda K(1), Gómez-Martín D, Monsivais-Urenda AE, Salgado-Bustamante M, 
González-Amaro R, Alcocer-Varela J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Médicas y Nutrición, Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, México.

Many genetic studies have found an association between interferon regulatory
factors (IRF) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE); however, specific dendritic cell (DC) alterations have not
been assessed. The aim of the present study was to address the expression of IRF3
and IRF5 on different DC subsets from SLE patients, as well as their association 
with interferon (IFN)-a production and novel SNPs. For the genetic association
analyses, 156 SLE patients and 272 healthy controls from the Mexican mestizo
population were included. From these, 36 patients and 36 controls were included
for functional analysis. Two IRF3 SNPs<U+2009>-<U+2009>rs2304206 and rs2304204 - were
determined. We found an increased percentage of circulating pDC in SLE patients
in comparison to controls (8.04 ± 1.48 versus 3.35 ± 0.8, P = 0.032). We also
observed enhanced expression of IRF3 (64 ± 6.36 versus 36.1 ± 5.57, P = 0.004)
and IRF5 (40 ± 5.25 versus 22.5 ± 2.6%, P = 0.010) restricted to this circulating
pDC subset from SLE patients versus healthy controls. This finding was associated
with higher IFN-a serum levels in SLE (160.2 ± 21 versus 106.1 ± 14 pg/ml, P =
0.036). Moreover, the IRF3 rs2304206 polymorphism was associated with increased
susceptibility to SLE [odds ratio (OR), 95% confidence interval (CI)<U+2009>= 2.401
(1.187-4.858), P = 0.021] as well as enhanced levels of serum type I IFN in SLE
patients who were positive for dsDNA autoantibodies. The IRF3 rs2304204 GG and AG
genotypes conferred decreased risk for SLE. Our findings suggest that the
predominant IRF3 expression on circulating pDC is a key element for the increased
IFN-a activation based on the interplay between the rs2304206 gene variant and
the presence of dsDNA autoantibodies in Mexican mestizo SLE patients.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4238870
PMID: 25130328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 15;9(8):e104770. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104770.
eCollection 2014.

Toll-like receptor-3 is dispensable for the innate microRNA response to West Nile
virus (WNV).

Chugh PE(1), Damania BA(1), Dittmer DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Center for AIDS Research, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina, United States of America.

The innate immune response to West Nile virus (WNV) infection involves
recognition through toll-like receptors (TLRs) and RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs),
leading to establishment of an antiviral state. MiRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown
to be reliable biomarkers of TLR activation. Here, we sought to evaluate the
contribution of TLR3 and miRNAs to the host response to WNV infection. We first
analyzed HEK293-NULL and HEK293-TLR3 cells for changes in the innate immune
response to infection. The presence of TLR3 did not seem to affect WNV load,
infectivity or phosphorylation of IRF3. Analysis of experimentally validated
NF<U+03BA>B-responsive genes revealed a WNV-induced signature largely independent of
TLR3. Since miRNAs are involved in viral pathogenesis and the innate response to 
infection, we sought to identify changes in miRNA expression upon infection in
the presence or absence of TLR3. MiRNA profiling revealed 70 miRNAs induced
following WNV infection in a TLR3-independent manner. Further analysis of
predicted gene targets of WNV signature miRNAs revealed genes highly associated
with pathways regulating cell death, viral pathogenesis and immune cell
trafficking.

PMCID: PMC4134228
PMID: 25127040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Innate Immun. 2015;7(1):47-58. doi: 10.1159/000365113. Epub 2014 Aug 8.

A MAVS/TICAM-1-independent interferon-inducing pathway contributes to regulation 
of hepatitis B virus replication in the mouse hydrodynamic injection model.

Leong CR(1), Oshiumi H, Okamoto M, Azuma M, Takaki H, Matsumoto M, Chayama K,
Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and cytoplasmic RNA sensors have been reported to be
involved in the regulation of hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication, but remain
controversial due to the lack of a natural infectious model. Our current study
sets out to characterize aspects of the role of the innate immune system in
eliminating HBV using hydrodynamic-based injection of HBV replicative plasmid and
knockout mice deficient in specific pathways of the innate system. The evidence
indicated that viral replication was not affected by MAVS or TICAM-1 knockout,
but absence of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and IRF-7 transcription
factors, as well as the interferon (IFN) receptor, had an adverse effect on the
inhibition of HBV replication, demonstrating the dispensability of MAVS and
TICAM-1 pathways in the early innate response against HBV. Myd88(-/-) mice did
not have a significant increase in the initial viremia, but substantial viral
antigen persisted in the mice sera, a response similar to Rag2(-/-) mice,
suggesting that the MyD88-dependent pathway participated in evoking an adaptive
immune response against the clearance of intrahepatic HBV. Taken together, we
show that the RNA-sensing pathways do not participate in the regulation of HBV
replication in a mouse model; meanwhile MyD88 is implicated in the HBV clearance.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25115498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Sci Rep. 2014 Aug 8;4:6006. doi: 10.1038/srep06006.

Persistent prion infection disturbs the function of Oct-1, resulting in the
down-regulation of murine interferon regulatory factor-3.

Homma T(1), Ishibashi D(1), Nakagaki T(2), Fuse T(2), Sano K(2), Satoh K(2),
Atarashi R(3), Nishida N(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan [2]. (2)Department of
Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. (3)1] Department of Molecular Microbiology 
and Immunology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Nagasaki, Japan [2] Nagasaki University Research Centre for Genomic Instability
and Carcinogenesis, Nagasaki, Japan.

As a prompt response against invasion of various viruses, interferon regulatory
factor-3 (IRF-3) is initially phosphorylated to become activated and upregulates 
mainly Type I Interferons (IFN-I) in most cell types. We previously reported that
IRF-3-dependent host innate immune responses partially interfere in infection of 
prions. Here, we found that stable infection of prion suppressed IRF-3
gene-expression. The decreased promoter activity of IRF-3 was significantly
restored along with treatment of anti-prion drugs in the prion-infected cells,
suggesting that infection of prion directly influence the regulation of IRF-3
transcription. We further investigated promoter activity of 5'- flanking region
of murine IRF-3 using a luciferase reporter system and found that the nucleotides
-119 to -1 were indispensable for the promoter activity. Within this region,
mutations in the Oct-1 binding site significantly reduced the promoter activity
and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay revealed that Oct-1 indeed binds
to the region. In addition, overexpression of Oct-1 increased the promoter
activity of IRF-3. Intriguingly, Oct-1 protein was significantly reduced in
prion-infected cells and mice brains compared with uninfected groups. Taken
together, we concluded that prion infection could interfere in the function of
Oct-1, resulting in the down-regulation of IRF-3.

PMCID: PMC4126003
PMID: 25103253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Allergy. 2014 Dec;69(12):1648-58. doi: 10.1111/all.12504. Epub 2014 Sep 20.

Polymorphisms of endotoxin pathway and endotoxin exposure: in vitro IgE synthesis
and replication in a birth cohort.

Sahiner UM(1), Semic-Jusufagic A, Curtin JA, Birben E, Belgrave D, Sackesen C,
Simpson A, Yavuz TS, Akdis CA, Custovic A, Kalayci O.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Allergy and Asthma Unit, Hacettepe University School of Medicine,
Ankara, Turkey.

BACKGROUND: Genetic variants in endotoxin signaling pathway are important in
modulating the effect of environmental endotoxin on asthma and atopic phenotypes.
Our objective was to determine the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 
endotoxin signaling pathway that may influence in vitro IgE synthesis and to
investigate the relationship between these variants and endotoxin exposure in
relation to the development of asthma and atopy in a birth cohort.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from 45 children with asthma were
stimulated with 2 and 200 ng/ml lipopolysaccharide in vitro and IgE was measured 
in the culture supernatants. Children were genotyped for 121 SNPs from 30 genes
in the endotoxin signaling pathway. Variants with a dose-response IgE production 
in relation to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were selected for replication in a
population-based birth cohort, in which we investigated the interaction between
these SNPs and endotoxin exposure in relation to airway hyper-responsiveness,
wheeze, and atopic sensitization.
RESULTS: Twenty-one SNPs in nine genes (CD14, TLR4, IRF3, TRAF-6, TIRAP, TRIF,
IKK-1, ST-2, SOCS1) were found to modulate the effect of endotoxin on in vitro
IgE synthesis, with six displaying high linkage disequilibrium. Of the remaining 
15 SNPs, for seven we found significant relationships between genotype and
endotoxin exposure in the genetic association study in relation to symptomatic
airway hyper-responsiveness (CD14-rs2915863 and rs2569191, TRIF-rs4807000),
current wheeze (ST-2-rs17639215, IKK-1-rs2230804, and TRIF-rs4807000), and atopy 
(CD14-rs2915863 and rs2569192, TRAF-6-rs5030411, and IKK-1-rs2230804).
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in the endotoxin signaling pathway are important
determinants of asthma and atopy. The genotype effect is a function of the
environmental endotoxin exposure.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25102764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Kidney Int. 2015 Feb;87(2):332-42. doi: 10.1038/ki.2014.270. Epub 2014 Aug 6.

Innate immunity pathways regulate the nephropathy gene Apolipoprotein L1.

Nichols B(1), Jog P(1), Lee JH(1), Blackler D(1), Wilmot M(1), D'Agati V(2),
Markowitz G(2), Kopp JB(3), Alper SL(4), Pollak MR(5), Friedman DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Renal Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA [2] Center for Vascular Biology Research, Beth
Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA. (2)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA. (3)Kidney Diseases Branch, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. (4)Renal Division, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(5)1] Renal Division, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA [2] Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2015 Feb;87(2):270-2.

Apolipoprotein L1 (APOL1) risk variants greatly elevate the risk of kidney
disease in African Americans. Here we report a cohort of patients who developed
collapsing focal segmental glomerulosclerosis while receiving therapeutic
interferon, all of whom carried the APOL1 high-risk genotype. This finding raised
the possibility that interferons and the molecular pattern recognition receptors 
that stimulate interferon production may contribute to APOL1-associated kidney
disease. In cell culture, interferons and Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists
increased APOL1 expression by up to 200-fold, in some cases with the appearance
of transcripts not detected under basal conditions. PolyI:C, a double-stranded
RNA TLR3 agonist, increased APOL1 expression by upregulating interferons directly
or through an interferon-independent, IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-dependent
pathway. Using pharmacological inhibitors, small hairpin RNA knockdown, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation, we found that the interferon-independent TLR3
pathway relied on signaling through TBK1, NF-<U+03BA>B, and Jak kinases, and on binding 
of IRF1, IRF2, and STAT2 at the APOL1 transcription start site. We also
demonstrate that overexpression of the APOL1 risk variants is more injurious to
cells than overexpression of the wild-type APOL1 protein. Our study illustrates
that antiviral pathways may be important inducers of kidney disease in
individuals with the APOL1 high-risk genotype and identifies potential targets
for prevention or treatment.

PMCID: PMC4312530
PMID: 25100047  [PubMed - in process]


288. Dev Comp Immunol. 2014 Dec;47(2):191-6. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.07.020. Epub 2014
Jul 30.

Molecular cloning and functional characterization of porcine DEAD
(Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide 41 (DDX41).

Zhu X(1), Wang D(1), Zhang H(1), Zhou Y(1), Luo R(1), Chen H(1), Xiao S(1), Fang 
L(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China. Electronic address:
fanglr@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box polypeptide 41 (DDX41), a member of the DEXDc helicase
family, was recently identified as an intracellular DNA sensor in mouse myeloid
dendritic cells. In this study, porcine DDX41 (poDDX41) was cloned and its role
in the type I interferon (IFN) signaling pathway was investigated in porcine
kidney (PK-15) cells. Full-length poDDX41 cDNA encodes 622 amino acid residues
and contains a DEADc domain and a HELICc domain. poDDX41 mRNA is widely expressed
in different tissues, especially the stomach and liver. Overexpression of poDDX41
in PK-15 cells induced IFN-ß by activating transcription factors IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B. 
Knockdown of poDDX41 with siRNA significantly reduced IFN-ß expression induced by
poly(dA:dT), a double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) analogue, or pseudorabies virus, a
dsDNA swine virus. Therefore, poDDX41 is involved in the dsDNA- and
dsDNA-virus-mediated type I IFN signaling pathway in porcine kidney cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25086295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2014 Oct;25(5):525-31. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.07.002. Epub 2014 Jul 11.

Danger, diversity and priming in innate antiviral immunity.

Collins SE(1), Mossman KL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster Immunology Research
Center, Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Canada L8S 4K1. (2)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster
Immunology Research Center, Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Canada L8S 4K1. Electronic address: mossk@mcmaster.ca.

The prototypic response to viral infection involves the recognition of
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs), leading to the activation of transcription factors such as IRF3 and NFkB 
and production of type 1 IFN. While this response can lead to the induction of
hundreds of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) and recruitment and activation of immune 
cells, such a comprehensive response is likely inappropriate for routine low
level virus exposure. Moreover, viruses have evolved a plethora of immune evasion
strategies to subvert antiviral signalling. There is emerging evidence that cells
have developed very sensitive methods of detecting not only specific viral PAMPS,
but also more general danger or stress signals associated with viral entry and
replication. Such stress-induced cellular responses likely serve to prime cells
to respond to further PAMP stimulation or allow for a rapid and localized
intracellular response independent of IFN production and its potential immune
sequelae. This review discusses diversity in innate antiviral players and
pathways, the role of "danger" sensing, and how alternative pathways, such as the
IFN-independent pathway, may serve to prime cells for further pathogen attack.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25081316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Neuroinflammation. 2014 Jul 28;11:130. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-11-130.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 is critical for the development of
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Fitzgerald DC(1), O'Brien K, Young A, Fonseca-Kelly Z, Rostami A, Gran B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, UK.
d.fitzgerald@qub.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) is an animal model of
autoimmune inflammatory demyelination that is mediated by Th1 and Th17 cells. The
transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is activated by
pathogen recognition receptors and induces interferon-ß production.
METHODS: To determine the role of IRF3 in autoimmune inflammation, we immunised
wild-type (WT) and irf3(-/-) mice to induce EAE. Splenocytes from WT and
irf3(-/-) mice were also activated in vitro in Th17-polarising conditions.
RESULTS: Clinical signs of disease were significantly lower in mice lacking IRF3,
with reduced Th1 and Th17 cells in the central nervous system. Peripheral T-cell 
responses were also diminished, including impaired proliferation and Th17
development in irf3(-/-) mice. Myelin-reactive CD4+ cells lacking IRF3 completely
failed to transfer EAE in Th17-polarised models as did WT cells transferred into 
irf3(-/-) recipients. Furthermore, IRF3 deficiency in non-CD4+ cells conferred
impairment of Th17 development in antigen-activated cultures.
CONCLUSION: These data show that IRF3 plays a crucial role in development of Th17
responses and EAE and warrants investigation in human multiple sclerosis.

PMCID: PMC4237888
PMID: 25069698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 12;289(37):25405-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.558817. Epub
2014 Jul 27.

Phospholipase D facilitates efficient entry of influenza virus, allowing escape
from innate immune inhibition.

Oguin TH 3rd(1), Sharma S(2), Stuart AD(3), Duan S(4), Scott SA(5), Jones CK(6), 
Daniels JS(6), Lindsley CW(7), Thomas PG(8), Brown HA(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105-3678, Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee 38152. (2)Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Biochemistry, Lala Lajpat Rai University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Hisar
125004, Haryana, India. (3)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QP, United Kingdom. (4)From the Department of Immunology, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105-3678. (5)Departments of
Pharmacology and. (6)Departments of Pharmacology and Vanderbilt Center for
Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-0697. (7)Departments of Pharmacology and Vanderbilt Center for
Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-0697 Department of Chemistry and The Vanderbilt Institute of
Chemical Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, and. (8)From
the Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105-3678, Paul.Thomas@stjude.org. (9)Departments of Pharmacology and 
Department of Chemistry and The Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, and Biochemistry, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-6600,
alex.brown@vanderbilt.edu.

Lipid metabolism plays a fundamental role during influenza virus replication,
although key regulators of lipid-dependent trafficking and virus production
remain inadequately defined. This report demonstrates that infection by influenza
virus stimulates phospholipase D (PLD) activity and that PLD co-localizes with
influenza during infection. Both chemical inhibition and RNA interference of PLD 
delayed viral entry and reduced viral titers in vitro. Although there may be
contributions by both major isoenzymes, the effects on viral infectivity appear
to be more dependent on the PLD2 isoenzyme. In vivo, PLD2 inhibition reduced
virus titer and correlated with significant increases in transcription of innate 
antiviral effectors. The reduction in viral titer downstream of PLD2 inhibition
was dependent on Rig-I (retinoic acid-inducible gene-1), IRF3, and MxA (myxovirus
resistance gene A) but not IRF7. Inhibition of PLD2 accelerated the accumulation 
of MxA in foci as early as 30 min postinfection. Together these data suggest that
PLD facilitates the rapid endocytosis of influenza virus, permitting viral escape
from innate immune detection and effectors that are capable of limiting lethal
infection.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4162146
PMID: 25065577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Virol. 2014 Oct;88(19):11007-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01545-14. Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Interferon regulatory factor 5-dependent immune responses in the draining lymph
node protect against West Nile virus infection.

Thackray LB(1), Shrestha B(1), Richner JM(1), Miner JJ(1), Pinto AK(1), Lazear
HM(1), Gale M Jr(2), Diamond MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
Missouri, USA. (2)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Molecular
Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri,
USA Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA The Center for Human Immunology and
Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
Missouri, USA diamond@borcim.wustl.edu.

Upon activation of Toll-like and RIG-I-like receptor signaling pathways, the
transcription factor IRF5 translocates to the nucleus and induces antiviral
immune programs. The recent discovery of a homozygous mutation in the
immunoregulatory gene guanine exchange factor dedicator of cytokinesis 2
(Dock2mu/mu) in several Irf5-/- mouse colonies has complicated interpretation of 
immune functions previously ascribed to IRF5. To define the antiviral functions
of IRF5 in vivo, we infected backcrossed Irf5-/-×Dock2wt/wt mice (here called
Irf5-/- mice) and independently generated CMV-Cre Irf5fl/fl mice with West Nile
virus (WNV), a pathogenic neurotropic flavivirus. Compared to congenic wild-type 
animals, Irf5-/- and CMV-Cre Irf5fl/fl mice were more vulnerable to WNV
infection, and this phenotype was associated with increased infection in
peripheral organs, which resulted in higher virus titers in the central nervous
system. The loss of IRF5, however, was associated with only small differences in 
the type I interferon response systemically and in the draining lymph node during
WNV infection. Instead, lower levels of several other proinflammatory cytokines
and chemokines, as well as fewer and less activated immune cells, were detected
in the draining lymph node 2 days after WNV infection. WNV-specific antibody
responses in Irf5-/- mice also were blunted in the context of live or inactivated
virus infection and this was associated with fewer antigen-specific memory B
cells and long-lived plasma cells. Our results with Irf5-/- mice establish a key 
role for IRF5 in shaping the early innate immune response in the draining lymph
node, which impacts the spread of virus infection, optimal B cell immunity, and
disease pathogenesis.IMPORTANCE: Although the roles of IRF3 and IRF7 in
orchestrating innate and adaptive immunity after viral infection are established,
the function of the related transcription factor IRF5 remains less certain. Prior
studies in Irf5-/- mice reported conflicting results as to the contribution of
IRF5 in regulating type I interferon and adaptive immune responses. The lack of
clarity may stem from a recently discovered homozygous loss-of-function mutation 
of the immunoregulatory gene Dock2 in several colonies of Irf5-/- mice. Here,
using a mouse model with a deficiency in IRF5 and wild-type Dock2 alleles, we
investigated how IRF5 modulates West Nile virus (WNV) pathogenesis and host
immune responses. Our in vivo studies indicate that IRF5 has a key role in
shaping the early proinflammatory cytokine response in the draining lymph node,
which impacts immunity and control of WNV infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178807
PMID: 25031348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Sep;22(1):266-72. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.07.001.
Epub 2014 Jul 12.

Dihydroartemisinin inhibits activation of the Toll-like receptor 4 signaling
pathway and production of type I interferon in spleen cells from lupus-prone
MRL/lpr mice.

Huang X(1), Xie Z(1), Liu F(1), Han C(1), Zhang D(1), Wang D(1), Bao X(1), Sun
J(2), Wen C(3), Fan Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Basic Medical Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310053, PR China. (2)Xinhua Hospital, Second Affiliated
Hospital Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310005, PR
China. (3)College of Basic Medical Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310053, PR China. Electronic address: wenchengping@126.com.
(4)College of Basic Medical Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310053, PR China. Electronic address: fyszjtcm@163.com.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multisystem autoimmune disease
characterized by various immunological abnormalities. Dihydroartemisinin (DHA), a
metabolite of artemisinin, has been recently reported to exhibit
immunosuppressive properties. The present study aims to determine the effects of 
DHA on spleen cell activation triggered by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
investigate the effects of DHA on LPS-induced activation of the Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4)/interferon regulatory factor (IRF) signaling pathway. Spleen
cells from lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice were isolated, prepared and cultured. Cells
were treated with LPS alone or LPS with DHA, and spleen cell proliferation was
analyzed using MTS assay. Protein expressions of TLR4, IRF3, and IRF7 were
analyzed by Western blot. IRF3 phosphorylation was also determined. Gene
expression levels of IFN-a and IFN-ß were measured using real-time PCR, and
protein levels in cells' supernatants were determined by ELISA. DHA was found to 
inhibit LPS-induced spleen cell proliferation, decrease LPS-induced protein
expression of TLR4, and inhibit IRF3 phosphorylation. Furthermore, LPS
significantly induced IRF3 expression and slightly increased IRF7 expression in
the nucleus of spleen cells, which was accompanied by enhanced IFN-a and IFN-ß
production. DHA inhibited the effects of LPS in spleen cells of MRL/lpr mice.
Taken together, the data obtained reveal that DHA inhibits LPS-induced cell
activation possibly by suppressing the TLR4/IRF/IFN pathway in spleen cells of
MRL/lpr mice. These data suggest that DHA has the potential therapeutic utility
for the treatment of SLE.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25027631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Immunol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;92(9):761-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2014.51. Epub 2014 Jul 
15.

STAT1 plays a role in TLR signal transduction and inflammatory responses.

Luu K(1), Greenhill CJ(1), Majoros A(2), Decker T(2), Jenkins BJ(1), Mansell
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, MIMR-PHI Institute of
Medical Research, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. (2)Max F.
Perutz Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Immunobiology,
University of Vienna, Dr Bohr-Gasse 9/4, Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;92(9):737-8.

Activation of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family of innate immune sensors
stimulates multiple signal transduction pathways. Previous studies have suggested
that TLR2, TLR4 and TLR9 induce serine phosphorylation of Signal Transducers and 
Activators of Transcription-1 (STAT1) at residue 727 (S727), although its role in
TLR signaling was unclear. We report here that STAT1 rapidly undergoes
phosphorylation following TLR4 challenge with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in a model
of LPS hypersensitivity in vivo. Importantly, genetic ablation of STAT1 protected
against LPS-induced lethality suggesting that STAT1 may have a key role in
TLR-induced inflammation. We have found that multiple TLRs induce Ser727
phosphorylation of STAT1, which is dependent on MyD88 and TRIF signaling, but
independent of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF)-3, IRF7 and the IFN
receptor complex, suggesting that activation is a direct TLR response rather than
autocrine activation via IFN. Importantly, we found that STAT1 interacts with
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor-6 (TRAF6), a key mediator 
of TLR signaling after TLR challenge and that following activation, STAT1
translocates to the nucleus. Critically, macrophages generated from mice in which
the S727 residue was replaced with alanine (STAT1 S727A mice) display
significantly reduced TNFa protein production, but not reduced interleukin-6 or
RANTES protein in response to multiple TLR challenges, as compared with wild-type
macrophages. These results clearly demonstrate cross-talk between the TLR and
JAK/STAT signaling pathways with direct recruitment of STAT1 by TRAF6 and that
the direct activation of STAT1 by TLR signaling suggests a crucial role for STAT1
in TLR-induced inflammation.

PMID: 25027037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Virol J. 2014 Jul 14;11:128. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-11-128.

Mutations within the conserved NS1 nuclear export signal lead to inhibition of
influenza A virus replication.

Tynell J(1), Melén K, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Unit, Department of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control,
National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Mannerheimintie 166, FIN-00300
Helsinki, Finland. janne.tynell@thl.fi.

BACKGROUND: The influenza A virus NS1 protein is a virulence factor and an
antagonist of host cell innate immune responses. During virus infection NS1
protein has several functions both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm and its
intracellular localization is regulated by one or two nuclear localization
signals (NLS) and a nuclear export signal (NES).
METHODS: In order to investigate the role of NS1 NES in intracellular
localization, virus life cycle and host interferon responses, we generated
recombinant A/Udorn/72 viruses harboring point mutations in the NES sequence.
RESULTS: NS1 NES was found to be inactivated by several of the mutations
resulting in nuclear retention of NS1 at late stages of infection confirming that
this sequence is a bona fide functional NES. Some of the mutant viruses showed
reduced growth properties in cell culture, inability to antagonize host cell
interferon production and increased p-IRF3 levels, but no clear correlation
between these phenotypes and NS1 localization could be made. Impaired activation 
of Akt phosphorylation by the replication-deficient viruses indicates possible
disruption of NS1-p85ß interaction by mutations in the NES region.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that mutations within the NS1 NES result in impairment of
several NS1 functions which extends further from the NES site being only involved
in regulating the nuclear-cytoplasmic trafficking of NS1.

PMCID: PMC4112715
PMID: 25023993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2014 Dec;25(6):641-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.06.006. Epub 2014 Jun 22.

The mechanism of double-stranded DNA sensing through the cGAS-STING pathway.

Shu C(1), Li X(1), Li P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX 77843-2128, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas 
A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-2128, USA. Electronic address:
pingwei@tamu.edu.

Microbial nucleic acids induce potent innate immune responses by stimulating the 
expression of type I interferons. Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) is a cytosolic
dsDNA sensor mediating the innate immunity to microbial DNA. cGAS is activated by
dsDNA and catalyze the synthesis of a cyclic dinucleotide cGAMP with 2',5' and
3',5'phosphodiester linkages. cGAMP binds to the adaptor STING located on the
endoplasmic reticulum membrane and mediates the recruitment and activation of the
protein kinase TBK1 and transcription factor IRF3. Phosphorylated IRF3
translocates to the nucleus and initiates the transcription of the IFN-ß gene.
The crystal structures of cGAS and its complex with dsDNA, STING and its complex 
with various cyclic dinucleotides have been determined recently. Here we
summarize the results from these structural studies and provide an overview about
the mechanism of cGAS activation by dsDNA, the catalytic mechanism of cGAS, and
the structural basis of STING activation by cGAMP.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4254336
PMID: 25007740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Oct;96(4):579-89. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2A0114-048RR. Epub 2014
Jul 7.

The antiviral immune response in human conventional dendritic cells is controlled
by the mammalian target of rapamycin.

Fekete T(1), Pazmandi K(1), Szabo A(1), Bacsi A(1), Koncz G(1), Rajnavölgyi E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Debrecen,
Debrecen, Hungary. (2)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University
of Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary evaraj@med.unideb.hu.

Type I and III IFNs are crucial, soluble components of potent antiviral
responses. It has been explored recently that mTOR is involved in the regulation 
of IFN-a/ß production by pDCs, albeit its role in the induction of IFN responses 
in cDCs remained unrevealed. In this study, we demonstrate that the PI3K/mTOR
pathway is indispensable for eliciting intact type I and III IFN responses in
moDCs stimulated with polyI:C. The inhibition of mTOR functionality by rapamycin 
impairs the pIRF3 and also a few members of the MAPK family, suggesting that mTOR
contributes to the activation of multiple signaling pathways in the presence of
viral antigens. Furthermore, rapamycin-treated moDCs show decreased capacity to
prime IFN-<U+03B3> secretion by naive CD8(+) T-lymphocytes. As in moDCs, mTOR-mediated
regulation is also essential for the production of type I and III IFNs in
circulating CD1c(+) DCs. To our best knowledge, these results demonstrate for the
first time that mTOR has an impact on the functional activities of cDCs via
modulating the outcome of IFN secretion.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 25001862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Immunol. 2014 Aug 1;193(3):1364-72. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303322. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

DHX15 senses double-stranded RNA in myeloid dendritic cells.

Lu H(1), Lu N(1), Weng L(1), Yuan B(2), Liu YJ(3), Zhang Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas,
TX 75204; and. (2)Immunobiology and Transplant Research, Houston Methodist
Hospital and Houston Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030. (3)Baylor
Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, TX 75204;
and yong-jun.liu@baylorhealth.edu zzhang@houstonmethodist.org. (4)Baylor
Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, TX 75204;
and Immunobiology and Transplant Research, Houston Methodist Hospital and Houston
Methodist Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030 yong-jun.liu@baylorhealth.edu
zzhang@houstonmethodist.org.

Many members of the DEXD/H box helicase family play important roles in the innate
immune system against viral infection. Therefore, we isolated dsRNA complex in
myeloid dendritic cells. We found that DHx15, a DEXDc helicase family member, is 
one of the components of this complex. Knockdown of DHX15 expression by short
hairpin RNA efficiently reduced the ability of myeloid dendritic cells to produce
IFN-ß, IL-6, and TNF-a in response to dsRNA and RNA virus. DHX15 specifically
bound polyinosine-polycytidylic acid via its helicase C-terminal domain. DHX15
interacted with MAVS and formed a complex following stimulation with
polyinosine-polycytidylic acid. The N-terminal domain containing a DEXDc motif in
DHX15 bound the C terminus of MAVS. DHX15 is required to activate IRF3
phosphorylation as well as NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPK signaling during RNA virus infection.
We, therefore, identified DHX15 as a new RNA virus sensor mediated by MAVS to
activate the immune responses to RNA.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4108507
PMID: 24990078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Virol. 2014 Sep;88(18):10340-53. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00984-14. Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Host factors that interact with the pestivirus N-terminal protease, Npro, are
components of the ribonucleoprotein complex.

Jefferson M(1), Donaszi-Ivanov A(1), Pollen S(2), Dalmay T(2), Saalbach G(3),
Powell PP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, Norwich Medical School, University of East Anglia,
Norwich, Norfolk, United Kingdom. (2)Biological Sciences, University of East
Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom. (3)John Innes Centre, Norwich Research Park,
Colney, Norwich, United Kingdom. (4)Biomedical Research Centre, Norwich Medical
School, University of East Anglia, Norwich, Norfolk, United Kingdom
p.powell@uea.ac.uk.

The viral N-terminal protease N(pro) of pestiviruses counteracts cellular
antiviral defenses through inhibition of IRF3. Here we used mass spectrometry to 
identify a new role for N(pro) through its interaction with over 55 associated
proteins, mainly ribosomal proteins and ribonucleoproteins, including RNA
helicase A (DHX9), Y-box binding protein (YBX1), DDX3, DDX5, eIF3, IGF2BP1,
multiple myeloma tumor protein 2, interleukin enhancer binding factor 3 (IEBP3), 
guanine nucleotide binding protein 3, and polyadenylate-binding protein 1
(PABP-1). These are components of the translation machinery, ribonucleoprotein
particles (RNPs), and stress granules. Significantly, we found that stress
granule formation was inhibited in MDBK cells infected with a noncytopathic
bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) strain, Kyle. However, ribonucleoproteins
binding to N(pro) did not inhibit these proteins from aggregating into stress
granules. N(pro) interacted with YBX1 though its TRASH domain, since the mutant
C112R protein with an inactive TRASH domain no longer redistributed to stress
granules. Interestingly, RNA helicase A and La autoantigen relocated from a
nuclear location to form cytoplasmic granules with N(pro). To address a proviral 
role for N(pro) in RNP granules, we investigated whether N(pro) affected RNA
interference (RNAi), since interacting proteins are involved in RISC function
during RNA silencing. Using glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH)
silencing with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) followed by Northern blotting of
GAPDH, expression of N(pro) had no effect on RNAi silencing activity, contrasting
with other viral suppressors of interferon. We propose that N(pro) is involved
with virus RNA translation in the cytoplasm for virus particle production, and
when translation is inhibited following stress, it redistributes to the
replication complex.IMPORTANCE: Although the pestivirus N-terminal protease,
N(pro), has been shown to have an important role in degrading IRF3 to prevent
apoptosis and interferon production during infection, the function of this unique
viral protease in the pestivirus life cycle remains to be elucidated. We used
proteomic mass spectrometry to identify novel interacting proteins and have shown
that N(pro) is present in ribosomal and ribonucleoprotein particles (RNPs),
indicating a translational role in virus particle production. The virus itself
can prevent stress granule assembly from these complexes, but this inhibition is 
not due to N(pro). A proviral role to subvert RNA silencing through binding of
these host RNP proteins was not identified for this viral suppressor of
interferon.

Copyright © 2014 Jefferson et al.

PMCID: PMC4178888
PMID: 24965446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Virol. 2014 Sep;88(18):10432-47. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01383-14. Epub 2014 Jun 18.

Interactions between the influenza A virus RNA polymerase components and retinoic
acid-inducible gene I.

Li W(1), Chen H(1), Sutton T(1), Obadan A(1), Perez DR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maryland, College Park, and
Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, College Park,
Maryland, USA. (2)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Maryland,
College Park, and Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine,
College Park, Maryland, USA dperez1@umd.edu.

The influenza A virus genome possesses eight negative-strand RNA segments in the 
form of viral ribonucleoprotein particles (vRNPs) in association with the three
viral RNA polymerase subunits (PB2, PB1, and PA) and the nucleoprotein (NP).
Through interactions with multiple host factors, the RNP subunits play vital
roles in replication, host adaptation, interspecies transmission, and
pathogenicity. In order to gain insight into the potential roles of RNP subunits 
in the modulation of the host's innate immune response, the interactions of each 
RNP subunit with retinoic acid-inducible gene I protein (RIG-I) from mammalian
and avian species were investigated. Studies using coimmunoprecipitation (co-IP),
bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFc), and colocalization using
confocal microscopy provided direct evidence for the RNA-independent binding of
PB2, PB1, and PA with RIG-I from various hosts (human, swine, mouse, and duck).
In contrast, the binding of NP with RIG-I was found to be RNA dependent.
Expression of the viral NS1 protein, which interacts with RIG-I, did not
interfere with the association of RNA polymerase subunits with RIG-I. The
association of each individual virus polymerase component with RIG-I failed to
significantly affect the interferon (IFN) induction elicited by RIG-I and 5'
triphosphate (5'ppp) RNA in reporter assays, quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), and IRF3 phosphorylation tests. Taken together, these
findings indicate that viral RNA polymerase components PB2, PB1, and PA directly 
target RIG-I, but the exact biological significance of these interactions in the 
replication and pathogenicity of influenza A virus needs to be further
clarified.IMPORTANCE: RIG-I is an important RNA sensor to elicit the innate
immune response in mammals and some bird species (such as duck) upon influenza A 
virus infection. Although the 5'-triphosphate double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
panhandle structure at the end of viral genome RNA is responsible for the binding
and subsequent activation of RIG-I, this structure is supposedly wrapped by RNA
polymerase complex (PB2, PB1, and PA), which may interfere with the induction of 
RIG-I signaling pathway. In the present study, PB2, PB1, and PA were found to
individually interact with RIG-Is from multiple mammalian and avian species in an
RNA-independent manner, without significantly affecting the generation of IFN.
The data suggest that although RIG-I binding by RNA polymerase complex is
conserved in different species, it does not appear to play crucial role in the
modulation of IFN in vitro.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178842
PMID: 24942585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 17;9(6):e100266. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100266.
eCollection 2014.

Toll-like receptors expressed by synovial fibroblasts perpetuate Th1 and th17
cell responses in rheumatoid arthritis.

Hu F(1), Li Y(1), Zheng L(1), Shi L(1), Liu H(1), Zhang X(1), Zhu H(1), Tang
S(1), Zhu L(1), Xu L(1), Yang Y(1), Li Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, Peking University People's
Hospital, Beijing, China.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic inflammatory disease characterized by
synovial fibroblast hyperplasia and bone and cartilage erosion. Synovial
fibroblast- and T cell-mediated inflammation plays crucial roles in the
pathogenesis of RA. However how this inflammation is initiated, propagated, and
maintained remains controversial. Here, we systemically examined the contribution
of toll-like receptors (TLRs) to the inflammatory mediator production as well as 
Th1 and Th17 cell hyperactivity in RA. Our results show that rheumatoid arthritis
synovial fibroblasts (RASF) express a series of TLRs, including TLR2, TLR3, TLR4,
and TLR9, with the predominant expression of TLR3. Moreover, the expression
levels of these TLRs were higher than those in osteoarthritis synovial
fibroblasts (OASF). Ligation of TLR3, as well as TLR2 and TLR4, resulted in
vigorous production of inflammatory cytokines, matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), 
and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in RASF, with activation of the
NF-<U+03BA>B, MAPK, and IRF3 pathways. More important, activation of these TLRs
expressed by RASF exacerbated inflammatory Th1 and Th17 cell expansion both in
cell-cell contact-dependent and inflammatory cytokine-dependent manners, which
induced more IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 accumulation. Targeting TLRs may modulate the
inflammation in RA and provide new therapeutic strategies for overcoming this
persistent disease.

PMCID: PMC4061069
PMID: 24936783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Immunol. 2014 Jul 15;193(2):840-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301601. Epub 2014 Jun
13.

DOK3 is required for IFN-ß production by enabling TRAF3/TBK1 complex formation
and IRF3 activation.

Kim SS(1), Lee KG(2), Chin CS(2), Ng SK(2), Pereira NA(2), Xu S(2), Lam KP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University
of Singapore, Singapore 119228; Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 138668; and. (2)Bioprocessing
Technology Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
138668; and. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 119228; Bioprocessing Technology
Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore 138668; and
Department of Microbiology, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore 119228 lam_kong_peng@bti.a-star.edu.sg.

The downstream of kinase (DOK) family of adaptors is generally involved in the
negative regulation of signaling pathways. DOK1, 2, and 3 were shown to attenuate
TLR4 signaling by inhibiting Ras-ERK activation. In this study, we elucidated a
novel role for DOK3 in IFN-ß production. Macrophages lacking DOK3 were impaired
in IFN-ß synthesis upon influenza virus infection or
polyinosinic-polyribocytidylic acid stimulation. In the absence of DOK3, the
transcription factor IFN regulatory factor 3 was not phosphorylated and could not
translocate to the nucleus to activate ifn-ß gene expression. Interestingly,
polyinosinic-polyribocytidylic acid-induced formation of the upstream
TNFR-associated factor (TRAF) 3/TANK-binding kinase (TBK) 1 complex was
compromised in dok3(-/-) macrophages. DOK3 was shown to bind TBK1 and was
required for its activation. Furthermore, we demonstrated that overexpression of 
DOK3 and TBK1 could significantly enhance ifn-ß promoter activity. DOK3 was also 
shown to bind TRAF3, and the binding of TRAF3 and TBK1 to DOK3 required the
tyrosine-rich C-terminal domain of DOK3. We further revealed that DOK3 was
phosphorylated by Bruton's tyrosine kinase. Hence, DOK3 plays a critical and
positive role in TLR3 signaling by enabling TRAF3/TBK1 complex formation and
facilitating TBK1 and IFN regulatory factor 3 activation and the induction of
IFN-ß production.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 24929003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Clin Immunol. 2014 Aug;153(2):343-52. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2014.06.001. Epub 2014 
Jun 10.

IRF5-mediated signaling and implications for SLE.

Lazzari E(1), Jefferies CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Research Institute, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. Electronic
address: elisalazzari@rcsi.ie. (2)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Research
Institute, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin
2, Ireland. Electronic address: cjefferies@rcsi.ie.

Transcription of the type I IFN genes is regulated by members of the Interferon
Regulatory Factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, composed in humans of 9 
distinct proteins. In addition to IRF3 and IRF7, the transcription factor IRF5
has been shown to be involved in type I IFN production and interestingly,
polymorphisms of the IRF5 gene in humans can result in risk or protective
haplotypes with regard to SLE susceptibility. In addition to regulation of type I
IFN expression, IRF5 is involved in other signaling pathways, including IgG
switching in B cells, macrophage polarization and apoptosis, and its role in SLE 
pathogenesis may therefore not be limited to dysregulated control of IFN
expression. In this review we will comprehensively discuss the role of IRF5 in
immune-mediated responses and its potential multifaceted role in conferring SLE
susceptibility.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24928322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Virology. 2014 Jun;458-459:136-50. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.04.028. Epub 2014
May 13.

Biogenesis of non-structural protein 1 (nsp1) and nsp1-mediated type I interferon
modulation in arteriviruses.

Han M(1), Kim CY(1), Rowland RR(2), Fang Y(2), Kim D(1), Yoo D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2001
South Lincoln Avenue, Urbana, IL 61802, USA. (2)Department of Diagnostic Medicine
and Pathobiology, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA.
(3)Department of Pathobiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2001
South Lincoln Avenue, Urbana, IL 61802, USA. Electronic address:
dyoo@illinois.edu.

Type I interferons (IFNs-a/ß) play a key role for the antiviral state of host,
and the porcine arterivirus; porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus 
(PRRSV), has been shown to down-regulate the production of IFNs during infection.
Non-structural protein (nsp) 1 of PRRSV has been identified as a viral IFN
antagonist, and the nsp1a subunit of nsp1 has been shown to degrade the
CREB-binding protein (CBP) and to inhibit the formation of enhanceosome thus
resulting in the suppression of IFN production. The study was expanded to other
member viruses in the family Arteriviridae: equine arteritis virus (EAV), murine 
lactate dehydrogenase-elevating virus (LDV), and simian hemorrhagic fever virus
(SHFV). While PRRSV-nsp1 and LDV-nsp1 were auto-cleaved to produce the nsp1a and 
nsp1ß subunits, EAV-nsp1 remained uncleaved. SHFV-nsp1 was initially predicted to
be cleaved to generate three subunits (nsp1a, nsp1ß, and nsp1<U+03B3>), but only two
subunits were generated as SHFV-nsp1aß and SHFV-nsp1<U+03B3>. The papain-like cysteine
protease (PLP) 1a motif in nsp1a remained inactive for SHFV, and only the PLP1ß
motif of nsp1ß was functional to generate SHFV-nsp1<U+03B3> subunit. All subunits of
arterivirus nsp1 were localized in the both nucleus and cytoplasm, but
PRRSV-nsp1ß, LDV-nsp1ß, EAV-nsp1, and SHFV-nsp1<U+03B3> were predominantly found in the 
nucleus. All subunits of arterivirus nsp1 contained the IFN suppressive activity 
and inhibited both interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-<U+03BA>B mediated IFN
promoter activities. Similar to PRRSV-nsp1a, CBP degradation was evident in cells
expressing LDV-nsp1a and SHFV-nsp1<U+03B3>, but no such degradation was observed for
EAV-nsp1. Regardless of CBP degradation, all subunits of arterivirus nsp1
suppressed the IFN-sensitive response element (ISRE)-promoter activities. Our
data show that the nsp1-mediated IFN modulation is a common strategy for all
arteriviruses but their mechanism of action may differ from each other.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24928046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 10;9(6):e99526. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099526. eCollection
2014.

Astrocytic Toll-like receptor 3 is associated with ischemic
preconditioning-induced protection against brain ischemia in rodents.

Pan LN(1), Zhu W(2), Li Y(3), Xu XL(4), Guo LJ(4), Lu Q(4), Wang J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China; Medical
Department of Neurology, The Second Hospital of Nanchang, Nanchang, Jiangxi,
People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Emergency Internal Medicine, Tongji 
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China; Department of Anesthesiology and
Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland, United States of America. (3)Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, People's
Republic of China. (4)Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of
China; The Key Laboratory of Drug Target Research and Pharmacodynamic Evaluation,
Hubei Province, Wuhan, Hubei, People's Republic of China. (5)Department of
Anesthesiology and Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral ischemic preconditioning (IPC) protects brain against
ischemic injury. Activation of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) signaling can induce
neuroprotective mediators, but whether astrocytic TLR3 signaling is involved in
IPC-induced ischemic tolerance is not known.
METHODS: IPC was modeled in mice with three brief episodes of bilateral carotid
occlusion. In vitro, IPC was modeled in astrocytes by 1-h oxygen-glucose
deprivation (OGD). Injury and components of the TLR3 signaling pathway were
measured after a subsequent protracted ischemic event. A neutralizing antibody
against TLR3 was used to evaluate the role of TLR3 signaling in ischemic
tolerance.
RESULTS: IPC in vivo reduced brain damage from permanent middle cerebral artery
occlusion in mice and increased expression of TLR3 in cortical astrocytes. IPC
also reduced damage in isolated astrocytes after 12-h OGD. In astrocytes, IPC or 
12-h OGD alone increased TLR3 expression, and 12-h OGD alone increased expression
of phosphorylated NF<U+03BA>B (pNF<U+03BA>B). However, IPC or 12-h OGD alone did not alter the 
expression of Toll/interleukin receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFNß
(TRIF) or phosphorylated interferon regulatory factor 3 (pIRF3). Exposure to IPC 
before OGD increased TRIF and pIRF3 expression but decreased pNF<U+03BA>B expression.
Analysis of cytokines showed that 12-h OGD alone increased IFNß and IL-6
secretion; 12-h OGD preceded by IPC further increased IFNß secretion but
decreased IL-6 secretion. Preconditioning with TLR3 ligand Poly I:C increased
pIRF3 expression and protected astrocytes against ischemic injury; however, cells
treated with a neutralizing antibody against TLR3 lacked the IPC- and Poly
I:C-induced ischemic protection and augmentation of IFNß.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that IPC-induced ischemic tolerance is mediated 
by astrocytic TLR3 signaling. This reprogramming of TLR3 signaling by IPC in
astrocytes may play an important role in suppression of the post-ischemic
inflammatory response and thereby protect against ischemic damage. The mechanism 
may be via activation of the TLR3/TRIF/IRF3 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC4051824
PMID: 24914679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Virus Res. 2014 Aug 30;189:226-34. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.05.027. Epub 2014
Jun 6.

The amino acid at residue 155 in nonstructural protein 4 of porcine reproductive 
and respiratory syndrome virus contributes to its inhibitory effect for
interferon-ß transcription in vitro.

Chen Z(1), Li M(1), He Q(1), Du J(1), Zhou L(1), Ge X(1), Guo X(2), Yang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis of Ministry of Agriculture,
College of Veterinary Medicine and State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, People's Republic of China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology and Zoonosis of Ministry of Agriculture,
College of Veterinary Medicine and State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: guoxin@cau.edu.cn. (3)Key Laboratory of Animal Epidemiology
and Zoonosis of Ministry of Agriculture, College of Veterinary Medicine and State
Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University, Beijing
100193, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: yanghanchun1@cau.edu.cn.

Type I interferons (IFNs), predominantly IFN-a and ß, play important roles in
both innate and adaptive immune responses against viral infections. Porcine
reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) has been recognized to be
able to down-regulate the IFN response during in vivo and in vitro infection. In 
this study, we first analyzed inhibitory effect of each NSP of low pathogenic
PRRSV HB-1/3.9 on IFN-ß transcription in MARC-145 cells, and the results showed
that the IFN-ß promoter activation could be suppressed by NSP1a, NSP2, NSP1ß,
NSP3, NSP4, NSP5 and NSP11. We next confirmed that the inhibitory effect of NSP4 
was mainly mediated through suppressing NF-<U+03BA>B activation, whereas not hindering
NF-<U+03BA>B phosphorylation and nuclear translocation, and nuclear-localized NSP4 was
responsible for inhibiting IFN-ß activation. We further found that the NSP4 of
different pathogenic PRRSV strains exhibited differential inhibitory effect on
IFN-ß, NF-<U+03BA>B, and IRF3 transcription, and the NSP4 of highly pathogenic
(HP)-PRRSV could display more strong inhibitory effect. Finally, we determined
that the amino acid at residue 155 in NSP4 contributed to its inhibitory effect
for IFN-ß transcription in vitro by altering its subcellular distribution. Our
findings suggest that the nucleus-localized NSP4 of PRRSV participates in the
modulation of the host type I IFNs system, and also provide novel insight for
understanding the pathogenesis of the Chinese HP-PRRSV.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24911239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Br J Pharmacol. 2014 Nov;171(21):4866-78. doi: 10.1111/bph.12797. Epub 2014 Sep
23.

A novel 1,2-benzenediamine derivative FC-99 suppresses TLR3 expression and
ameliorates disease symptoms in a mouse model of sepsis.

Gong W(1), Hu E, Dou H, Song Y, Yang L, Ji J, Li E, Tan R, Hou Y.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Division of
Immunology, Medical School, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Sepsis is a clinical condition characterized by
overwhelming systemic inflammation with high mortality rate and high prevalence, 
but effective treatment is still lacking. Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) is an
endogenous sensor, thought to regulate the amplification of immune response
during sepsis. Modulators of TLR3 have an advantage in the treatment of sepsis.
Here, we aimed to explore the mechanism of a monosubstituted 1,2-benzenediamine
derivative FC-99 {N(1) -[(4-methoxy)methyl]-4-methyl-1,2-benzenediamine}on
modulating TLR3 expression and its therapeutic potential on mouse model of
sepsis.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Cells were pretreated with FC-99 followed by poly(I:C) or 
IFN-a stimulation; TLR3 and other indicators were assayed. Female C57BL/6 mice
were subjected to sham or caecal ligation puncture (CLP) surgery after i.p.
injection of vehicle or FC-99; serum and tissues were collected for further
experiments.
KEY RESULTS: FC-99 suppressed inflammatory response induced by poly(I:C) with no 
effect on cell viability or uptake of poly(I:C). FC-99 also inhibited TLR3
expression induced by not only poly(I:C) but also by exogenous IFN-a. This
inhibition of FC-99 was related to the poly(I:C)-evoked IRF3/IFN-a/JAK/STAT1
signalling pathway. In CLP-induced model of sepsis, FC-99 administration
decreased mice mortality and serum levels of inflammatory factors, attenuated
multiple organ dysfunction and enhanced bacterial clearance. Accordingly,
systemic and local expression of TLR3 was reduced by FC-99 in vivo.
CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS: FC-99 reversed TLR3 expression and ameliorate
CLP-induced sepsis in mice. Thus, FC-99 will be a potential therapeutic candidate
for sepsis.

© 2014 The British Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC4294110
PMID: 24903157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jun 5;8(6):e2933. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002933.
eCollection 2014.

Potent inhibition of Junín virus infection by interferon in murine cells.

Huang C(1), Walker AG(1), Grant AM(1), Kolokoltsova OA(1), Yun NE(1), Seregin
AV(1), Paessler S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Institute for Human Infections and Immunity,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

The new world arenavirus Junín virus (JUNV) is the causative agent of Argentine
hemorrhagic fever, a lethal human infectious disease. Adult laboratory mice are
generally resistant to peripheral infection by JUNV. The mechanism underlying the
mouse resistance to JUNV infection is largely unknown. We have reported that
interferon receptor knockout mice succumb to JUNV infection, indicating the
critical role of interferon in restricting JUNV infection in mice. Here we report
that the pathogenic and vaccine strains of JUNV were highly sensitive to
interferon in murine primary cells. Treatment with low concentrations of
interferon abrogated viral NP protein expression in murine cells. The replication
of both JUNVs was enhanced in IRF3/IRF7 deficient cells. In addition, the vaccine
strain of JUNV displayed impaired growth in primary murine cells. Our data
suggested a direct and potent role of host interferon response in restricting
JUNV replication in mice. The defect in viral growth for vaccine JUNV might also 
partially explain its attenuation in mice.

PMCID: PMC4046933
PMID: 24901990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Oct;71(20):3873-83. doi: 10.1007/s00018-014-1653-9. Epub 
2014 May 31.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 in adaptive immune responses.

Ysebrant de Lendonck L(1), Martinet V, Goriely S.

Author information: 
(1)WELBIO and Institute for Medical Immunology (IMI), Université Libre de
Bruxelles, 8 rue Adrienne Bolland, 6041, Charleroi-Gosselies, Belgium.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 plays a key role in innate responses against
viruses. Indeed, activation of this transcription factor triggers the expression 
of type I interferons and downstream interferon-stimulated genes in infected
cells. Recent evidences indicate that this pathway also modulates adaptive immune
responses. This review focuses on the different mechanisms that are implicated in
this process. We discuss the role of IRF3 within antigen-presenting cells and T
lymphocytes in the polarization of the cellular immune response and its
implication in the pathogenesis of immune disorders.

PMID: 24879293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Virol. 2014 Aug;88(16):8936-45. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00700-14. Epub 2014 May 28.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus nucleocapsid protein antagonizes beta interferon 
production by sequestering the interaction between IRF3 and TBK1.

Ding Z(1), Fang L(2), Jing H(1), Zeng S(1), Wang D(1), Liu L(1), Zhang H(1), Luo 
R(1), Chen H(1), Xiao S(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China. (2)State Key Laboratory
of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan, China fanglr@mail.hzau.edu.cn
vet@mail.hzau.edu.cn.

Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV), a porcine enteropathogenic coronavirus,
causes lethal watery diarrhea in piglets and results in large economic losses in 
many Asian and European countries. A large-scale outbreak of porcine epidemic
diarrhea occurred in China in 2010, and the virus emerged in the United States in
2013 and spread rapidly, posing significant economic and public health concerns. 
Previous studies have shown that PEDV infection inhibits the synthesis of type I 
interferon (IFN), and viral papain-like protease 2 has been identified as an IFN 
antagonist. In this study, we found that the PEDV-encoded nucleocapsid (N)
protein also inhibits Sendai virus-induced IFN-ß production, IFN-stimulated gene 
expression, and activation of the transcription factors IFN regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) and NF-<U+03BA>B. We also found that N protein significantly impedes the
activation of the IFN-ß promoter stimulated by TBK1 or its upstream molecules
(RIG-I, MDA5, IPS-1, and TRAF3) but does not counteract its activation by IRF3. A
detailed analysis revealed that the PEDV N protein targets TBK1 by direct
interaction and that this binding sequesters the association between TBK1 and
IRF3, which in turn inhibits both IRF3 activation and type I IFN production.
Together, our findings demonstrate a new mechanism evolved by PEDV to circumvent 
the host's antiviral immunity.IMPORTANCE: PEDV has received increasing attention 
since the emergence of a PEDV variant in China and the United States. Here, we
identify nucleocapsid (N) protein as a novel PEDV-encoded interferon (IFN)
antagonist and demonstrate that N protein antagonizes IFN production by
sequestering the interaction between IRF3 and TBK1, a critical step in type I IFN
signaling. This adds another layer of complexity to the immune evasion strategies
evolved by this economically important viral pathogen. An understanding of its
immune evasion mechanism may direct us to novel therapeutic targets and more
effective vaccines against PEDV infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4136253
PMID: 24872591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2014 May 28;9(5):e98517. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098517. eCollection
2014.

Differences in PGE2 production between primary human monocytes and differentiated
macrophages: role of IL-1ß and TRIF/IRF3.

Endo Y(1), Blinova K(1), Romantseva T(1), Golding H(1), Zaitseva M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER), Food and Drug
Administration (FDA), Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) is induced in vivo by bacterial products including TLR
agonists. To determine whether PGE2 is induced directly or via IL-1ß, human
monocytes and macrophages were cultured with LPS or with Pam3CSK4 in presence of 
caspase-1 inhibitor, ZVAD, or IL-1R antagonist, Kineret. TLR agonists induced
PGE2 in macrophages exclusively via IL-1ß-independent mechanisms. In contrast,
ZVAD and Kineret reduced PGE2 production in LPS-treated (but not in
Pam3CSK4-treated) monocytes, by 30-60%. Recombinant human IL-1ß augmented COX-2
and mPGES-1 mRNA and PGE2 production in LPS-pretreated monocytes but not in
un-primed or Pam3CSK4-primed monocytes. This difference was explained by the
finding that LPS but not Pam3CSK4 induced phosphorylation of IRF3 in monocytes
suggesting activation of the TRIF signaling pathway. Knocking down TRIF, TRAM, or
IRF3 genes by siRNA inhibited IL-1ß-induced COX-2 and mPGES-1 mRNA. Blocking of
TLR4 endocytosis during LPS priming prevented the increase in PGE2 production by 
exogenous IL-1ß. Our data showed that TLR2 agonists induce PGE2 in monocytes
independently from IL-1ß. In the case of TLR4, IL-1ß augments PGE2 production in 
LPS-primed monocytes (but not in macrophages) through a mechanism that requires
TLR4 internalization and activation of the TRIF/IRF3 pathway. These findings
suggest a key role for blood monocytes in the rapid onset of fever in animals and
humans exposed to bacterial products and some novel adjuvants.

PMCID: PMC4037220
PMID: 24870145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Jul 15;90(2):126-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.05.004. Epub
2014 May 17.

Cyanidin-3-O-ß-glucoside ameliorates lipopolysaccharide-induced acute lung injury
by reducing TLR4 recruitment into lipid rafts.

Fu Y(1), Zhou E(1), Wei Z(1), Wang W(1), Wang T(1), Yang Z(2), Zhang N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130062, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130062, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: yangzhengtao01@sina.com. (3)Department of Clinical Veterinary
Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin
Province 130062, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
zhangns61@sohu.com.

Cyanidin-3-O-ß-glucoside (C3G), a typical anthocyanin pigment that exists in the 
human diet, has been reported to have anti-inflammatory properties. The aim of
this study was to detect the effect of C3G on LPS-induced acute lung injury and
to investigate the molecular mechanisms. Acute lung injury was induced by
intratracheal administration of LPS in mice. Alveolar macrophages from mice were 
stimulated with LPS and were treated with C3G. Our results showed that C3G
attenuated lung histopathologic changes, myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity, TNF-a,
IL-1ß and IL-6 production in LPS-induced acute lung injury model. In vitro, C3G
dose-dependently inhibited TNF-a, IL-1ß, IL-6, IL-10 and IFN-ß production, as
well as NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 activation in LPS-stimulated alveolar macrophages.
Furthermore, C3G disrupted the formation of lipid rafts by depleting cholesterol 
and inhibited TLR4 translocation into lipid rafts. Moreover, C3G activated
LXRa-ABCG1-dependent cholesterol efflux. Knockout of LXRa abrogated the
anti-inflammatory effects of C3G. In conclusion, C3G has a protective effect on
LPS-induced acute lung injury. The promising anti-inflammatory mechanisms of C3G 
is associated with up-regulation of the LXRa-ABCG1 pathway which result in
disrupting lipid rafts by depleting cholesterol and reducing translocation of
TLR4 to lipid rafts, thereby suppressing TLR4 mediated inflammatory response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24841888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Gene. 2014 Jul 25;545(2):226-32. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.05.029. Epub 2014 May
14.

Genetic variations of mitochondrial antiviral signaling gene (MAVS) in domestic
chickens.

Yu D(1), Xu L(2), Peng L(2), Chen SY(3), Liu YP(4), Yao YG(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese
Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming,
Yunnan 650223, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease
Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming
Institute of Zoology, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China; Kunming College of Life
Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650204,
China. (3)Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, Sichuan Agricultural
University, Chengdu Campus, Chengdu 611130, China. (4)Institute of Animal
Genetics and Breeding, Sichuan Agricultural University, Chengdu Campus, Chengdu
611130, China; College of Animal Science and Technology, Sichuan Agricultural
University, Ya'an, Sichuan 625014, China. (5)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and 
Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, 
Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China. Electronic address: 
ygyaozh@gmail.com.

Mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) gene plays a key role in antiviral
regulation in mammals potentially by activating IRF3/7 and NF-<U+03BA>B and leading to
the induction of type I interferon (IFN)-mediated antiviral and inflammatory
responses. In this study, we screened genetic polymorphisms of the MAVS gene in
various Chinese domestic chicken breeds/populations and evaluated its potential
effect on gene expression. Among the sequenced fragment (4678bp), a total of 75
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified in 46 chickens from 10
breeds/populations, including 30 coding SNPs and 45 non-coding SNPs. Extremely
high haplotype diversity (37 nucleotide haplotypes, 18 amino acid haplotypes) was
observed in the coding region (CDS), and a similar pattern of high polymorphisms 
was also observed for the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR). Luciferase assays of
two representative 3'-UTR haplotypes were performed in both HEK293 cells and DF-1
chicken fibroblast cells, and we found that they were differentially associated
with different abilities on regulating mRNA expression level (P<0.05).
Collectively, we observed a considerably high genetic variability of the MAVS
gene, and the 3'-UTR variants had an ability to regulate mRNA expression. These
results would cast some clues on understanding the potential role of MAVS on
viral resistance in chicken.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24835312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2014 May;70(Pt 5):619-23. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X14006396. Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Expression, purification and crystallization of the SKICH domain of human
TAX1BP1.

Yang Y(1), Wang G(1), Huang X(2), Du Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Southern Illinois University, 1245
Lincoln Drive, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA. (2)Department of Computer Science,
Southern Illinois University, 1245 Lincoln Drive, Carbondale, IL 62901, USA.

TAX1BP1 is a highly conserved, pleiotropic protein that plays many essential
functions in human cells, including negative regulation of inflammatory and
antimicrobial responses mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 signaling, inhibition of
apoptosis, transcriptional coactivation and autophagy etc. TAX1BP1 contains a
SKICH domain at the N-terminus, three coiled-coil domains in the middle and two
ubiquitin-binding zinc-finger motifs at the C-terminus. The SKICH domain and the 
linker sequence between the SKICH domain and the coiled-coil region mediate
interaction with ubiquitin-like proteins of the LC3/GABARAP family, which are
autophagosome markers. For structure determination of the SKICH domain of
TAX1BP1, a protein construct (amino acids 15-148) corresponding to the SKICH
domain plus the linker region was expressed, purified and crystallized. A native 
diffraction data set has been collected to 1.9 Å resolution. A
molecular-replacement solution has been found by using the structure of the SKICH
domain of NDP52, a paralog of TAX1BP1.

PMID: 24817723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(14):8091-101. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00944-14. Epub 2014 May 7.

Novel roles of cytoplasmic ICP0: proteasome-independent functions of the RING
finger are required to block interferon-stimulated gene production but not to
promote viral replication.

Taylor KE(1), Chew MV(2), Ashkar AA(2), Mossman KL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster Immunology
Research Centre, Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine,
McMaster Immunology Research Centre, Institute for Infectious Disease Research,
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Biochemistry and
Biomedical Sciences, McMaster Immunology Research Centre, Institute for
Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster Immunology Research
Centre, Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada mossk@mcmaster.ca.

The immediate-early protein ICP0 from herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) plays
pleiotropic roles in promoting viral lytic replication and reactivation from
latency. Most of the known actions of ICP0 occur in the nucleus and are thought
to involve the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of its RING finger domain, which
targets proteins for degradation via the proteasome. Although ICP0 translocates
to the cytoplasm as the infection progresses, little is known about its
activities in this location. Here, we show that cytoplasmic ICP0 has two distinct
functions. In primary cell cultures and in an intravaginal mouse model,
cytoplasmic ICP0 promotes viral replication in the absence of an intact RING
finger domain. Additionally, ICP0 blocks the activation of interferon regulatory 
factor 3 (IRF3), a key transcription factor of the innate antiviral response, in 
a mechanism that requires the RING finger domain but not the proteasome. To our
knowledge, this is the first observation of a proteasome-independent function of 
the RING finger domain of ICP0. Collectively, these results underscore the
importance of cytoplasm-localized ICP0 and the diverse nature of its activities. 
Importance: Despite ICP0 being a well-studied viral protein, the significance of 
its cytoplasmic localization has been largely overlooked. This is, in part,
because common experimental manipulations result in the restriction of ICP0 to
the nucleus. By overcoming this constraint, we both further characterize the
ability of cytoplasmic ICP0 to inhibit antiviral signaling and show that ICP0 at 
this site has unexpected activities in promoting viral replication. This
demonstrates the importance of considering location when analyzing protein
function and adds a new perspective to our understanding of this multifaceted
protein.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4097794
PMID: 24807717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(14):7987-97. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00643-14. Epub 2014 May 7.

RIOK3 is an adaptor protein required for IRF3-mediated antiviral type I
interferon production.

Feng J(1), De Jesus PD(2), Su V(1), Han S(1), Gong D(1), Wu NC(1), Tian Y(3), Li 
X(1), Wu TT(1), Chanda SK(2), Sun R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA. 
(2)Infectious and Inflammatory Disease Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. (3)Center for Autism Research and
Treatment, Semel Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA Interdepartmental Ph.D.
Program in Bioinformatics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, USA. (4)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
California, USA rsun@mednet.ucla.edu.

Detection of cytosolic nucleic acids by pattern recognition receptors leads to
the induction of type I interferons (IFNs) and elicits the innate immune
response. We report here the identification of RIOK3 as a novel adaptor protein
that is essential for the cytosolic nucleic acid-induced type I IFN production
and for the antiviral response to gammaherpesvirus through two independent
kinome-wide RNA interference screens. RIOK3 knockdown blocks both cytosolic
double-stranded B-form DNA and double-stranded RNA-induced IRF3 activation and
IFN-ß production. In contrast, the overexpression of RIOK3 activates IRF3 and
induces IFN-ß. RIOK3 functions downstream of TBK1 and upstream of IRF3
activation. Furthermore, RIOK3 physically interacts with both IRF3 and TBK1 and
is necessary for the interaction between TBK1 and IRF3. In addition, global
transcriptome analysis shows that the expression of many gene involved antiviral 
responses is dependent on RIOK3. Thus, knockdown of RIOK3 inhibits cellular
antiviral responses against both DNA and RNA viruses (herpesvirus and influenza A
virus). Our data suggest that RIOK3 plays a critical role in the antiviral type I
IFN pathway by bridging TBK1 and IRF3. Importance: The innate immune response,
such as the production of type I interferons, acts as the first line of defense, 
limiting infectious pathogens directly and shaping the adaptive immune response. 
In this study, we identified RIOK3 as a novel regulator of the antiviral type I
interferon pathway. Specifically, we found that RIOK3 physically interacts with
TBK1 and IRF3 and bridges the functions between TBK1 and IRF3 in the activation
of type I interferon pathway. The identification of a cellular kinase that plays 
a role the type I interferon pathway adds another level of complexity in the
regulation of innate immunity and will have implications for developing novel
strategies to combat viral infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4097797
PMID: 24807708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Innate Immun. 2014;6(5):650-62. doi: 10.1159/000360764. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Sustained activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 during infection by
paramyxoviruses requires MDA5.

Grandvaux N(1), Guan X, Yoboua F, Zucchini N, Fink K, Doyon P, Martin L, Servant 
MJ, Chartier S.

Author information: 
(1)CRCHUM - Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Montreal, Que.,
Canada.

Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated
gene 5 (MDA5) are the main cytosolic sensors of single-stranded RNA viruses,
including paramyxoviruses, and are required to initiate a quick and robust innate
antiviral response. Despite different ligand-binding properties, the consensus
view is that RIG-I and MDA5 trigger common signal(s) to activate interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and NF-<U+03BA>B, and downstream antiviral and
proinflammatory cytokine expression. Here, we performed a thorough analysis of
the temporal involvement of RIG-I and MDA5 in the regulation of IRF-3 during
respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection. Based on specific RNA
interference-mediated knockdown of RIG-I and MDA5 in A549 cells, we confirmed
that RIG-I is critical for the initiation of IRF-3 phosphorylation, dimerization 
and downstream gene expression. On the other hand, our experiments yielded the
first evidence that knockdown of MDA5 leads to early ubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation of active IRF-3. Conversely, ectopic expression of MDA5
prolonged RIG-I-induced IRF-3 activation. Altogether, we provide novel
mechanistic insight into the temporal involvement of RIG-I and MDA5 in the innate
antiviral response. While RIG-I is essential for initial IRF-3 activation,
engagement of induced MDA5 is essential to prevent early degradation of IRF-3,
thereby sustaining IRF-3-dependent antiviral gene expression. MDA5 plays a
similar role during Sendai virus infection suggesting that this model is not
restricted to RSV amongst paramyxoviruses.

PMID: 24800889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Open Virol J. 2014 Mar 7;8:1-8. doi: 10.2174/1874357901408010001. eCollection
2014.

Both Cyclophilin Inhibitors and Direct-Acting Antivirals Prevent PKR Activation
in HCV-Infected Cells.

Bobardt M(1), Chatterji U(1), Lim P(1), Gawlik K(1), Gallay P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology & Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, 
La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

We and others demonstrated that the contact between NS5A and the host factor CypA
is critical for HCV replication. CypI, by disrupting NS5A-CypA complexes, block
HCV replication both in vitro and in patients. Since NS5A also binds to PKR, a
central component of the IFN response, we investigated the possibility of a
relationship between CypA, NS5A and PKR in the IFN response to HCV. HCV-infected 
cells treated with CypI, DAAs or IFN were analyzed for the expression and
activation of various components of the innate response. We found that CypI
(cyclosporine A, alisporivir, NIM811 and sanglifehrins), drastically prevented
the activation/phosphorylation, but not the expression of IFN-induced PKR in
HCV-infected cells. CypI had no effect on the expression or phosphorylation of
other components of the innate response such as eiF2, NF-kB, IRF3, IRF9, STAT1
and STAT2, suggesting a specific effect on PKR. No significant activation of
IFN-induced PKR was observed in the absence of HCV. Importantly, we found that
several classes of DAAs such as NS3/4A protease, NS5B polymerase and NS5A
inhibitors also prevented PKR activation. Furthermore, we found that PKR
activation by the dsRNA mimic poly I:C cannot be prevented by CypI or DAAs. Our
findings suggest that CypI do not have a unique effect on PKR activation, but
rather the suppression of HCV replication by any anti-HCV inhibitor, abrogates
PKR activation induced by IFN. Moreover, they suggest that the accumulation of
dsRNA intermediates allows HCV to exploit the activation of PKR to counteract the
IFN response.

PMCID: PMC4009744
PMID: 24799968  [PubMed]


319. PLoS One. 2014 May 1;9(5):e95992. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095992. eCollection 
2014.

Mitochondria-nucleus shuttling FK506-binding protein 51 interacts with TRAF
proteins and facilitates the RIG-I-like receptor-mediated expression of type I
IFN.

Akiyama T(1), Shiraishi T(1), Qin J(2), Konno H(1), Akiyama N(1), Shinzawa M(1), 
Miyauchi M(1), Takizawa N(1), Yanai H(1), Ohashi H(3), Miyamoto-Sato E(3),
Yanagawa H(4), Yong W(5), Shou W(5), Inoue J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Division of Cellular and
Molecular Biology, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology,
Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Ministry of Education and International
Base of Collaboration for Science and Technology, the Ministry of Science and
Technology and Guangdong Province, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)Division of Interactome Medical Sciences, Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Biosciences and
Informatics, Faculty of Science and Technology, Keio University, Yokohama, Japan.
(5)Pediatrics, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical and Molecular
Genetics, Pharmacology and Toxicology, Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of
America.

Virus-derived double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) are sensed in the cytosol by retinoic
acid-inducible gene (RIG)-I-like receptors (RLRs). These induce the expression of
type I IFN and proinflammatory cytokines through signaling pathways mediated by
the mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) protein. TNF receptor-associated
factor (TRAF) family proteins are reported to facilitate the RLR-dependent
expression of type I IFN by interacting with MAVS. However, the precise
regulatory mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we show the role of FK506-binding
protein 51 (FKBP51) in regulating the dsRNA-dependent expression of type I IFN.
The binding of FKBP51 to TRAF6 was first identified by "in vitro virus" selection
and was subsequently confirmed with a coimmunoprecipitation assay in HEK293T
cells. The TRAF-C domain of TRAF6 is required for its interaction, although
FKBP51 does not contain the consensus motif for interaction with the TRAF-C
domain. Besides TRAF6, we found that FKBP51 also interacts with TRAF3. The
depletion of FKBP51 reduced the expression of type I IFN induced by dsRNA
transfection or Newcastle disease virus infection in murine fibroblasts.
Consistent with this, the FKBP51 depletion attenuated dsRNA-mediated
phosphorylations of IRF3 and JNK and nuclear translocation of RelA.
Interestingly, dsRNA stimulation promoted the accumulation of FKBP51 in the
mitochondria. Moreover, the overexpression of FKBP51 inhibited RLR-dependent
transcriptional activation, suggesting a scaffolding function for FKBP51 in the
MAVS-mediated signaling pathway. Overall, we have demonstrated that FKBP51
interacts with TRAF proteins and facilitates the expression of type I IFN induced
by cytosolic dsRNA. These findings suggest a novel role for FKBP51 in the innate 
immune response to viral infection.

PMCID: PMC4006813
PMID: 24788966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Sci Signal. 2014 Apr 29;7(323):ra40. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2004841.

The DEAH-box RNA helicase DHX15 activates NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPK signaling downstream of 
MAVS during antiviral responses.

Mosallanejad K(1), Sekine Y, Ishikura-Kinoshita S, Kumagai K, Nagano T, Matsuzawa
A, Takeda K, Naguro I, Ichijo H.

Author information: 
(1)1Laboratory of Cell Signaling, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

During infection with an RNA virus, the DExD/H-box RNA helicases RIG-I (retinoic 
acid-inducible gene I) and MDA5 (melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5)
activate the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B),
c-Jun amino-terminal kinase (JNK), and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signaling pathways through an unknown mechanism involving the adaptor
protein MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral signaling). We used a Drosophila
misexpression screen to identify DEAH-box polypeptide 15 (DHX15) as an activator 
of the p38 MAPK pathway. Human DHX15 contributed to the activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B, 
JNK, and p38 MAPK pathways, but not the IRF3 pathway, in response to the
synthetic double-stranded RNA analog poly(I:C) (polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid),
and DHX15 was required for optimal cytokine production in response to poly(I:C)
and infection with RNA virus. DHX15 physically interacted with MAVS and mediated 
the MAVS-dependent activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPK pathways. Furthermore, DHX15 
was required for poly(I:C)- and RNA virus-dependent, MAVS-mediated apoptosis.
Thus, our findings indicate that, in RIG-I-like receptor signaling, DHX15
specifically stimulates the NF-<U+03BA>B and MAPK pathways downstream of MAVS and
contributes to MAVS-mediated cytokine production and apoptosis.

PMID: 24782566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Basic Res Cardiol. 2014 May;109(3):411. doi: 10.1007/s00395-014-0411-3. Epub 2014
Apr 24.

The adapter protein c-Cbl-associated protein (CAP) protects from acute
CVB3-mediated myocarditis through stabilization of type I interferon production
and reduced cytotoxicity.

Valaperti A(1), Nishii M, Liu Y, Yang H, Naito K, Liu PP, Eriksson U.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Heart and Stroke/Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence,
Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, University Health Network,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, alan.valaperti@vetbio.uzh.ch.

c-Cbl-associated protein (CAP), also called Sorbs1 or ponsin, has been described 
as an essential adapter protein in the insulin-signalling pathway. Here, we
describe for the first time a unique protective role for CAP in viral
myocarditis. Mortality and heart failure development were increased in CAP(-/-)
mice compared to CAP(+/+) littermates after Coxsackievirus (CVB3) infection.
Mechanistically, CAP protected from tissue apoptosis because of reduced CD8(+) T 
and natural killer cell cytotoxicity. Despite reduced cytotoxic elimination of
CVB3-infected cells in CAP(+/+) hearts, however, CAP enhanced interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-dependent antiviral type I interferon production and
decreased viral proliferation in vitro by binding to the cytoplasmic RIG-I-like
receptor melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5). Taken together,
these findings reveal a novel modulatory role for CAP in the heart as a key
protein stabilizing antiviral type I interferon production, while protecting from
excessive cytotoxic responses. Our study will help to define future strategies to
develop treatments to limit detrimental responses during viral heart
inflammation.

PMID: 24763933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Apr 24;10(4):e1004041. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1004041.
eCollection 2014.

HSCARG negatively regulates the cellular antiviral RIG-I like receptor signaling 
pathway by inhibiting TRAF3 ubiquitination via recruiting OTUB1.

Peng Y(1), Xu R(1), Zheng X(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Protein and Plant Gene Research, School of Life Sciences,
Peking University, Beijing, China; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

RIG-I like receptors (RLRs) recognize cytosolic viral RNA and initiate innate
immunity; they increase the production of type I interferon (IFN) and the
transcription of a series of antiviral genes to protect the host organism.
Accurate regulation of the RLR pathway is important for avoiding tissue injury
induced by excessive immune response. HSCARG is a newly reported negative
regulator of NF-<U+03BA>B. Here we demonstrated that HSCARG participates in innate
immunity. HSCARG inhibited the cellular antiviral response in an NF-<U+03BA>B
independent manner, whereas deficiency of HSCARG had an opposite effect. After
viral infection, HSCARG interacted with tumor necrosis receptor-associated factor
3 (TRAF3) and inhibited its ubiquitination by promoting the recruitment of OTUB1 
to TRAF3. Knockout of HSCARG attenuated the de-ubiquitination of TRAF3 by OTUB1, 
and knockdown of OTUB1 abolished the effect of HSCARG. HSCARG also interacted
with Ikappa-B kinase epsilon (IKKe) after viral infection and impaired the
association between TRAF3 and IKKe, which further decreased the phosphorylation
of IKKe and interferon response factor 3 (IRF3), thus suppressed the dimerization
and nuclear translocation of IRF3. Moreover, knockdown of TRAF3 dampened the
inhibitory effect of IFN-ß transcription by HSCARG, suggesting that TRAF3 is
necessary for HSCARG to down-regulate RLR pathway. This study demonstrated that
HSCARG is a negative regulator that enables balanced antiviral innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC3999155
PMID: 24763515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 1;192(11):4977-88. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1302919. Epub 2014
Apr 23.

TLR3 activation augments matrix metalloproteinase production through reactive
nitrogen species generation in human lung fibroblasts.

Ichikawa T(1), Sugiura H(2), Koarai A(2), Minakata Y(3), Kikuchi T(3), Morishita 
Y(3), Oka A(3), Kanai K(3), Kawabata H(3), Hiramatsu M(3), Akamatsu K(3), Hirano 
T(3), Nakanishi M(3), Matsunaga K(3), Yamamoto N(3), Ichinose M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, School of 
Medicine, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan; and 1kawa@wakayama-med.ac.jp. (2)Department
of Respiratory Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai
980-8574, Japan. (3)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical
University, School of Medicine, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan; and.

Viral infection often triggers asthma exacerbation and contributes to airway
remodeling. Cell signaling in viral infection is mainly mediated through TLR3.
Many mediators are involved in airway remodeling, but matrix metalloproteinases
(MMPs) are key players in this process in asthma. However, the role of TLR3
activation in production of MMPs is unknown. In this study, we examined the
effects of polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid [poly(I:C)], a ligand for TLR3, on
production of MMPs in human lung fibroblasts, with a focus on nitrosative stress 
in TLR3 modulation of MMP production. After lung fibroblasts were treated with
poly(I:C), production of MMP-1, -2, and -9 and inducible NO synthase (iNOS) was
assessed. The roles of NF-<U+03BA>B and IFN regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) in the
poly(I:C)-mediated production of MMPs and the responsiveness to poly(I:C) of
normal lung fibroblasts and asthmatic lung fibroblasts were also investigated.
Poly(I:C) augmented production of MMPs and iNOS in fibroblasts, and an iNOS
inhibitor diminished this production of MMPs. Poly(I:C) stimulated translocation 
of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF-3 into the nucleus in fibroblasts and inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B or
IRF-3 abrogated the poly(I:C)-induced increase in both iNOS expression and
release of MMPs. Poly(I:C)-induced production of iNOS and MMPs was greater in
asthmatic fibroblasts than in normal fibroblasts. We conclude that viral
infection may induce nitrosative stress and subsequent MMP production via NF-<U+03BA>B- 
and IRF-3-dependent pathways, thus potentiating viral-induced airway remodeling
in asthmatic airways.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 24760149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Apr;6(2):154-63. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju005.

TRIM4 modulates type I interferon induction and cellular antiviral response by
targeting RIG-I for K63-linked ubiquitination.

Yan J(1), Li Q, Mao AP, Hu MM, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.

RIG-I is a pivotal cytoplasmic sensor that recognizes different species of viral 
RNAs. This recognition leads to activation of the transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B and
IRF3, which collaborate to induce type I interferons (IFNs) and innate antiviral 
response. In this study, we identified the TRIM family protein TRIM4 as a
positive regulator of RIG-I-mediated IFN induction. Overexpression of TRIM4
potentiated virus-triggered activation of IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B, as well as IFN-ß
induction, whereas knockdown of TRIM4 had opposite effects. Mechanistically,
TRIM4 associates with RIG-I and targets it for K63-linked polyubiquitination. Our
findings demonstrate that TRIM4 is an important regulator of the virus-induced
IFN induction pathways by mediating RIG-I for K63-linked ubiquitination.

PMID: 24755855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Cancer Res. 2014 Jul;12(7):1055-66. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0642. Epub 
2014 Apr 21.

Evaluating TBK1 as a therapeutic target in cancers with activated IRF3.

Muvaffak A(1), Pan Q(2), Yan H(2), Fernandez R(3), Lim J(3), Dolinski B(3),
Nguyen TT(3), Strack P(3), Wu S(2), Chung R(2), Zhang W(2), Hulton C(2), Ripley
S(2), Hirsch H(3), Nagashima K(3), Wong KK(4), Jánne PA(4), Seidel-Dugan C(3),
Zawel L(3), Kirschmeier PT(2), Middleton RE(2), Morris EJ(3), Wang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Belfer Institute for Applied Cancer Science;
asli_muvaffak@dfci.harvard.edu ywang@tesarobio.com. (2)Authors' Affiliations:
Belfer Institute for Applied Cancer Science; (3)Merck Research Laboratories,
Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Authors' Affiliations: Belfer Institute for Applied
Cancer Science; Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute;
and. (5)Merck Research Laboratories, Boston, Massachusetts
asli_muvaffak@dfci.harvard.edu ywang@tesarobio.com.

TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase 1) is a noncanonical I<U+03BA>B protein kinase that
phosphorylates and activates downstream targets such as IRF3 and c-Rel and,
mediates NF-<U+03BA>B activation in cancer. Previous reports demonstrated synthetic
lethality of TBK1 with mutant KRAS in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC); thus,
TBK1 could be a novel target for treatment of KRAS-mutant NSCLC. Here, the effect
of TBK1 on proliferation in a panel of cancer cells by both genetic and
pharmacologic approaches was evaluated. In KRAS-mutant cancer cells, reduction of
TBK1 activity by knockdown or treatment with TBK1 inhibitors did not correlate
with reduced proliferation in a two-dimensional viability assay. Verification of 
target engagement via reduced phosphorylation of S386 of IRF3 (pIRF3(S386)) was
difficult to assess in NSCLC cells due to low protein expression. However,
several cell lines were identified with high pIRF3(S386) levels after screening a
large panel of cell lines, many of which also harbor KRAS mutations.
Specifically, a large subset of KRAS-mutant pancreatic cancer cell lines was
uncovered with high constitutive pIRF3(S386) levels, which correlated with high
levels of phosphorylated S172 of TBK1 (pTBK1(S172)). Finally, TBK1 inhibitors
dose-dependently inhibited pIRF3(S386) in these cell lines, but this did not
correlate with inhibition of cell growth. Taken together, these data demonstrate 
that the regulation of pathways important for cell proliferation in some NSCLC,
pancreatic, and colorectal cell lines is not solely dependent on TBK1
activity.IMPLICATIONS: TBK1 has therapeutic potential under certain contexts and 
phosphorylation of its downstream target IRF3 is a biomarker of TBK1 activity.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24752990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Lipid Res. 2014 Apr 21;55(6):1111-1119. [Epub ahead of print]

Cyanidin-3-O-ß-glucoside inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory
response in mouse mastitis model.

Fu Y(1), Wei Z(1), Zhou E(1), Zhang N(1), Yang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130062, People's Republic of China.

Cyanidin-3-O-ß-glucoside (C3G) (CAS number 7084-24-4), a typical anthocyanin
pigment that exists in the human diet, has been reported to have
anti-inflammatory properties. However, the effect of C3G on lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced mastitis and the molecular mechanisms have not been investigated.
In this study, we detected the protective effects of C3G on a LPS-induced mouse
mastitis model and investigated the molecular mechanisms in LPS-stimulated mouse 
mammary epithelial cells (MMECs). Our results showed that C3G could attenuate
mammary histopathologic changes and myeloperoxidase activity, and inhibit TNF-a, 
interleukin (IL)-1ß, and IL-6 production caused by LPS. Meanwhile, C3G
dose-dependently inhibited TNF-a and IL-6 in LPS-stimulated MMECs. C3G suppressed
LPS-induced nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
activation. Furthermore, C3G disrupted the formation of lipid rafts by depleting 
cholesterol. Moreover, C3G activated liver X receptor (LXR)-ABCG1-dependent
cholesterol efflux. Knockdown of LXRa abrogated the anti-inflammatory effects of 
C3G. In conclusion, C3G has a protective effect on LPS-induced mastitis. The
promising anti-inflammatory mechanisms of C3G are associated with upregulation of
the LXRa-ABCG1 pathway which result in disrupting lipid rafts by depleting
cholesterol, thereby suppressing toll-like receptor 4-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3
signaling pathways induced by LPS.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 
Inc.

PMCID: PMC4031942
PMID: 24752550  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


327. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2014 Jan-Mar;28(1):33-40.

The innate immunity receptor TIR8/SIGIRR is expressed in the early developmental 
stages of chicken embryos.

Turin L(1), Manarolla G(1), Rampin T(1), Riva F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Science and Public Health (DIVET), University of
Milan, Milan, Italy.

The orphan receptor TIR8, also known as SIGIRR (Single Immunoglobulin
IL-1R-Related molecule), belongs to the IL-1R/TLR (TIR) superfamily and plays an 
important role in the inflammatory responses. The signaling pathways of the
receptors belonging to the TIR family are tightly regulated by both extracellular
and intracellular mechanisms. TIR8 does not activate the transcription factors
NFkB (nuclear factor kB) and IRF3 (interferon regulatory factor 3), although it
negatively modulates the inflammatory responses. It acts as an antagonist for the
IL-1 receptor family and triggers a negative pathway of the Toll-like/IL-1
receptor system, crucial for dampening inflammation stimuli in the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract and in other organs (e.g. lung and kidney). The
recent findings of TLRs expression in ovary and embryos of different species
(mammals and chickens) are very important for an understanding of reproductive
physiology and transovarian pathogen transmission. TIR8 was well characterized in
mouse, humans and in other mammalian species, but it is still poorly
characterized in the chicken. When TIR8 expression was measured in selected
organs of chicken embryos of both broiler and layer types at different time
points a unique pattern of expression was observed. Interestingly, TIR8 was
detected during the first stages of chicken development (day 1 of incubation),
and reached a remarkable level of expression by day 10. We observed this receptor
to be ubiquitously expressed in the kidney, GI tract, Bursa of Fabricius, with
the highest expression levels in liver and kidney. This pattern was comparable to
those observed in post-hatching chickens and in mammals examined to date. No
expression differences were observed between the two different chicken breeds
(layer- and broiler-type) in the first incubation period (8 days). Whereas in
some organs starting from day 10, higher TIR8 expression was observed in
broiler-type compared to layer-type. These are the first findings concerning TIR8
expression in developmental stages and therefore they are of comparative value.

PMID: 24750789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Apr 17;10(4):e1003989. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003989.
eCollection 2014.

Modified vaccinia virus Ankara triggers type I IFN production in murine
conventional dendritic cells via a cGAS/STING-mediated cytosolic DNA-sensing
pathway.

Dai P(1), Wang W(2), Cao H(1), Avogadri F(3), Dai L(4), Drexler I(4), Joyce
JA(5), Li XD(6), Chen Z(6), Merghoub T(3), Shuman S(7), Deng L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, United States of America; Molecular Biology Program, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of
America. (2)Dermatology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of America. (3)Immunology
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United
States of America. (4)Institute for Virology, Düsseldorf University Hospital,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany. (5)Cancer Biology & Genetics
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United
States of America. (6)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas,
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.
(7)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York, United States of America; Lucille Castori Center for Microbes,
Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York, United States of America. (8)Dermatology Service, Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of
America; Lucille Castori Center for Microbes, Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of America.

Modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) is an attenuated poxvirus that has been
engineered as a vaccine against infectious agents and cancers. Our goal is to
understand how MVA modulates innate immunity in dendritic cells (DCs), which can 
provide insights to vaccine design. In this study, using murine bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells, we assessed type I interferon (IFN) gene
induction and protein secretion in response to MVA infection. We report that MVA 
infection elicits the production of type I IFN in murine conventional dendritic
cells (cDCs), but not in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). Transcription
factors IRF3 (IFN regulatory factor 3) and IRF7, and the positive feedback loop
mediated by IFNAR1 (IFN alpha/beta receptor 1), are required for the induction.
MVA induction of type I IFN is fully dependent on STING (stimulator of IFN genes)
and the newly discovered cytosolic DNA sensor cGAS (cyclic guanosine
monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate synthase). MVA infection of cDCs triggers
phosphorylation of TBK1 (Tank-binding kinase 1) and IRF3, which is abolished in
the absence of cGAS and STING. Furthermore, intravenous delivery of MVA induces
type I IFN in wild-type mice, but not in mice lacking STING or IRF3. Treatment of
cDCs with inhibitors of endosomal and lysosomal acidification or the lysosomal
enzyme Cathepsin B attenuated MVA-induced type I IFN production, indicating that 
lysosomal enzymatic processing of virions is important for MVA sensing. Taken
together, our results demonstrate a critical role of the cGAS/STING-mediated
cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway for type I IFN induction in cDCs by MVA. We present
evidence that vaccinia virulence factors E3 and N1 inhibit the activation of IRF3
and the induction of IFNB gene in MVA-infected cDCs.

PMCID: PMC3990710
PMID: 24743339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Vet Res. 2014 Apr 17;45:47. doi: 10.1186/1297-9716-45-47.

Npro of classical swine fever virus contributes to pathogenicity in pigs by
preventing type I interferon induction at local replication sites.

Tamura T, Nagashima N, Ruggli N, Summerfield A, Kida H, Sakoda Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Microbiology, Department of Disease Control, Graduate School of 
Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo 060-0818, Japan.
sakoda@vetmed.hokudai.ac.jp.

Classical swine fever (CSF) caused by CSF virus (CSFV) is a highly contagious
disease of pigs. The viral protein Npro of CSFV interferes with alpha- and
beta-interferon (IFN-a/ß) induction by promoting the degradation of interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). During the establishment of the live attenuated CSF
vaccine strain GPE-, Npro acquired a mutation that abolished its capacity to bind
and degrade IRF3, rendering it unable to prevent IFN-a/ß induction. In a previous
study, we showed that the GPE- vaccine virus became pathogenic after forced
serial passages in pigs, which was attributed to the amino acid substitutions
T830A in the viral proteins E2 and V2475A and A2563V in NS4B. Interestingly,
during the re-adaptation of the GPE- vaccine virus in pigs, the IRF3-degrading
function of Npro was not recovered. Therefore, we examined whether restoring the 
ability of Npro to block IFN-a/ß induction of both the avirulent and moderately
virulent GPE--derived virus would enhance pathogenicity in pigs. Viruses carrying
the N136D substitution in Npro regained the ability to degrade IRF3 and suppress 
IFN-a/ß induction in vitro. In pigs, functional Npro significantly reduced the
local IFN-a mRNA expression in lymphoid organs while it increased quantities of
IFN-a/ß in the circulation, and enhanced pathogenicity of the moderately virulent
virus. In conclusion, the present study demonstrates that functional Npro
influences the innate immune response at local sites of virus replication in pigs
and contributes to pathogenicity of CSFV in synergy with viral replication.

PMCID: PMC4018971
PMID: 24742209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2014 Jul;41(7):482-8. doi: 10.1111/1440-1681.12241.

Toll-like receptor-4 signalling in the progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease induced by high-fat and high-fructose diet in mice.

Liu J(1), Zhuang ZJ, Bian DX, Ma XJ, Xun YH, Yang WJ, Luo Y, Liu YL, Jia L, Wang 
Y, Zhu ML, Ye DW, Zhou G, Lou GQ, Shi JP.

Author information: 
(1)Second Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4)
signalling at different stages of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
induced by a high-fat, high-fructose (HFHFr) diet in mice. Both TLR4 wild-type
(WT) and mutant (TLR4(mut) ) mice were fed either standard chow (SC) or the HFHFr
diet for different periods of time from 4 to 16 weeks. Pathological
characteristics and function of the liver were assessed. Simple steatosis,
steatohepatitis and hepatic fibrosis occurred sequentially in Week 4, 8 and 16 in
WT mice fed with the HFHFr. Expression of TLR4, myeloid differentiation factor 88
(MyD88), interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7 started to increase at
Week 4, peaked at Week 8 and then declined to basal levels at Week 16. This
pattern was consistent with changes in inflammation in the liver revealed by
haematoxylin and eosin staining. However, lipid accumulation, inflammation and
fibrosis in livers of TLR4(mut) mice fed the HFHFr diet were significantly
alleviated. In addition, the expression of activin A in WT mice fed the HFHFr
diet increased at Week 16. The data suggest that TLR4 signalling mediates
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis before fibrosis and that activin A is subsequently 
involved in NAFLD.

© 2014 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24739055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 May 28;154(1):218-28. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.04.008. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

ATF-2/CREB/IRF-3-targeted anti-inflammatory activity of Korean red ginseng water 
extract.

Yang Y(1), Yang WS(1), Yu T(1), Sung GH(2), Park KW(3), Yoon K(1), Son YJ(4),
Hwang H(1), Kwak YS(5), Lee CM(6), Rhee MH(7), Kim JH(8), Cho JY(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea. (2)Mushroom Research Division, National Institute of
Horticultural and Herbal Science, Rural Development Administration, Eumseong
369-873, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Food Science and Biotechnology,
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Pharmacy, Sunchon National University, Suncheon 540-742, Republic of Korea.
(5)Ginseng Corporation Central Research Institute, Daejeon 305-805, Republic of
Korea. (6)Metabolic Engineering Division, National Academy of Agricultural
Science, Rural Development Administration, Suwon 441-707, Republic of Korea.
(7)College of Veterinary Medicine, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-701, 
Republic of Korea. (8)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Biosafety Research Institute, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju
561-756, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jhkim1@chonbuk.ac.kr.
(9)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jaecho@skku.edu.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Korean Red Ginseng (KRG) is one of the
representative traditional herbal medicines prepared from Panax ginseng Meyer
(Araliaceae) in Korea. It has been reported that KRG exhibits a lot of different 
biological actions such as anti-aging, anti-fatigue, anti-stress,
anti-atherosclerosis, anti-diabetic, anti-cancer, and anti-inflammatory
activities. Although systematic studies have investigated how KRG is able to
ameliorate various inflammatory diseases, its molecular inhibitory mechanisms had
not been carried out prior to this study.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In order to investigate these mechanisms, we evaluated the
effects of a water extract of Korean Red Ginseng (KRG-WE) on the in vitro
inflammatory responses of activated RAW264.7 cells, and on in vivo gastritis and 
peritonitis models by analyzing the activation events of inflammation-inducing
transcription factors and their upstream kinases.
RESULTS: KRG-WE reduced the production of nitric oxide (NO), protected cells
against NO-induced apoptosis, suppressed mRNA levels of inducible NO synthase
(iNOS), cyclooxygenase (COX)-2, and interferon (IFN)-ß, ameliorated
EtOH/HCl-induced gastritis, and downregulated peritoneal exudate-derived NO
production from lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-injected mice. The inhibition of these
inflammatory responses by KRG-WE was regulated through the suppression of p38,
c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and by subsequent
inhibition of activating transcription factor (ATF)-2, cAMP response
element-binding protein (CREB), and IRF-3 activation. Of ginsensides included in 
this extract, interestingly, G-Rc showed the highest inhibitory potency on
IRF-3-mediated luciferase activity.
CONCLUSION: These results strongly suggest that the anti-inflammatory activities 
of KRG-WE could be due to its inhibition of the p38/JNK/TBK1 activation pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24735861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 11;9(4):e94501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094501. eCollection
2014.

MiR-942 mediates hepatitis C virus-induced apoptosis via regulation of ISG12a.

Yang D(1), Meng X(1), Xue B(1), Liu N(1), Wang X(1), Zhu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and
Chemometrics, Hunan University, Changsha, China. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine, State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, Hunan
University, Changsha, China; Research Center of Cancer Prevention & Treatment,
Translational Medicine Research Center of Liver Cancer, Hunan Provincial Tumor
Hospital (Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xiangya Medical School of Central South
University), Changsha, China.

The interaction between hepatitis C virus (HCV) and human hepatic innate
antiviral responses is unclear. The aim of this study was to examine how human
hepatocytes respond to HCV infection. An infectious HCV isolate, JFH1, was used
to infect a newly established human hepatoma cell line HLCZ01. Viral RNA or NS5A 
protein was examined by real-time PCR or immunofluorescence respectively. The
mechanisms of HCV-induced IFN-ß and apoptosis were explored. Our data showed that
HLCZ01 cells supported the entire HCV lifecycle and IFN-ß and
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) were induced in HCV-infected cells. Viral
infection caused apoptosis of HLCZ01 cells. Silencing of RIG-I, IRF3 or TRAIL
inhibited ISG12a expression and blocked apoptosis of viral-infected HLCZ01 cells.
Knockdown ISG12a blocked apoptosis of viral-infected cells. MiR-942 is a
candidate negative regulator of ISG12a predicted by bioinformatics search.
Moreover, HCV infection decreased miR-942 expression in HLCZ01 cells and miR-942 
was inversely correlated with ISG12a expression in both HCV-infected cells and
liver biopsies. MiR-942 forced expression in HLCZ01 cells decreased ISG12a
expression and subsequently suppressed apoptosis triggered by HCV infection.
Conversely, silencing of miR-942 expression by anti-miR-942 increased ISG12a
expression and enhanced apoptosis in HCV-infected cells. Induction of Noxa by HCV
infection contributed to ISG12a-mediated apoptosis. All the data indicated that
innate host response is intact in HCV-infected hepatocytes. MiR-942 regulates
HCV-induced apoptosis of human hepatocytes by targeting ISG12a. Our study
provides a novel mechanism by which human hepatocytes respond to HCV infection.

PMCID: PMC3984147
PMID: 24727952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Control Release. 2014 Jun 28;184:20-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jconrel.2014.04.004. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

A new adjuvant delivery system 'cyclic di-GMP/YSK05 liposome' for cancer
immunotherapy.

Miyabe H(1), Hyodo M(2), Nakamura T(1), Sato Y(1), Hayakawa Y(3), Harashima H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Design of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita 12, Nishi 6, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido
060-0812, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Innovative Nanomedicine, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita 12, Nishi 6, Kita-ku, Sapporo,
Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, Department of
Applied Chemistry, Faculty of Engineering, Aichi Institute of Technology, Toyota,
Japan, 470-0392. (4)Laboratory for Molecular Design of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita 12, Nishi 6, Kita-ku, Sapporo,
Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan; Laboratory of Innovative Nanomedicine, Faculty of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Kita 12, Nishi 6, Kita-ku, Sapporo,
Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan. Electronic address: harasima@pharm.hokudai.ac.jp.

Cyclic dinucleotides are of importance in the field of microbiology and
immunology. They function as second messengers and are thought to participate in 
the signal transduction of cytosolic DNA immune responses. One such dinucleotide,
cyclic di-GMP (c-di-GMP), stimulates the immune system. It is thought that
c-di-GMP is recognized by ATP dependent RNA helicase (DDX41) in the cytosol,
forms a complex with the Stimulator of interferon genes protein (STING), triggers
a signal via the tank binding kinase 1-interferon regulatory factor 3 (TBK1-IRF3)
pathway and induces the production of type I interferons. Therefore c-di-GMP can 
be thought of as a new class of adjuvant. However, because c-di-GMP contains two 
phosphate groups, this prevents its use as an adjuvant because it cannot pass
through the cell membrane, even though the target molecule of c-di-GMP is located
in the cytoplasm. Our group has been developing a series of liposomal drug
delivery systems and recently investigated YSK05 which is a synthetic, pH
sensitive lipid that has a high fusogenicity. We utilized this lipid as a carrier
to transport c-di-GMP into the cytosol to then use c-di-GMP as an adjuvant. Based
on screening experiments, YSK05/POPE/cholesterol=40/25/35 was found to induce
IFN-ß in Raw264.7 cells. The induction of IFN-ß from c-di-GMP liposomes was
inhibited by adding BX795, a TBK1 inhibitor, indicating that the production of
IFN-ß caused the activation of the STING-TBK1 pathway. C-di-GMP liposomes also
showed significantly higher levels of expression of CD80, CD86 and MHC class I.
The c-di-GMP/YSK05 liposome facilitated antigen specific cytotoxic T cell
activity and the inhibition of tumor growth in a mouse model. These findings
indicate that c-di-GMP/YSK05 liposomes could be used, not only to transfer
c-di-GMP to the cytosol and induce an innate immune system but also as a platform
for investigating the mechanism of immune sensing with cyclic dinucleotides in
vitro and in vivo.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24727060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Immunity. 2014 Apr 17;40(4):515-29. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.01.015. Epub 2014 
Apr 10.

Recruitment of phosphatase PP2A by RACK1 adaptor protein deactivates
transcription factor IRF3 and limits type I interferon signaling.

Long L(1), Deng Y(1), Yao F(1), Guan D(1), Feng Y(1), Jiang H(1), Li X(1), Hu
P(1), Lu X(1), Wang H(1), Li J(1), Gao X(2), Xie D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences and Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Model Animal for Disease Study of Ministry of
Education, Model Animal Research Center, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210061,
China. (3)Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences and Graduate School of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031,
China. Electronic address: dxie@sibs.ac.cn.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2014 Apr 24;54(2):210-1.

The transcription factor IRF3 is a central regulator of type I interferon (IFN)
signaling. The mechanisms underlying deactivation of IRF3 are poorly understood
although many studies suggest that IRF3 activity is terminated through
degradation after viral infection. Here we report that IRF3 is deactivated via
dephosphorylation mediated by the serine and threonine phosphatase PP2A and its
adaptor protein RACK1. The PP2A-RACK1 complex negatively regulated the IRF3
pathway after LPS or poly(I:C) stimulation or Sendai virus (SeV) infection. After
challenge with LPS, poly(I:C), or low-titer SeV, activated IRF3 was
dephosphorylated and returned to resting state without being degraded, although
high-titer SeV infection triggered the degradation of IRF3. Furthermore,
PP2A-deficient macrophages showed enhanced type I IFN signaling upon LPS,
poly(I:C), and SeV challenge and protected mice from lethal vesicular stomatitis 
virus infection. Therefore, dephosphorylation of IRF3 is a deactivation mechanism
that contributes to termination of IRF3-type I IFN signaling.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Am J Pathol. 2014 Jun;184(6):1795-806. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.02.026. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

IRF-3, IRF-7, and IPS-1 promote host defense against acute human metapneumovirus 
infection in neonatal mice.

Spann KM(1), Loh Z(2), Lynch JP(2), Ullah A(3), Zhang V(2), Baturcam E(4), Werder
RB(2), Khajornjiraphan N(2), Rudd P(5), Loo YM(6), Suhrbier A(5), Gale M Jr(6),
Upham JW(7), Phipps S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Medical Virology Centre, University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Australia; Sir Albert Sakzewski Virus Research Centre, Children's Hospital
Queensland, Australia; Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, University
of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia. Electronic address: k.spann@uq.edu.au.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia.
(3)Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Sydney Medical School, The University 
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. (4)Clinical Medical Virology Centre, University of 
Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia; Sir Albert Sakzewski Virus Research Centre,
Children's Hospital Queensland, Australia; Queensland Childrens Medical Research 
Institute, University of Queensland, Herston, Australia. (5)Australian Infectious
Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia; QIMR
Berghofer Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia. (6)Department of
Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington.
(7)Lung and Allergy Research Centre, Translational Research Institute, School of 
Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Australia.
(8)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland, St. 
Lucia, Australia; School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, St.
Lucia, Australia. Electronic address: s.phipps@uq.edu.au.

Human metapneumovirus (hMPV) is a leading cause of respiratory tract disease in
children and is associated with acute bronchiolitis, pneumonia, and asthma
exacerbations, yet the mechanisms by which the host immune response to hMPV is
regulated are poorly understood. By using gene-deleted neonatal mice, we examined
the contributions of the innate receptor signaling molecules interferon (IFN)-ß
promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3, and IRF7. Viral
load in the lungs was markedly greater in IPS-1(-/-) > IRF3/7(-/-) > IRF3(-/-),
but not IRF7(-/-), mice compared with wild-type mice. IFN-ß and IFN-<U+03BB>2/3
(IL-28A/B) production was attenuated in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in all
factor-deficient mice compared with wild-type mice at 1 day after infection,
although IFN-<U+03BB>2/3 was greater in IRF3/7(-/-) mice at 5 days after infection.
IRF7(-/-) and IRF3/7(-/-) mice presented with airway eosinophilia, whereas only
IRF3/7(-/-) mice developed an exaggerated type 1 and 17 helper T-cell response,
characterized by natural killer T-cell and neutrophilic inflammation. Despite
having the highest viral load, IPS-1(-/-) mice did not develop a proinflammatory 
cytokine or granulocytic response to hMPV infection. Our findings demonstrate
that IFN-ß, but not IFN-<U+03BB>2/3, produced via an IPS-1-IRF3 signaling pathway, is
important for hMPV clearance. In the absence of a robust type I IFN-a/ß response,
targeting the IPS-1 signaling pathway may limit the overexuberant inflammatory
response that occurs as a consequence of viral persistence.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 10;9(4):e94806. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094806. eCollection
2014.

HSV-2 increases TLR4-dependent phosphorylated IRFs and IFN-ß induction in
cervical epithelial cells.

Liu H(1), Chen K(2), Feng W(1), Guo J(1), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Institute of Medical Virology, Wuhan
University School of Medicine, Wuhan, Hubei, China; Shengzhen R&D Center of State
Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan University Shenzhen Institute, Shenzhen,
Guangdong, China. (2)Central Blood Station of Rizhao, Rizhao, Shandong, China.

Our previous studies demonstrated that HSV-2 infection up-regulates TLR4
expression and induces NF-kB activity, thereby facilitating innate immune
response in human cervical epithelial cells. This process requires involvement of
TLR4 adaptors, Mal and MyD88. In the current study, we found that HSV-2 infection
increases levels of phosphoryalted IRF3 and IRF7, then regulating expression of
type I IFN. As expected, these changes induced by HSV-2 infection depended upon
TLR4. Knockdown of TRIF and/or TRAM by siRNAs indicated that TRIF/TRAM might be
involved in expression of IFN-ß. Our results demonstrate for the first time that 
IRF3 and IRF7 are both involved in inducing TLR4-dependent IFN-ß expression in
response to HSV-2 in its primary infected genital epithelial cells. Thus,
TLR4-Mal/MyD88 and TLR4-TRIF/TRAM signaling may synergize and/or cooperate in
innate immune response of cervical epithelial cells to HSV-2 infection.

PMCID: PMC3983257
PMID: 24722640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 10;9(4):e94999. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094999. eCollection
2014.

Functionally distinct effects of the C-terminal regions of IKKe and TBK1 on type 
I IFN production.

Nakatsu Y(1), Matsuoka M(2), Chang TH(3), Otsuki N(1), Noda M(4), Kimura H(4),
Sakai K(1), Kato H(1), Takeda M(1), Kubota T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Bacteriology II, National
Institute of Infectious Diseases, Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department
of Medical Education and Research, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Infectious Diseases Surveillance Center, National Institute
of Infectious Diseases, Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, Japan.

Inhibitor of <U+03BA>B kinase e (IKKe) and TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1), so-called
non-canonical IKKs or IKK-related kinases, are involved in the cellular innate
immunity by inducing type I IFNs. Two kinases commonly phosphorylate
transcription factors IRF3 and IRF7 in type I IFN production pathway. In contrast
to TBK1, underlying mechanisms of IKKe activation and regions required for
activation of downstream molecules are poorly understood. In this study, we
investigated regions of IKKe required for the activation of type I IFN promoter
specially, by focusing on the C-terminal region. To show the functional
significance of the IKKe C-terminal region on type I IFN production, we employed 
various mutant forms of IKKe and compared to corresponding region of TBK1. We
identified the specific regions and residues of IKKe involved in the activation
of downstream signaling. Interestingly, corresponding region and residues are not
required for activation of downstream signaling by TBK1. The results highlight
the importance of the C-terminal region in the functional activity of IKKe in
innate immune response and also the difference in activation mechanisms between
IKKe and the closely related TBK1.

PMCID: PMC3983252
PMID: 24722368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(12):6539-41. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00276-14. Epub 2014 Apr 9.

Viral and cellular FLICE-inhibitory proteins: a comparison of their roles in
regulating intrinsic immune responses.

Shisler JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA jshisler@illinois.edu.

FLICE-inhibitory proteins (FLIPs) are a family of viral (poxvirus and
herpesvirus) and cellular proteins. The hallmark of this family is the presence
of tandem death-effector domains (DEDs). Despite this shared motif, each protein 
possesses different abilities to modulate apoptosis, NF-<U+03BA>B, and interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). These similarities and differences are discussed and 
highlighted here. The comparative study of FLIPs provides a unique basis to
understand virus-host interactions, viral pathogenesis, and cellular regulation
of immune system signal transduction pathways.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054373
PMID: 24719415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 7;9(4):e93396. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093396. eCollection 
2014.

Dynamic cross talk model of the epithelial innate immune response to
double-stranded RNA stimulation: coordinated dynamics emerging from cell-level
noise.

Bertolusso R(1), Tian B(2), Zhao Y(3), Vergara L(4), Sabree A(1), Iwanaszko M(5),
Lipniacki T(6), Brasier AR(3), Kimmel M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Rice University, Houston, Texas, United States of
America. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch
(UTMB), Galveston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston, Texas, United
States of America; Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, Texas,
United States of America; Institute for Translational Sciences, UTMB, Galveston, 
Texas, United States of America. (4)Center for Biomedical Engineering, UTMB,
Galveston, Texas, United States of America. (5)Systems Engineering Group,
Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland. (6)Institute of Fundamental
Technological Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. (7)Department
of Statistics, Rice University, Houston, Texas, United States of America; Systems
Engineering Group, Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e103019.

We present an integrated dynamical cross-talk model of the epithelial innate
immune response (IIR) incorporating RIG-I and TLR3 as the two major pattern
recognition receptors (PRR) converging on the RelA and IRF3 transcriptional
effectors. bioPN simulations reproduce biologically relevant gene-and protein
abundance measurements in response to time course, gene silencing and
dose-response perturbations both at the population and single cell level. Our
computational predictions suggest that RelA and IRF3 are under auto- and
cross-regulation. We predict, and confirm experimentally, that RIG-I mRNA
expression is controlled by IRF7. We also predict the existence of a
TLR3-dependent, IRF3-independent transcription factor (or factors) that
control(s) expression of MAVS, IRF3 and members of the IKK family. Our model
confirms the observed dsRNA dose-dependence of oscillatory patterns in single
cells, with periods of 1-3 hr. Model fitting to time series, matched by knockdown
data suggests that the NF-<U+03BA>B module operates in a different regime (with
different coefficient values) than in the TNFa-stimulation experiments. In future
studies, this model will serve as a foundation for identification of
virus-encoded IIR antagonists and examination of stochastic effects of viral
replication. Our model generates simulated time series, which reproduce the noisy
oscillatory patterns of activity (with 1-3 hour period) observed in individual
cells. Our work supports the hypothesis that the IIR is a phenomenon that emerged
by evolution despite highly variable responses at an individual cell level.

PMCID: PMC3977818
PMID: 24710104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;6(4):324-37. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju015. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Viral suppression of innate immunity via spatial isolation of TBK1/IKKe from
mitochondrial antiviral platform.

Ning YJ(1), Wang M(1), Deng M(1), Shen S(1), Liu W(2), Cao WC(2), Deng F(1), Wang
YY(1), Hu Z(3), Wang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and
Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, 
China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China h.wang@wh.iov.cn huzh@wh.iov.cn.

For antiviral signaling mediated by retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like
receptors (RLRs), the recruitment of cytosolic RLRs and downstream molecules
(such as TBK1 and IKKe) to mitochondrial platform is a central event that
facilitates the establishment of host antiviral state. Here, we present an
example of viral targeting for immune evasion through spatial isolation of
TBK1/IKKe from mitochondrial antiviral platform, which was employed by severe
fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome virus (SFTSV), a deadly bunyavirus emerging 
recently. We showed that SFTSV nonstructural protein NSs functions as the
interferon (IFN) antagonist, mainly via suppressing TBK1/IKKe-IRF3 signaling. NSs
mediates the formation of cytoplasmic inclusion bodies (IBs), and the blockage of
IB formation impairs IFN-inhibiting activity of NSs. We next demonstrate that IBs
are utilized to compartmentalize TBK1/IKKe. The compartmentalization results in
spatial isolation of the kinases from mitochondria, and deprived TBK1/IKKe may
participate in antiviral complex assembly, leading to the blockage of IFN
induction. This study proposes a new role of viral IBs as virus-built 'jail' for 
imprisoning cellular factors and presents a novel and likely common mechanism of 
viral immune evasion through spatial isolation of critical signaling molecules
from the mitochondrial antiviral platform.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Journal of
Molecular Cell Biology, IBCB, SIBS, CAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24706939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Dev Comp Immunol. 2014 Aug;45(2):278-90. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.03.018. Epub
2014 Apr 1.

Molecular characterizations of grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) TBK1 gene and
its roles in regulating IFN-I pathway.

Feng X(1), Su J(2), Yang C(1), Yan N(1), Rao Y(1), Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling 712100, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling 712100, China.
Electronic address: su.jianguo@gmail.com.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), a kinase at the crossroads of multiple IFN-inducing
signaling pathways, plays essential roles in both antiviral and antibacterial
innate immunity in mammals. Here, TBK1 gene (10339bp) was identified and
characterized from grass carp Ctenopharyngodon idella (CiTBK1). The genomic
sequence is shorter than other orthologs in vertebrate, and a promoter region is 
found in intron 1. mRNA expression of CiTBK1 was widespread in fifteen tissues
investigated, and was up-regulated post GCRV challenge in vivo and in vitro, as
well as after stimulation of viral/bacterial PAMPs in vitro. CiTBK1 mediates
IFN-I signal pathway through over-expression experiment. Post GCRV challenge,
CiTBK1 over-expression inhibits viral infection by induction of CiIFN-I and CiMx1
mainly via CiIRF7. In CiTBK1 over-expression cells, mRNA expressions of CiIRF3,
CiIRF7 and CiIFN-I were inhibited, whereas CiMx1 was facilitated after poly I:C
stimulation, comparing to those in control group. The result indicated that CiMx1
expression mediated by CiTBK1 is in IFN-I independent way after poly I:C
stimulation. However, over-expression of CiTBK1 diminishes LPS-induced
expressions of CiIRF3 and CiIRF7 but promotes the induction of CiIFN-I and CiMx1 
in comparison with the control, which suggests that CiTBK1-triggered IFN-I
activation is in IRF3/IRF7-independent manner after LPS stimulation. Notably,
over-expression of CiTBK1 negatively regulated PGN-induced IRF3, IRF7, IFN-I and 
Mx1 immune response. Taken together, CiTBK1 participates in broad antiviral and
antibacterial immune responses in different manners, and keeps regulatory balance
that prevents harmful effects from excessive activation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24704212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Cell Rep. 2014 Apr 24;7(2):436-47. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.018. Epub 2014
Apr 3.

Interferon-mediated innate immune responses against malaria parasite liver
stages.

Miller JL(1), Sack BK(1), Baldwin M(1), Vaughan AM(1), Kappe SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, 307 Westlake Avenue North, Suite 500,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (2)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, 307 Westlake
Avenue North, Suite 500, Seattle, WA 98109, USA; Department of Global Health,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. Electronic address:
stefan.kappe@seattlebiomed.org.

Mosquito-transmitted malaria parasites infect hepatocytes and asymptomatically
replicate as liver stages. Using RNA sequencing, we show that a rodent malaria
liver-stage infection stimulates a robust innate immune response including type I
interferon (IFN) and IFN<U+03B3> pathways. Liver-stage infection is suppressed by these 
infection-engendered innate responses. This suppression was abrogated in mice
deficient in IFN<U+03B3>, the type I IFN a/ß receptor (IFNAR), and interferon regulatory
factor 3. Natural killer and CD49b(+)CD3(+) natural killer T (NKT) cells
increased in the liver after a primary infection, and CD1d-restricted NKT cells, 
which secrete IFN<U+03B3>, were critical in reducing liver-stage burden of a secondary
infection. Lack of IFNAR signaling abrogated the increase in NKT cell numbers in 
the liver, showing a link between type I IFN signaling, cell recruitment, and
subsequent parasite elimination. Our findings demonstrate innate immune sensing
of malaria parasite liver-stage infection and that the ensuing innate responses
can eliminate the parasite.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(12):6832-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03460-13. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Murine gammaherpesvirus 68 encoding open reading frame 11 targets TANK binding
kinase 1 to negatively regulate the host type I interferon response.

Kang HR(1), Cheong WC(1), Park JE(1), Ryu S(1), Cho HJ(1), Youn H(2), Ahn JH(3), 
Song MJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Virus-Host Interactions Laboratory, Department of Biosystems and
Biotechnology, Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology, South Korea University, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Virus-Host
Interactions Laboratory, Department of Biosystems and Biotechnology, Division of 
Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, South Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea Laboratory of Protein Immunology, Biomedical
Research Institutes, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Republic of
Korea. (3)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Sungkyunkwan 
University, Suwon, Gueonggido, Republic of Korea. (4)Virus-Host Interactions
Laboratory, Department of Biosystems and Biotechnology, Division of
Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, South Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea moonsong@korea.ac.kr.

Upon viral infection, type I interferons, such as alpha and beta interferon
(IFN-a and IFN-ß, respectively), are rapidly induced and activate multiple
antiviral genes, thereby serving as the first line of host defense. Many DNA and 
RNA viruses counteract the host interferon system by modulating the production of
IFNs. In this study, we report that murine gammaherpesvirus 68 (MHV-68), a
double-stranded DNA virus, encodes open reading frame 11 (ORF11), a novel immune 
modulator, to block IFN-ß production. ORF11-deficient recombinant viruses induced
more IFN-ß production in fibroblast and macrophage cells than the MHV-68 wild
type or a marker rescue virus. MHV-68 ORF11 decreased IFN-ß promoter activation
by various factors, the signaling of which converges on TBK1-IRF3 activation.
MHV-68 ORF11 directly interacted with both overexpressed and endogenous TBK1 but 
not with IRF3. Physical interactions between ORF11 and endogenous TBK1 were
further confirmed during virus replication in fibroblasts using a recombinant
virus expressing FLAG-ORF11. ORF11 efficiently reduced interaction between TBK1
and IRF3 and subsequently inhibited activation of IRF3, thereby negatively
regulating IFN-ß production. Our domain-mapping study showed that the central
domain of ORF11 was responsible for both TBK1 binding and inhibition of IFN-ß
induction, while the kinase domain of TBK1 was sufficient for ORF11 binding.
Taken together, these results suggest a mechanism underlying inhibition of IFN-ß 
production by a gammaherpesvirus and highlight the importance of TBK1 in DNA
virus replication.IMPORTANCE: Gammaherpesviruses are important human pathogens,
as they are associated with various kinds of tumors. Upon virus infection, the
type I interferon pathway is activated by a series of signaling molecules and
stimulates antiviral gene expression. To subvert such interferon antiviral
responses, viruses are equipped with multiple factors that can inhibit its
critical steps. In this study, we took an unbiased genomic approach using a
mutant library of murine gammaherpesvirus 68 to screen a novel viral immune
modulator that negatively regulates the type I interferon pathway and identified 
ORF11 as a strong candidate. ORF11-deficient virus infection produced more
interferon than the wild type in both fibroblasts and macrophages. During virus
replication, ORF11 directly bound to TBK1, a key regulatory protein in the
interferon pathway, and inhibited TBK1-mediated interferon production. Our
results highlight a crucial role of TBK1 in controlling DNA virus infection and a
viral strategy to curtail host surveillance.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054366
PMID: 24696485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Neuroinflammation. 2014 Apr 2;11:67. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-11-67.

RIG-1 receptor expression in the pathology of Alzheimer's disease.

de Rivero Vaccari JP(1), Brand FJ 3rd, Sedaghat C, Mash DC, Dietrich WD, Keane
RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA. JdeRivero@med.miami.edu.

BACKGROUND: Neuroinflammation plays a critical role in the pathogenesis of
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and involves activation of the innate immune response
via recognition of diverse stimuli by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). The
inflammatory inducers and precise innate signaling pathway contributing to AD
pathology remain largely undefined.
RESULTS: In the present study we analyzed expression levels of innate immune
proteins in temporal and occipital cortices from preclinical (no cognitive
impairment, NCI, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>22) to mild cognitive impairment (MCI, N<U+2009>=<U+2009>20) associated
with AD pathology (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>20) and AD patients (N<U+2009>=<U+2009>23). We found that retinoic
acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-1) is significantly elevated in the temporal cortex
and plasma in patients with MCI. In addition, primary human astrocytes stimulated
with the RIG-1 ligand 5'ppp RNA showed increased expression of amyloid precursor 
protein (APP) and amyloid-ß (Aß), supporting the idea that RIG-1 is involved in
the pathology of MCI associated with early progression to AD.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that RIG-1 may play a critical role in
incipient AD.

PMCID: PMC3977677
PMID: 24694234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Sep;51(3):446-54. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0018OC.

MUC1 regulates epithelial inflammation and apoptosis by PolyI:C through
inhibition of Toll/IL-1 receptor-domain-containing adapter-inducing IFN-ß (TRIF) 
recruitment to Toll-like receptor 3.

Kato K(1), Lillehoj EP, Kim KC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Center for Inflammation, Translational and Clinical Lung Research, Temple
University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and.

MUC1/Muc1 (MUC1 in humans, Muc1 in animals) is a membrane-tethered mucin
expressed by airway epithelial cells and plays an antiinflammatory role during
airway bacterial infection. We previously demonstrated that MUC1/Muc1 is a
negative regulator of Toll-like receptor (TLR) inflammatory signaling mediated
through the myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88) adaptor
protein. In the present study, we determined whether MUC1 regulates
MyD88-independent TLR signaling mediated through the TLR3-Toll/IL-1
receptor-domain-containing adapter-inducing IFN-ß (TRIF) pathway in response to
poly(I:C). Compared with MUC1/Muc1-expressing controls, cells deficient in
MUC1/Muc1 were more prone to poly(I:C)-induced apoptosis; had increased
poly(I:C)-driven activation of caspase-3, caspase-8, IFN regulatory factor-3, and
NF-<U+03BA>B; and displayed heightened IFN-ß gene expression. MUC1 overexpression by
these cells had the opposite effects. Reciprocal coimmunoprecipitation
experiments established constitutive TLR3/MUC1-CT (cytoplasmic tail) protein
interaction in human embryonic kidney (HEK)293T cells overexpressing the two
proteins and in lung epithelial cells expressing the endogenous proteins, the
latter of which was confirmed by immunofluorescence colocalization of TLR3 with
MUC1-CT. Coimmunoprecipitation studies also revealed that MUC1 overexpression by 
HEK293T cells reduced poly(I:C)-induced TLR3/TRIF protein interaction. Finally,
MUC1 overexpression had no effect on TRIF-dependent auto-activation of TLR3
signaling, suggesting that the site of action of the MUC1-CT in TLR3 signaling is
not downstream of TRIF. These data indicate that MUC1-CT counter-regulates
apoptotic and inflammatory responses of airway epithelial cell through
constitutive association with TLR3, thereby inhibiting poly(I:C)-induced
recruitment of TRIF to TLR3.

PMCID: PMC4189494
PMID: 24693944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Virol. 2014 Jun;88(12):6650-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03138-13. Epub 2014 Mar 26.

Enterovirus 68 3C protease cleaves TRIF to attenuate antiviral responses mediated
by Toll-like receptor 3.

Xiang Z(1), Li L(1), Lei X(1), Zhou H(1), Zhou Z(1), He B(2), Wang J(3).

Author information: 
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens and Christophe Mérieux
Laboratory, IPB, CAMS-Fondation Mérieux, Institute of Pathogen Biology (IPB),
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois, USA
wangjw28@163.com tshuo@uic.edu. (3)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of
Pathogens and Christophe Mérieux Laboratory, IPB, CAMS-Fondation Mérieux,
Institute of Pathogen Biology (IPB), Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS)
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China
wangjw28@163.com tshuo@uic.edu.

Human enterovirus 68 (EV68) is a member of the EV-D species, which belongs to the
EV genus of the Picornaviridae family. Over the past several years, there have
been increasingly documented outbreaks of respiratory disease associated with
EV68. As a globally emerging pathogen, EV68 infects both adults and children.
However, the molecular basis of EV68 pathogenesis is unknown. Here we report that
EV68 inhibits Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3)-mediated innate immune responses by
targeting the TIR domain-containing adaptor inducing beta interferon (TRIF). In
infected HeLa cells, EV68 inhibits poly(I·C)-induced interferon regulatory factor
3 (IRF3) activation and beta interferon (IFN-ß) expression. Further
investigations revealed that TRIF, a critical adaptor downstream of TLR3, is
targeted by EV68. When expressed alone, 3C(pro), an EV68-encoded protease,
cleaves TRIF. 3C(pro) mediates TRIF cleavage at Q312 and Q653, which are sites in
the amino- and carboxyl-terminal domains, respectively. This cleavage relies on
3C(pro)'s cysteine protease activity. Cleavage of TRIF abolishes the capacity of 
TRIF to activate NF-<U+03BA>B and IFN-ß signaling. These results suggest that control of
TRIF by 3C(pro) may be a mechanism by which EV68 subverts host innate immune
responses.IMPORTANCE: EV68 is a globally emerging pathogen, but the molecular
basis of EV68 pathogenesis is unclear. Here we report that EV68 inhibits
TLR3-mediated innate immune responses by targeting TRIF. Further investigations
revealed that TRIF is cleaved by 3C(pro). These results suggest that control of
TRIF by 3C(pro) may be a mechanism by which EV68 impairs type I IFN production in
response to TLR3 activation.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054379
PMID: 24672048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Infect Immun. 2014 Jun;82(6):2405-16. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01617-14. Epub 2014 Mar
24.

Borrelia burgdorferi RNA induces type I and III interferons via Toll-like
receptor 7 and contributes to production of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent cytokines.

Love AC(1), Schwartz I, Petzke MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
New York, USA.

Borrelia burgdorferi elicits a potent cytokine response through activation of
multiple signaling receptors on innate immune cells. Spirochetal lipoproteins
initiate expression of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent cytokines primarily via TLR2, whereas type
I interferon (IFN) production is induced through the endosomal receptors TLR7 and
TLR9 in human dendritic cells and TLR8 in monocytes. We demonstrate that DNA and 
RNA are the B. burgdorferi components that initiate a type I IFN response by
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). IFN-a protein and transcripts
for IRF7, MX1, and OAS1 were induced by endosomal delivery of B. burgdorferi DNA,
RNA, or whole-cell lysate, but not by lysate that had been treated with DNase and
RNase. Induction of IFN-a and IFN-<U+03BB>1, a type III IFN, by B. burgdorferi RNA or
live spirochetes required TLR7-dependent signaling and correlated with
significantly enhanced transcription and expression of IRF7 but not IRF3.
Induction of type I and type III IFNs by B. burgdorferi RNA could be completely
abrogated by a TLR7 inhibitor, IRS661. In addition to type I and type III IFNs,
B. burgdorferi RNA contributed to the production of the NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
cytokines, IFN-<U+03B3>, interleukin-10 (IL-10), IL-1ß, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-a), by human PBMCs. Collectively, these data indicate that
TLR7-dependent recognition of RNA is pivotal for IFN-a and IFN-<U+03BB>1 production by
human PBMCs, and that RNA-initiated signaling contributes to full potentiation of
the cytokine response generated during B. burgdorferi infection.

PMCID: PMC4019181
PMID: 24664510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 May;38(1):184-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.03.018.
Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Anti-inflammatory effects of extract from Haliotis discus hannai fermented with
Cordyceps militaris mycelia in RAW264.7 macrophages through TRIF-dependent
signaling pathway.

Joung HJ(1), Kim YS(1), Hwang JW(1), Han YK(1), Jeong JH(2), Lee JS(3), Moon
SH(4), Jeon BT(4), Park PJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Chungju 380-701, Republic of
Korea. (2)Department of Food & Biotechnology, Korea National University of
Transportation, Chungju 380-702, Republic of Korea. (3)Industry-Academic
Cooperation Foundation, Jeju National University, Jeju 690-756, Republic of
Korea. (4)Nokyong Research Center, Konkuk University, Chungju 380-701, Republic
of Korea. (5)Department of Biotechnology, Konkuk University, Chungju 380-701,
Republic of Korea; Nokyong Research Center, Konkuk University, Chungju 380-701,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: parkpj@kku.ac.kr.

In this study, Haliotis discus hannai (H. discus hannai) fermentation was
attempted with Cordyceps militaris (C. militaris) mycelia using a solid culture. 
We tried to ferment H. discus hannai to determine the optimal conditions
fermentation with regards to its anti-inflammatory effects. The extracts of
H. discus hannai fermented with C. militaris mycelia (HFCM-5) showed higher
nitric oxide inhibitory effects than H. discus hannai and C. militaris alone.
HFCM-5 also decreased pro-inflammatory cytokines, TNF-a and IL-6 in a
dose-dependent manner. HFCM-5 did not affect the MyD88-dependent pathway, but
decreased phosphorylation of IRF3 and STAT1 which are involved in TRIF-dependent 
pathway. Taken together, our results suggest that HFCM-5 exerts its
anti-inflammatory effects via TRIF signaling pathway and could potentially be
used as a functional food in the regulation of inflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24657261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 18;9(3):e92126. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092126. eCollection
2014.

MAVS protein is attenuated by rotavirus nonstructural protein 1.

Nandi S(1), Chanda S(1), Bagchi P(1), Nayak MK(1), Bhowmick R(1), Chawla-Sarkar
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, National Institute of Cholera and Enteric Diseases,
Beliaghata, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(6):e0131956.

Rotavirus is the single, most important agent of infantile gastroenteritis in
many animal species, including humans. In developing countries, rotavirus
infection attributes approximately 500,000 deaths annually. Like other viruses it
establishes an intimate and complex interaction with the host cell to counteract 
the antiviral responses elicited by the cell. Among various pattern recognition
receptors (PAMPs) of the host, the cytosolic RNA helicases interact with viral
RNA to activate the Mitochondrial Antiviral Signaling protein (MAVS), which
regulates cellular interferon response. With an aim to identify the role of
different PAMPs in rotavirus infected cell, MAVS was found to degrade in a time
dependent and strain independent manner. Rotavirus non-structural protein 1
(NSP1) which is a known IFN antagonist, interacted with MAVS and degraded it in a
strain independent manner, resulting in a complete loss of RNA sensing machinery 
in the infected cell. To best of our knowledge, this is the first report on NSP1 
functionality where a signaling protein is targeted unanimously in all strains.
In addition NSP1 inhibited the formation of detergent resistant MAVS aggregates, 
thereby averting the antiviral signaling cascade. The present study highlights
the multifunctional role of rotavirus NSP1 and reinforces the fact that the virus
orchestrates the cellular antiviral response to its own benefit by various back
up strategies.

PMCID: PMC3958477
PMID: 24643253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Dev Comp Immunol. 2014 Jul;45(1):163-76. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.03.001. Epub
2014 Mar 11.

Identification, characterization and immunological response analysis of
stimulator of interferon gene (STING) from grass carp Ctenopharyngodon idella.

Feng X(1), Yang C(2), Zhang Y(1), Peng L(1), Chen X(1), Rao Y(1), Gu T(1), Su
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling
712100, China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University,
Yangling 712100, China. (3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest
A&F University, Yangling 712100, China. Electronic address: su.jianguo@gmail.com.

Stimulator of interferon gene (STING), an important adapter responsible for RLR
pathway, plays a pivotal role in both viral RNA- and DNA-triggered induction of
IFNs in mammals. To understand the roles of STING in piscine immune system, STING
gene (CiSTING) was identified from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). The
genomic sequence of CiSTING was of 8548 base pairs (bp), including 899 bp 5'
flank region, 7 exons and 6 introns. Promoter region was predicted and promoter
activity was verified. The CiSTING cDNA was of 1358 bp with an open reading frame
of 1185 bp, encoding a polypeptide of 394 amino acids with a signal peptide and
three transmembrane motifs in the N-terminal region. mRNA expression of CiSTING
was widespread in fifteen tissues investigated, and was up-regulated by GCRV in
vivo and in vitro. Meanwhile, the transcription of CiSTING was inhibited at early
stage, and then up-regulated at late phase upon poly(I:C) or PGN stimulation in
vitro. Interestingly, CiSTING had little impact on LPS in vitro. In CiSTING
over-expression cells, CiTBK1, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7 were significantly up-regulated 
post GCRV or viral/bacterial PAMPs stimulation. In addition, post GCRV or PGN
stimulation, the transcription of CiIFN-I was remarkably inhibited while CiMx1
was up-regulated; as for poly(I:C) stimulation, mRNA expressions of CiIFN-I and
CiMx1 were inhibited at early stage while enhanced at late phrase; after LPS
stimulation, both CiIFN-I and CiMx1 were inhibited. Furthermore, antiviral
activity of CiSTING was manifested by the inhibition of GCRV yield. Taken
together, these results demonstrated that CiSTING may be involved in board innate
immune responses via the TBK1-IRF3/IRF7 cascade, responding to not only dsRNA
analogue in an IFN-dependent pathway, but also virus and bacterial PAMPs in an
IFN-independent pathway. This study provided novel insights into the essential
role of STING in innate immunity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24631580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Horm Metab Res. 2014 Apr;46(4):252-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1370933. Epub 2014 Mar 
13.

A key role for interferon regulatory factors in mediating early-life metabolic
defects in male offspring of maternal protein restricted rats.

Silvestre MF(1), Kieswich J(2), Yaqoob MM(2), Holness MJ(1), Sugden MC(1), Caton 
PW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Diabetes, Bart's and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry,
Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. (2)Department of Translational
Medicine and Therapeutic, William Harvey Research Institute, Charterhouse Square,
London, UK.

An adverse intra-uterine environment, induced by maternal consumption of diets
high in saturated fat or low in protein have been implicated as a potential
trigger for development of metabolic disease in later life. However, the
underlying mechanisms responsible for this programming of obesity have yet to be 
described. Recent studies have demonstrated that interferon regulatory factors 3 
(IRF3) and 4 (IRF4) function to repress adipogenesis. We investigated whether
impaired IRF3 and IRF4 function may predispose to development of metabolic
disease in a model of programmed obesity. Changes in IRF3 and IRF4 levels,
adipogenic gene expression, and adiponectin signalling were measured in white
adipose tissue from programmed male offspring of rat dams fed a low-protein diet 
(MLP), which are predisposed to obesity. 3T3L1 adipocytes were used to determine 
novel regulatory mechanisms governing IRF expression. IRF3 and IRF4 levels were
suppressed in MLP rats, together with raised lipogenic and adipogenic gene
expression. Adiponectin and adiponectin receptor 1 and 2 mRNA levels were reduced
in MLP rats, along with levels of PPARa and activity of AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK), 2 downstream targets of adiponectin. Further studies determined
that both IRF3 and IRF4 are induced by adiponectin, with adiponectin-AMPK and
adiponectin-PPARa signalling regulating IRF3 and IRF4, respectively. We have
demonstrated that impaired ability to repress adipogenesis and lipogenesis,
through dysregulated adiponectin-PPARa-AMPK-IRF signalling, may play a causal
role in predisposing MLP offspring to development of obesity and metabolic
disease in later life.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 24627105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Protein Cell. 2014 May;5(5):369-81. doi: 10.1007/s13238-014-0026-3. Epub 2014 Mar
14.

SARS coronavirus papain-like protease inhibits the type I interferon signaling
pathway through interaction with the STING-TRAF3-TBK1 complex.

Chen X(1), Yang X, Zheng Y, Yang Y, Xing Y, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Department of Electromagnetic and Laser
Biology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, 100850, China.

SARS coronavirus (SARS-CoV) develops an antagonistic mechanism by which to evade 
the antiviral activities of interferon (IFN). Previous studies suggested that
SARS-CoV papain-like protease (PLpro) inhibits activation of the IRF3 pathway,
which would normally elicit a robust IFN response, but the mechanism(s) used by
SARS PLpro to inhibit activation of the IRF3 pathway is not fully known. In this 
study, we uncovered a novel mechanism that may explain how SARS PLpro efficiently
inhibits activation of the IRF3 pathway. We found that expression of the
membrane-anchored PLpro domain (PLpro-TM) from SARS-CoV inhibits
STING/TBK1/IKKe-mediated activation of type I IFNs and disrupts the
phosphorylation and dimerization of IRF3, which are activated by STING and TBK1. 
Meanwhile, we showed that PLpro-TM physically interacts with TRAF3, TBK1, IKKe,
STING, and IRF3, the key components that assemble the STING-TRAF3-TBK1 complex
for activation of IFN expression. However, the interaction between the components
in STING-TRAF3-TBK1 complex is disrupted by PLpro-TM. Furthermore, SARS PLpro-TM 
reduces the levels of ubiquitinated forms of RIG-I, STING, TRAF3, TBK1, and IRF3 
in the STING-TRAF3-TBK1 complex. These results collectively point to a new
mechanism used by SARS-CoV through which PLpro negatively regulates IRF3
activation by interaction with STING-TRAF3-TBK1 complex, yielding a SARS-CoV
countermeasure against host innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC3996160
PMID: 24622840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Virol. 2014 May;88(10):5328-41. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00037-14. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Cytosolic-DNA-mediated, STING-dependent proinflammatory gene induction
necessitates canonical NF-<U+03BA>B activation through TBK1.

Abe T(1), Barber GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, Florida, USA.

STING (stimulator of interferon genes) is known to control the induction of
innate immune genes in response to the recognition of cytosolic DNA species,
including the genomes of viruses such as herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1). However,
while STING is essential for protection of the host against numerous DNA
pathogens, sustained STING activity can lead to lethal inflammatory disease. It
is known that STING utilizes interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear
factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathways to exert its effects, although the signal transduction
mechanisms remain to be clarified fully. Here we demonstrate that in addition to 
the activation of these pathways, potent induction of the Jun N-terminal protein 
kinase/stress-activated protein kinase (JNK/SAPK) pathway was similarly observed 
in response to STING activation by double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). Furthermore,
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) associated with STING was found to facilitate
dsDNA-mediated canonical activation of NF-<U+03BA>B as well as IRF3 to promote
proinflammatory gene transcription. The triggering of NF-<U+03BA>B function was noted to
require TRAF6 activation. Our findings detail a novel dsDNA-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B
activation pathway facilitated through a STING-TRAF6-TBK1 axis and suggest a
target for therapeutic intervention to plausibly stimulate antiviral activity or,
alternatively, avert dsDNA-mediated inflammatory disease.IMPORTANCE: The IKK
complex, which is composed of two catalytic subunits, IKKa and IKKß, has been
suggested to be essential for the activation of canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signaling in
response to various stimuli, including cytokines (e.g., interleukin-1a [IL-1a]
and tumor necrosis factor alpha [TNF-a]), Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands (e.g.,
lipopolysaccharide [LPS]), and dsRNAs derived from viruses, or a synthetic
analog. STING has been identified as a critical signaling molecule required for
the detection of cytosolic dsDNAs derived from pathogens and viruses. However,
little is known about how cytosolic dsDNA triggers NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. In the
present study, we demonstrate that TBK1, identified as an IKK-related kinase, may
predominantly control the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B in response to dsDNA signaling via 
STING through the IKKaß activation loop. Thus, our results establish TBK1 as a
downstream kinase controlling dsDNA-mediated IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B signaling dependent
on STING.

PMCID: PMC4019140
PMID: 24600004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cardiovasc Res. 2014 Jun 1;102(3):469-79. doi: 10.1093/cvr/cvu052. Epub 2014 Mar 
4.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 protects against adverse neo-intima formation.

Zhang SM(1), Zhu LH(1), Li ZZ(2), Wang PX(1), Chen HZ(2), Guan HJ(1), Jiang
DS(1), Chen K(3), Zhang XF(3), Tian S(1), Yang D(1), Zhang XD(2), Li H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Cardiovascular 
Research Institute, Jiefang Road 238, Wuhan 430060, China Cardiovascular Research
Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Medical
Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of
Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing, China. (3)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University,
Wuhan, China. (4)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University,
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Jiefang Road 238, Wuhan 430060, China
Cardiovascular Research Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
lihl@whu.edu.cn.

AIMS: Vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation is central to the
pathophysiology of neo-intima formation. Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
inhibits the growth of cancer cells and fibroblasts. However, the role of IRF3 in
vascular neo-intima formation is unknown. We evaluated the protective role of
IRF3 against neo-intima formation in mice and the underlying mechanisms.
METHODS AND RESULTS: IRF3 expression was down-regulated in VSMCs after carotid
wire injury in vivo, and in SMCs after platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)-BB
challenge in vitro. Global knockout of IRF3 (IRF3-KO) led to accelerated
neo-intima formation and proliferation of VSMCs, whereas the opposite was seen in
SMC-specific IRF3 transgenic mice. Mechanistically, we identified IRF3 as a novel
regulator of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>), a negative
regulator of SMC proliferation after vascular injury. Binding of IRF3 to the AB
domain of PPAR<U+03B3> in the nucleus of SMCs facilitated PPAR<U+03B3> transactivation,
resulting in decreased proliferation cell nuclear antigen expression and
suppressed proliferation. Overexpression of wild-type, but not truncated, IRF3
with a mutated IRF association domain (IAD) retained the ability to exert
anti-proliferative effect.
CONCLUSIONS: IRF3 inhibits VSMC proliferation and neo-intima formation after
vascular injury through PPAR<U+03B3> activation.

Published on behalf of the European Society of Cardiology. All rights reserved. ©
The Author 2014. For permissions please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24596398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 15;74(8):2193-203. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-1703. Epub 
2014 Mar 3.

RAE1 ligands for the NKG2D receptor are regulated by STING-dependent DNA sensor
pathways in lymphoma.

Lam AR(1), Le Bert N, Ho SS, Shen YJ, Tang ML, Xiong GM, Croxford JL, Koo CX,
Ishii KJ, Akira S, Raulet DH, Gasser S.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Immunology Programme and Department of Microbiology,
Centre for Life Sciences; NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and
Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore; Laboratory of Adjuvant 
Innovation, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation (NIBIO); Laboratory of
Vaccine Science, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center (iFREC), Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan; and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology and
Cancer Research Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley, California.

The immunoreceptor NKG2D originally identified in natural killer (NK) cells
recognizes ligands that are upregulated on tumor cells. Expression of NKG2D
ligands (NKG2DL) is induced by the DNA damage response (DDR), which is often
activated constitutively in cancer cells, revealing them to NK cells as a
mechanism of immunosurveillance. Here, we report that the induction of retinoic
acid early transcript 1 (RAE1) ligands for NKG2D by the DDR relies on a
STING-dependent DNA sensor pathway involving the effector molecules TBK1 and
IRF3. Cytosolic DNA was detected in lymphoma cell lines that express RAE1 and its
occurrence required activation of the DDR. Transfection of DNA into
ligand-negative cells was sufficient to induce RAE1 expression. Irf3(+/-);Eµ-Myc 
mice expressed lower levels of RAE1 on tumor cells and showed a reduced survival 
rate compared with Irf3(+/+);Eµ-Myc mice. Taken together, our results suggest
that genomic damage in tumor cells leads to activation of STING-dependent DNA
sensor pathways, thereby activating RAE1 and enabling tumor immunosurveillance.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4229084
PMID: 24590060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Feb 27;10(2):e1003981. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003981.
eCollection 2014.

Human genome-wide RNAi screen identifies an essential role for inositol
pyrophosphates in Type-I interferon response.

Pulloor NK(1), Nair S(1), McCaffrey K, Kostic AD(2), Bist P(1), Weaver JD(3),
Riley AM(4), Tyagi R(5), Uchil PD(6), York JD(7), Snyder SH(5), García-Sastre
A(8), Potter BV(4), Lin R(9), Shears SB(3), Xavier RJ(2), Krishnan MN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program on Emerging Infectious Diseases, DUKE-NUS Graduate Medical School,
Singapore. (2)Center for Computational and Integrative Biology, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (3)Inositol Signaling Group, Laboratory of Signal Transduction, National
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, NIH, DHHS, Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina, United States of America. (4)Department of Pharmacy and
Pharmacology, University of Bath, Claverton Down, Bath, United Kingdom.
(5)Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience and Departments of Psychiatry and
Behavioral Sciences, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland, United States of America. (6)Section of Microbial Pathogenesis, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, United States of America. 
(7)Department of Biochemistry, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, United States of America. (8)Department of Microbiology, Global Health
and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious 
Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York, United
States of America. (9)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Jewish General
Hospital, Montreal, Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2014 Oct;10(10):e1004519. McCaffrey, Kathleen [added].
    PLoS Pathog. 2014 Mar;10(3):e1004095.

The pattern recognition receptor RIG-I is critical for Type-I interferon
production. However, the global regulation of RIG-I signaling is only partially
understood. Using a human genome-wide RNAi-screen, we identified 226 novel
regulatory proteins of RIG-I mediated interferon-ß production. Furthermore, the
screen identified a metabolic pathway that synthesizes the inositol pyrophosphate
1-IP7 as a previously unrecognized positive regulator of interferon production.
Detailed genetic and biochemical experiments demonstrated that the kinase
activities of IPPK, PPIP5K1 and PPIP5K2 (which convert IP5 to1-IP7) were critical
for both interferon induction, and the control of cellular infection by Sendai
and influenza A viruses. Conversely, ectopically expressed inositol
pyrophosphate-hydrolases DIPPs attenuated interferon transcription. Mechanistic
experiments in intact cells revealed that the expression of IPPK, PPIP5K1 and
PPIP5K2 was needed for the phosphorylation and activation of IRF3, a
transcription factor for interferon. The addition of purified individual inositol
pyrophosphates to a cell free reconstituted RIG-I signaling assay further
identified 1-IP7 as an essential component required for IRF3 activation. The
inositol pyrophosphate may act by ß-phosphoryl transfer, since its action was not
recapitulated by a synthetic phosphonoacetate analogue of 1-IP7. This study thus 
identified several novel regulators of RIG-I, and a new role for inositol
pyrophosphates in augmenting innate immune responses to viral infection that may 
have therapeutic applications.

PMCID: PMC3937324
PMID: 24586175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Feb 27;10(2):e1003975. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003975.
eCollection 2014.

Implication of PMLIV in both intrinsic and innate immunity.

El Asmi F(1), Maroui MA(1), Dutrieux J(1), Blondel D(2), Nisole S(1), Chelbi-Alix
MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR-S 1124, Paris, France ; Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. 
(2)CNRS UPR 3296, Gif sur Yvette, France.

PML/TRIM19, the organizer of nuclear bodies (NBs), has been implicated in the
antiviral response to diverse RNA and DNA viruses. Several PML isoforms generated
from a single PML gene by alternative splicing, share the same N-terminal region 
containing the RBCC/tripartite motif but differ in their C-terminal sequences.
Recent studies of all the PML isoforms reveal the specific functions of each. The
knockout of PML renders mice more sensitive to vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). 
Here we report that among PML isoforms (PMLI to PMLVIIb), only PMLIII and PMLIV
confer resistance to VSV. Unlike PMLIII, whose anti-VSV activity is
IFN-independent, PMLIV can act at two stages: it confers viral resistance
directly in an IFN-independent manner and also specifically enhances IFN-ß
production via a higher activation of IRF3, thus protecting yet uninfected cells 
from oncoming infection. PMLIV SUMOylation is required for both activities. This 
demonstrates for the first time that PMLIV is implicated in innate immune
response through enhanced IFN-ß synthesis. Depletion of IRF3 further demonstrates
the dual activity of PMLIV, since it abrogated PMLIV-induced IFN synthesis but
not PMLIV-induced inhibition of viral proteins. Mechanistically, PMLIV enhances
IFN-ß synthesis by regulating the cellular distribution of Pin1 (peptidyl-prolyl 
cis/trans isomerase), inducing its recruitment to PML NBs where both proteins
colocalize. The interaction of SUMOylated PMLIV with endogenous Pin1 and its
recruitment within PML NBs prevents the degradation of activated IRF3, and thus
potentiates IRF3-dependent production of IFN-ß. Whereas the intrinsic antiviral
activity of PMLIV is specific to VSV, its effect on IFN-ß synthesis is much
broader, since it affects a key actor of innate immune pathways. Our results show
that, in addition to its intrinsic anti-VSV activity, PMLIV positively regulates 
IFN-ß synthesis in response to different inducers, thus adding PML/TRIM19 to the 
growing list of TRIM proteins implicated in both intrinsic and innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC3937294
PMID: 24586174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Trends Microbiol. 2014 Apr;22(4):199-207. doi: 10.1016/j.tim.2014.01.005. Epub
2014 Feb 21.

Programmed necrosis in microbial pathogenesis.

Sridharan H(1), Upton JW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 2506 Speedway, Stop A5000, Austin, TX
78712-1191, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular
and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, 2506 Speedway, Stop A5000, 
Austin, TX 78712-1191, USA. Electronic address: upton@austin.utexas.edu.

Programmed cell death is an important facet of host-pathogen interactions.
Although apoptosis has long been implicated as the major form of programmed cell 
death in host defense, the past decade has seen the emergence of other forms of
regulated death, including programmed necrosis. While the molecular mechanisms of
programmed necrosis continue to be unveiled, an increasing number of viral and
bacterial pathogens induce this form of death in host cells, with important
consequences for infection, control, and pathogenesis. Moreover, pathogen
strategies to manipulate or utilize this pathway are now being discovered. In
this review, we focus on a variety of viral and bacterial pathogens where a role 
for programmed necrosis is starting to be appreciated. In particular, we focus on
the mechanistic details of how the host or the pathogen might appropriate this
pathway for its own benefit.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24565922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Apr;37(2):239-47. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.02.009.
Epub 2014 Feb 21.

Cloning and expression analyses of interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and 7
genes in European eel, Anguilla anguilla with the identification of genes
involved in IFN production.

Huang B(1), Huang WS(1), Nie P(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Jimei University, 43 Yindou Road, Xiamen, Fujian
Province 361021, China. (2)College of Fisheries, Jimei University, 43 Yindou
Road, Xiamen, Fujian Province 361021, China. Electronic address:
pinnie@ihb.ac.cn.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7 have been identified as regulators 
of type I interferon (IFN) gene expression in mammals. In the present study, the 
two genes were cloned and characterized in the European eel, Anguilla anguilla.
The full-length cDNA sequence of IRF3 and IRF7 in the European eel, named as
AaIRF3 and AaIRF7 consists of 2879 and 2419 bp respectively. Multiple alignments 
showed that the two IRFs have a highly conserved DNA binding domain (DBD) in the 
N terminus, with the characteristic motif containing five tryptophan residues,
which is a feature present in their mammalian homologues. But, IRF7 has only four
of the five residues in other species of fish. The expression of AaIRF3 and
AaIRF7 both displayed an obvious dose-dependent manner following
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (PolyI:C) challenge. In vivo expression analysis 
showed that the mRNA level of AaIRF3 and AaIRF7 was significantly up-regulated in
response to PolyI:C stimulation in all examined tissues/organs except in muscle, 
with a lower level of increase observed in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
challenge and Edwardsiella tarda infection, indicating that AaIRF3 and AaIRF7 may
be more likely involved in antiviral immune response. In addition, some pattern
recognition receptors genes related with the production of type I IFNs and those 
genes in response to type I IFNs were identified in the European eel genome
database, indicating a relatively conserved system in the production of type I
IFN and its signalling in the European eel.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24565894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 14;9(2):e88838. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088838. eCollection
2014.

The pestivirus N terminal protease N(pro) redistributes to mitochondria and
peroxisomes suggesting new sites for regulation of IRF3 by N(pro.).

Jefferson M(1), Whelband M(1), Mohorianu I(1), Powell PP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Centre, Norwich Medical School and Biological Sciences,
University of East Anglia, Norwich, United Kingdom.

The N-terminal protease of pestiviruses, N(pro) is a unique viral protein, both
because it is a distinct autoprotease that cleaves itself from the following
polyprotein chain, and also because it binds and inactivates IRF3, a central
regulator of interferon production. An important question remains the role of
N(pro) in the inhibition of apoptosis. In this study, apoptotic signals induced
by staurosporine, interferon, double stranded RNA, sodium arsenate and hydrogen
peroxide were inhibited by expression of wild type N(pro), but not by mutant
protein N(pro) C112R, which we show is less efficient at promoting degradation of
IRF3, and led to the conclusion that N(pro) inhibits the stress-induced intrinsic
mitochondrial pathway through inhibition of IRF3-dependent Bax activation. Both
expression of N(pro) and infection with Bovine Viral Diarrhea Virus (BVDV)
prevented Bax redistribution and mitochondrial fragmentation. Given the role
played by signaling platforms during IRF3 activation, we have studied the
subcellular distribution of N(pro) and we show that, in common with many other
viral proteins, N(pro) targets mitochondria to inhibit apoptosis in response to
cell stress. N(pro) itself not only relocated to mitochondria but in addition,
both N(pro) and IRF3 associated with peroxisomes, with over 85% of N(pro) puncta 
co-distributing with PMP70, a marker for peroxisomes. In addition, peroxisomes
containing N(pro) and IRF3 associated with ubiquitin. IRF3 was degraded, whereas 
N(pro) accumulated in response to cell stress. These results implicate
mitochondria and peroxisomes as new sites for IRF3 regulation by N(pro), and
highlight the role of these organelles in the anti-viral pathway.

PMCID: PMC3925175
PMID: 24551175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. MBio. 2014 Feb 18;5(1). pii: e01088-13. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01088-13.

An innate immunity-regulating virulence determinant is uniquely encoded by the
Andes virus nucleocapsid protein.

Cimica V(1), Dalrymple NA, Roth E, Nasonov A, Mackow ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York, USA.

Andes virus (ANDV) is the only hantavirus known to spread from person to person
and shown to cause highly lethal hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS) in patients 
and Syrian hamsters. Hantaviruses replicate in human endothelial cells and
accomplish this by restricting the early induction of beta interferon (IFN-ß)-
and IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Our studies reveal that the ANDV nucleocapsid
(N) protein uniquely inhibits IFN signaling responses directed by cytoplasmic
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) sensors RIG-I and MDA5. In contrast, N proteins from 
Sin Nombre, New York-1, and Prospect Hill hantaviruses had no effect on
RIG-I/MDA5-directed transcriptional responses from IFN-ß-, IFN-stimulated
response element (ISRE)-, or <U+03BA>B-containing promoters. Ablating a potential
S-segment nonstructural open reading frame (ORF) (NSs) within the ANDV plasmid
expressing N protein failed to alter IFN regulation by ANDV N protein. Further
analysis demonstrated that expressing the ANDV N protein inhibited downstream IFN
pathway activation directed by MAVS, TBK1, and I<U+03BA>B kinase e (IKKe) but failed to 
inhibit transcriptional responses directed by constitutive expression of active
interferon regulatory factor IRF3-5D or after stimulation by alpha interferon
(IFN-a) or tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a). Consistent with IFN
pathway-specific regulation, the ANDV N protein inhibited TBK1-directed IRF3
phosphorylation (phosphorylation of serine 396 [pS396]) and TBK1
autophosphorylation (pS172). Collectively, these findings indicate that the ANDV 
N inhibits IFN signaling responses by interfering with TBK1 activation, upstream 
of IRF3 phosphorylation and NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Moreover, our findings reveal that 
ANDV uniquely carries a gene encoding a virulence determinant within its N
protein that is capable of restricting ISG and IFN-ß induction and provide a
rationale for the novel pathogenesis and spread of ANDV.IMPORTANCE: Andes virus
(ANDV) is distinguished from other hantaviruses by its unique ability to spread
from person to person and cause lethal hantavirus pulmonary syndrome (HPS)-like
disease in Syrian hamsters. However, virulence determinants that distinguish ANDV
from other pathogenic hantaviruses have yet to be defined. Here we reveal that
ANDV uniquely contains a virulence determinant within its nucleocapsid (N)
protein that potently inhibits innate cellular signaling pathways. This novel
function of the N protein provides a new mechanism for hantaviruses to regulate
interferon (IFN) and IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) induction that is likely to
contribute to the enhanced ability of ANDV to replicate, spread, and cause
disease. These findings differentiate ANDV from other HPS-causing hantaviruses
and provide a potential target for viral attenuation that needs to be considered 
in vaccine development.

PMCID: PMC3944819
PMID: 24549848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Apr;9(4):1453-9. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.1957. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Repression of interferon regulatory factor 3 by the Epstein-Barr virus
immediate-early protein Rta is mediated through E2F1 in HeLa cells.

Zhu LH(1), Gao S(1), Jin R(1), Zhuang LL(1), Jiang L(1), Qiu LZ(1), Xu HG(2),
Zhou GP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China. (2)Department of Clinical
Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu 210029, P.R. China.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), an essential transcriptional regulator of
the interferon (IFN) genes, is important in the host defense against viral and
microbial infection. Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) immediate-early protein replication
and transcription activator (Rta) and the transcription factor E2F1 are two
important inhibitive factors, which repress IRF-3 expression. Numerous studies
have identified that Rta can directly bind to the Rta-response element in
promoters of its target genes and regulate their expression. In the present
study, we demonstrated that Rta represses the expression of IRF-3 by E2F1 rather 
than through its traditional way. Transient transfection analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that the overexpression of Rta
elevated the expression of E2F1 and increased the binding of E2F1 to the promoter
of IRF-3. The mutation of the E2F1-binding site and the knocking down of E2F1 by 
small interfering RNA (siRNA) can eradicate the inhibitory effect of Rta. These
results suggested that Rta represses IRF-3 expression by increasing E2F1 binding 
to the IRF-3 promoter.

PMID: 24535579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Gen Virol. 2014 May;95(Pt 5):1144-55. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.060608-0. Epub 2014
Feb 17.

Singapore grouper iridovirus-encoded semaphorin homologue (SGIV-sema) contributes
to viral replication, cytoskeleton reorganization and inhibition of cellular
immune responses.

Yan Y(1), Cui H, Guo C, Wei J, Huang Y, Li L, Qin Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, South China Sea
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road,
Guangzhou 510301, PR China.

Semaphorins are a large, phylogenetically conserved family of proteins that are
involved in a wide range of biological processes including axonal steering,
organogenesis, neoplastic transformation, as well as immune responses. In this
study, a novel semaphorin homologue gene belonging to the Singapore grouper
iridovirus (SGIV), ORF155R (termed SGIV-sema), was cloned and characterized. The 
coding region of SGIV-sema is 1728 bp in length, encoding a predicted protein
with 575 aa. SGIV-sema contains a ~370 aa N-terminal Sema domain, a conserved
plexin-semaphorin-integrin (PSI) domain, and an immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domain
near the C terminus. SGIV-sema is an early gene product during viral infection
and predominantly distributed in the cytoplasm with a speckled and clubbed
pattern of appearance. Functionally, SGIV-sema could promote viral replication
during SGIV infection in vitro, with no effect on the proliferation of host
cells. Intriguingly, ectopically expressed SGIV-sema could alter the cytoskeletal
structure of fish cells, characterized by a circumferential ring of microtubules 
near the nucleus and a disrupted microfilament organization. Furthermore,
SGIV-sema was able to attenuate the cellular immune response, as demonstrated by 
decreased expression of inflammation/immune-related genes such as IL-8, IL-15,
TNF-a and mediator of IRF3 activation (MITA), in SGIV-sema-expressing cells
before and after SGIV infection. Ultimately, our study identified a novel,
functional SGIV gene that could regulate cytoskeletal structure, immune responses
and facilitate viral replication.

PMID: 24535211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 May;11(3):245-52. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.65. Epub 2014 Feb 
17.

Death-associated protein kinase 1 is an IRF3/7-interacting protein that is
involved in the cellular antiviral immune response.

Zhang J, Hu MM, Shu HB, Li S.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 7 has been demonstrated to be a master
regulator of virus-induced type I interferon production (IFN), and it plays a
central role in the innate immune response against viruses. Here, we identified
death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1) as an IRF7-interacting protein by
tandem affinity purification (TAP). Viral infection induced DAPK1-IRF7 and
DAPK1-IRF3 interactions and overexpression of DAPK1 enhanced virus-induced
activation of the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) and IFN-ß
promoters and the expression of the IFNB1 gene. Knockdown of DAPK1 attenuated the
induction of IFNB1 and RIG-I expression triggered by viral infection or IFN-ß,
and they were enhanced by viral replication. In addition, viral infection or
IFN-ß treatment induced the expression of DAPK1. IFN-ß treatment also activated
DAPK1 by decreasing its phosphorylation level at serine 308. Interestingly, the
involvement of DAPK1 in virus-induced signaling was independent of its kinase
activity. Therefore, our study identified DAPK1 as an important regulator of the 
cellular antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC4085485
PMID: 24531619  [PubMed - in process]


365. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 28;289(13):9208-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.508663. Epub 2014
Feb 13.

The inducible nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS)/Src axis mediates Toll-like receptor 3
tyrosine 759 phosphorylation and enhances its signal transduction, leading to
interferon-ß synthesis in macrophages.

Hsieh MY(1), Chang MY, Chen YJ, Li YK, Chuang TH, Yu GY, Cheung CH, Chen HC, Maa 
MC, Leu TH.

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Basic Medical Sciences.

Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) induces phosphorylation of Toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3) at tyrosine 759 and subsequently triggers signaling pathways to promote
interferon-ß (IFN-ß) production. In this study, we found that dsRNA stimulation
induces biphasic TLR3 Tyr-759 phosphorylation in macrophages. In addition to the 
immediate TLR3 Tyr-759 phosphorylation, we identified a second wave of Tyr-759
phosphorylation accompanied by an increase of both Src and ifn-ß transcription in
the later phase of dsRNA stimulation. Interestingly, Src phosphorylated TLR3
Tyr-759 in vitro and in vivo. However, knockdown of Src abolished the late phase 
of TLR3 Tyr-759 phosphorylation and decreased the nuclear accumulation of
interferon regulatory factors 3 and 7 (IRF3 and -7) and IFN-ß production.
Reintroduction of Src restored all of these molecular changes. Notably, via
down-regulation of Src, dsRNA-elicited TLR3 Tyr-759 phosphorylation, the nuclear 
accumulation of IRF3/IRF7, and IFN-ß generation were inhibited in inducible
nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS)-null macrophages. TLR3 knockdown destabilized Src
and reduced the nuclear level of IRF3/IRF7 and IFN-ß production in macrophages
exposed to LPS (a TLR4 ligand known to induce Src and IFN-ß expression). Ectopic 
expression of wild type TLR3, but not its 759-phenylalanine mutant, restored Src 
activity and ifn-ß transcription. Taken together, these results suggested an
essential role of the iNOS/Src/TLR3 axis in IFN-ß production in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3979412
PMID: 24526685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Mol Neurosci. 2014 Sep;54(1):20-6. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0240-8. Epub 2014
Feb 15.

Lrg participates in lipopolysaccharide preconditioning-induced brain ischemia
injury via TLR4 signaling pathway.

Gong G(1), Bai S, Wu W, Hu L, Liu Y, Niu J, Dai X, Yin L, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, General Hospital of Chengdu Military Area Command,
Chengdu, 610000, Sichuan, China.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) preconditioning is a powerful neuroprotective phenomenon
by which an injurious stimulus renders the brain resistant to a subsequent
damaging ischemic insult. The LPS response gene (Lrg) is a recently identified
gene in human dental pulp cells treated with LPS. However, the role and mechanism
of Lrg in brain ischemia injury have not yet been demonstrated. Here, we sought
to determine whether Lrg participates in LPS preconditioning-induced brain
ischemia injury. The Lrg protein accumulates in brain tissue after middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Furthermore, knockdown of Lrg by small
interfering RNA (siRNA) significantly increased the infarct size of brain injury.
In addition, we investigated the mechanism of Lrg in brain ischemia injury.
Lrg-siRNA could regulate inflammatory cytokine expression. Moreover,
interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAK-1) and nuclear factor Kappa B
(NF-<U+03BA>B) p65 protein levels were significantly increased by Lrg-siRNA in mice
after MCAO. Conversely, interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) protein level was
decreased by Lrg-siRNA. Taken together, these results suggest that Lrg regulates 
the expression of inflammatory cytokines in LPS preconditioning-induced brain
ischemia injury via the toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling pathway. Lrg may
therefore serve as a novel therapeutic target for brain ischemia injury.

PMID: 24526448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Virol. 2014 May;88(9):4853-65. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02923-13. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Ectromelia virus encodes a BTB/kelch protein, EVM150, that inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling.

Wang Q(1), Burles K, Couturier B, Randall CM, Shisler J, Barry M.

Author information: 
(1)Li Ka Shing Institute of Virology, Department of Medical Microbiology and
Immunology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

The NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway plays a critical role in inflammation and innate
immunity. Consequently, many viruses have evolved strategies to inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B in 
order to facilitate replication and evasion of the host immune response.
Recently, we determined that ectromelia virus, the causative agent of mousepox,
contains a family of four BTB/kelch proteins that interact with cullin-3-based
ubiquitin ligases. We demonstrate here that expression of EVM150, one of the four
BTB/kelch proteins, inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B activation induced by tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNF-a) and interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß). Although EVM150 inhibited NF-<U+03BA>B p65
nuclear translocation, I<U+03BA>Ba degradation was observed, indicating that EVM150
functioned downstream of I<U+03BA>Ba degradation. Significantly, expression of the
BTB-only domain of EVM150 blocked NF-<U+03BA>B activation, demonstrating that EVM150
functioned independently of the kelch domain and its role as an adapter for
cullin-3-based ubiquitin ligases. Furthermore, cullin-3 knockdown by small
interfering RNA demonstrated that cullin-3-based ubiquitin ligases are
dispensable for TNF-a-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Interestingly, nuclear
translocation of IRF3 and STAT1 still occurred in the presence of EVM150,
indicating that EVM150 prevented NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear translocation specifically. In
addition to identifying EVM150 as an inhibitor of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, this study
provides new insights into the role of BTB/kelch proteins during virus
infection.IMPORTANCE: With the exception of virulence studies, little work has
been done to determine the role of poxviral BTB/kelch proteins during infection. 
This study, for the first time, has identified a mechanism for the ectromelia
virus BTB/kelch protein EVM150. Here, we show that EVM150 is a novel inhibitor of
the cellular NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, an important component of the antiviral response.
This study adds EVM150 to the growing list of NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitors in poxviruses and 
provides new insights into the role of BTB/kelch proteins during virus infection.

PMCID: PMC3993801
PMID: 24522926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Virol. 2014 May;88(9):4866-76. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03649-13. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Middle east respiratory syndrome coronavirus 4a protein is a double-stranded
RNA-binding protein that suppresses PACT-induced activation of RIG-I and MDA5 in 
the innate antiviral response.

Siu KL(1), Yeung ML, Kok KH, Yuen KS, Kew C, Lui PY, Chan CP, Tse H, Woo PC, Yuen
KY, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is an emerging pathogen
that causes severe disease in human. MERS-CoV is closely related to bat
coronaviruses HKU4 and HKU5. Evasion of the innate antiviral response might
contribute significantly to MERS-CoV pathogenesis, but the mechanism is poorly
understood. In this study, we characterized MERS-CoV 4a protein as a novel
immunosuppressive factor that antagonizes type I interferon production. MERS-CoV 
4a protein contains a double-stranded RNA-binding domain capable of interacting
with poly(I · C). Expression of MERS-CoV 4a protein suppressed the interferon
production induced by poly(I · C) or Sendai virus. RNA binding of MERS-CoV 4a
protein was required for IFN antagonism, a property shared by 4a protein of bat
coronavirus HKU5 but not by the counterpart in bat coronavirus HKU4. MERS-CoV 4a 
protein interacted with PACT in an RNA-dependent manner but not with RIG-I or
MDA5. It inhibited PACT-induced activation of RIG-I and MDA5 but did not affect
the activity of downstream effectors such as RIG-I, MDA5, MAVS, TBK1, and IRF3.
Taken together, our findings suggest a new mechanism through which MERS-CoV
employs a viral double-stranded RNA-binding protein to circumvent the innate
antiviral response by perturbing the function of cellular double-stranded
RNA-binding protein PACT. PACT targeting might be a common strategy used by
different viruses, including Ebola virus and herpes simplex virus 1, to
counteract innate immunity.IMPORTANCE: Middle East respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is an emerging and highly lethal human pathogen. Why
MERS-CoV causes severe disease in human is unclear, and one possibility is that
MERS-CoV is particularly efficient in counteracting host immunity, including the 
sensing of virus invasion. It will therefore be critical to clarify how MERS-CoV 
cripples the host proteins that sense viruses and to compare MERS-CoV with its
ancestral viruses in bats in the counteraction of virus sensing. This work not
only provides a new understanding of the abilities of MERS-CoV and closely
related bat viruses to subvert virus sensing but also might prove useful in
revealing new strategies for the development of vaccines and antivirals.

PMCID: PMC3993821
PMID: 24522921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 Mar;11(2):175-83. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.66. Epub 2014 Feb 
10.

HBV life cycle is restricted in mouse hepatocytes expressing human NTCP.

Li H(1), Zhuang Q(1), Wang Y(2), Zhang T(3), Zhao J(3), Zhang Y(3), Zhang J(3),
Lin Y(4), Yuan Q(3), Xia N(3), Han J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, and School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China.
(2)1] State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, and School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China [2]
School of Chemical Engineering, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361005, China.
(3)National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious
Disease, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China.
(4)School of Chemical Engineering, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361005, China.

Recent studies have revealed that human sodium taurocholate cotransporting
polypeptide (SLC10A1 or NTCP) is a functional cellular receptor for hepatitis B
virus (HBV). However, whether human NTCP can support HBV infection in mouse
hepatocyte cell lines has not been clarified. Because an HBV-permissible mouse
model would be helpful for the study of HBV pathogenesis, it is necessary to
investigate whether human NTCP supports the susceptibility of mouse hepatocyte
cell lines to HBV. The results show that exogenous human NTCP expression can
render non-susceptible HepG2 (human), Huh7 (human), Hepa1-6 (mouse), AML-12
(mouse) cell lines and primary mouse hepatocyte (PMH) cells susceptible to
hepatitis D virus (HDV) which employs HBV envelope proteins. However, human NTCP 
could only introduce HBV susceptibility in human-derived HepG2 and Huh7 cells,
but not in mouse-derived Hepa1-6, AML-12 or PMH cells. These data suggest that
although human NTCP is a functional receptor that mediates HBV infection in human
cells, it cannot support HBV infection in mouse hepatocytes. Our study indicated 
that the restriction of HBV in mouse hepatocytes likely occurs after viral entry 
but prior to viral transcription. We have excluded the role of mouse hepatocyte
nuclear factors in the restriction of the HBV life cycle and showed that
knockdown or inhibition of Sting, TBK1, IRF3 or IRF7, the components of the
anti-viral signaling pathways, had no effect on HBV infection in mouse
hepatocytes. Therefore, murine restriction factors that limit HBV infection need 
to be identified before a HBV-permissible mouse line can be created.

PMCID: PMC4003384
PMID: 24509445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Virology. 2014 Feb;450-451:182-95. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.12.020. Epub 2014
Jan 4.

MicroRNA-23 inhibits PRRSV replication by directly targeting PRRSV RNA and
possibly by upregulating type I interferons.

Zhang Q(1), Guo XK(1), Gao L(1), Huang C(1), Li N(2), Jia X(3), Liu W(3), Feng
WH(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China; Ministry of Agriculture Key
Laboratory of Soil Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China;
Department of Molecular Biology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. (3)Institute of Microbiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of
Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China; Ministry of Agriculture Key Laboratory of Soil
Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
Electronic address: whfeng@cau.edu.cn.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression
post-transcriptionally and play critical roles in intricate networks of
host-pathogen interactions and innate immunity. Porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome (PRRS) is one of the most important diseases affecting swine
industry worldwide. Here, we demonstrated that miR-23, miR-378, and miR-505 were 
antiviral host factors against PRRS virus (PRRSV). Over-expression of the three
miRNAs inhibited PRRSV infection in a dose-dependent manner, respectively.
Blockage of the three endogenously expressed miRNAs significantly enhanced PRRSV 
replication. Different type 2 PRRSV strains harbored conserved miR-23, miR-378,
and miR-505 target sites (TSs) that were sufficient to confer miRNA-mediated
repression of PRRSV replication. Interestingly, miR-23 was capable of inducing
type I interferon expression during PRRSV infection through IRF3/IRF7 activation,
which might further lead to the inhibition of virus infection. These results
suggest that miR-23, miR-378, and miR-505, especially miR-23, may have the
potential to be used as antiviral therapy against PRRSV infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24503081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Exp Med. 2014 Feb 10;211(2):313-28. doi: 10.1084/jem.20122844. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

USP21 negatively regulates antiviral response by acting as a RIG-I
deubiquitinase.

Fan Y(1), Mao R, Yu Y, Liu S, Shi Z, Cheng J, Zhang H, An L, Zhao Y, Xu X, Chen
Z, Kogiso M, Zhang D, Zhang H, Zhang P, Jung JU, Li X, Xu G, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Texas Children's Cancer Center, Department of Pediatrics, 2 Department of
Pathology and Immunology, Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

Lys63-linked polyubiquitination of RIG-I is essential in antiviral immune
defense, yet the molecular mechanism that negatively regulates this critical step
is poorly understood. Here, we report that USP21 acts as a novel negative
regulator in antiviral responses through its ability to bind to and
deubiquitinate RIG-I. Overexpression of USP21 inhibited RNA virus-induced RIG-I
polyubiquitination and RIG-I-mediated interferon (IFN) signaling, whereas
deletion of USP21 resulted in elevated RIG-I polyubiquitination, IRF3
phosphorylation, IFN-a/ß production, and antiviral responses in MEFs in response 
to RNA virus infection. USP21 also restricted antiviral responses in peritoneal
macrophages (PMs) and bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs).
USP21-deficient mice spontaneously developed splenomegaly and were more resistant
to VSV infection with elevated production of IFNs. Chimeric mice with
USP21-deficient hematopoietic cells developed virus-induced splenomegaly and were
more resistant to VSV infection. Functional comparison of three deubiquitinases
(USP21, A20, and CYLD) demonstrated that USP21 acts as a bona fide RIG-I
deubiquitinase to down-regulate antiviral response independent of the A20
ubiquitin-editing complex. Our studies identify a previously unrecognized role
for USP21 in the negative regulation of antiviral response through
deubiquitinating RIG-I.

PMCID: PMC3920558
PMID: 24493797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Hepat Res Treat. 2013;2013:917261. doi: 10.1155/2013/917261. Epub 2013 Dec 29.

Involvement of Differential Relationship between HCV Replication and Hepatic PRR 
Signaling Gene Expression in Responsiveness to IFN-Based Therapy.

Yuki N(1), Matsumoto S(2), Kato M(3), Yamaguchi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Osaka National Hospital, Hoenzaka 2-1-14,
Chuo-ku, Osaka 540-0006, Japan. (2)BML, Inc., Kawagoe 350-1101, Japan.
(3)Department of Gastroenterology, Minamiwakayama National Hospital, Tanabe
646-8558, Japan.

Aim. To gain an insight into the effect of HCV replication-associated
interference with the IFN system on hepatic mRNA expression involved in IFN
production. Methods. Relative mRNA expression of TLR3/RIG-I signaling genes
involved in IFN- ß production was correlated with positive- and negative-strand
HCV RNAs in pretreatment liver tissues responsive and nonresponsive to
peginterferon and ribavirin for chronic hepatitis C genotype 1. Treatment
response was analyzed for per protocol population at weeks 12 (n = 45) and 24 (n 
= 40) and at 24 weeks aftertreatment (n = 38). Results. HCV replication had no
relation to the expression of TLR3, RIG-I, TRIF, IPS-1, IRF3, and IFN- ß mRNAs in
responders. In striking contrast, positive- and/or negative-strand HCV showed
positive correlations with TLR3, RIG-I, TRIF, IPS-1, and IRF3 mRNAs in week-12
nonresponders; with RIG-I, TRIF, IPS-1, and IRF3 mRNAs in week-24 nonresponders; 
and with TLR3, RIG-I, and IRF3 mRNAs in posttreatment nonresponders. Thus mRNA
expression of TLR3/RIG-I signaling genes was increased in relation to viral
replication in nonresponders. Conclusions. The findings in IFN nonresponders may 
imply a host feedback response to severe impairment of the IFN system associated 
with HCV replication.

PMCID: PMC3893785
PMID: 24490062  [PubMed]


373. J Neuroinflammation. 2014 Feb 1;11:24. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-11-24.

Regulatory role of TRIM21 in the type-I interferon pathway in Japanese
encephalitis virus-infected human microglial cells.

Manocha GD, Mishra R, Sharma N, Kumawat KL, Basu A, Singh SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurovirology and Inflammation Biology, CSIR-Centre for Cellular
and Molecular Biology (CCMB), New R&D Building-1st Floor, Uppal Road, Hyderabad
500007, India. sunitsingh2000@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) infection leads to Japanese
encephalitis (JE) in humans. JEV is transmitted through mosquitoes and maintained
in a zoonotic cycle. This cycle involves pigs as the major reservoir, water birds
as carriers and mosquitoes as vectors. JEV invasion into the central nervous
system (CNS) may occur via antipodal transport of virions or through the vascular
endothelial cells. Microglial cells get activated in response to pathogenic
insults. JEV infection induces the innate immune response and triggers the
production of type I interferons. The signaling pathway of type I interferon
production is regulated by a number of molecules. TRIM proteins are known to
regulate the expression of interferons; however, the involvement of TRIM genes
and their underlying mechanism during JEV infection are not known.
METHODS: Human microglial cells (CHME3) were infected with JEV to understand the 
role of TRIM21 in JEV infection and its effect on type I interferon (IFN-ß)
production. Cells were infected in presence and absence of exogenous TRIM21 as
well as after knocking down the TRIM21 mRNA. Levels of activated IRF3 expression 
were measured through Western blot analyses of anti-p-IRF3 antibody, and IFN-ß
production was measured by using IFN-ß real-time PCR and luciferase activity
analyses.
RESULTS: JEV infection increased expression of TRIM21 in CHME3 cells. JEV induced
an innate immune response by increasing production of IFN-ß via IRF3 activation
and phosphorylation. Overexpression of TRIM21 resulted in downregulation of
p-IRF3 and IFN-ß, while silencing led to increased production of p-IRF3 and IFN-ß
in JEV-infected CHME3 cells.
CONCLUSION: This report demonstrates TRIM21 as a negative regulator of
interferon-ß (IFN-ß) production mediated by IRF-3 during JEV infection in human
microglial cells.

PMCID: PMC3922089
PMID: 24485101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(8):4180-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03114-13. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Inhibition of dengue and chikungunya virus infections by RIG-I-mediated type I
interferon-independent stimulation of the innate antiviral response.

Olagnier D(1), Scholte FE, Chiang C, Albulescu IC, Nichols C, He Z, Lin R,
Snijder EJ, van Hemert MJ, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine & Gene Therapy Institute of Florida, Port St. Lucie, Florida, USA.

RIG-I is a cytosolic sensor critically involved in the activation of the innate
immune response to RNA virus infection. In the present study, we evaluated the
inhibitory effect of a RIG-I agonist on the replication of two emerging
arthropod-borne viral pathogens, dengue virus (DENV) and chikungunya virus
(CHIKV), for which no therapeutic options currently exist. We demonstrate that
when a low, noncytotoxic dose of an optimized 5'triphosphorylated RNA (5'pppRNA) 
molecule was administered, RIG-I stimulation generated a robust antiviral
response against these two viruses. Strikingly, 5'pppRNA treatment before or
after challenge with DENV or CHIKV provided protection against infection. In
primary human monocytes and monocyte-derived dendritic cells, the RIG-I agonist
blocked both primary infection and antibody-dependent enhancement of DENV
infection. The protective response against DENV and CHIKV induced by 5'pppRNA was
dependent on an intact RIG-I/MAVS/TBK1/IRF3 axis and was largely independent of
the type I IFN response. Altogether, this in vitro analysis of the antiviral
efficacy of 5'pppRNA highlights the therapeutic potential of RIG-I agonists
against emerging viruses such as DENV and CHIKV.IMPORTANCE: DENV and CHIKV are
two reemerging mosquito-borne viruses for which no therapeutic options currently 
exist. Both viruses overlap geographically in tropical regions of the world,
produce similar fever-like symptoms, and are difficult to diagnose. This study
investigated the inhibitory effect of a RIG-I agonist on the replication of these
two viruses. RIG-I stimulation using 5'pppRNA before or after DENV or CHIKV
infection generated a protective antiviral response against both pathogens in
immune and nonimmune cells; interestingly, the protective response against the
viruses was largely independent of the classical type I interferon response. The 
antiviral efficacy of 5'pppRNA highlights the therapeutic potential of RIG-I
agonists against emerging viruses such as DENV and CHIKV.

PMCID: PMC3993760
PMID: 24478443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(8):4161-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03223-13. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Large-scale nucleotide optimization of simian immunodeficiency virus reduces its 
capacity to stimulate type I interferon in vitro.

Vabret N(1), Bailly-Bechet M, Lepelley A, Najburg V, Schwartz O, Verrier B, Tangy
F.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génomique Virale et Vaccination, CNRS UMR-3569, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

Lentiviral RNA genomes present a strong bias in their nucleotide composition with
extremely high frequencies of A nucleotide in human immunodeficiency virus type 1
(HIV-1) and simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV). Based on the observation that
human optimization of RNA virus gene fragments may abolish their ability to
stimulate the type I interferon (IFN-I) response, we identified the most biased
sequences along the SIV genome and showed that they are the most potent IFN-I
stimulators. With the aim of designing an attenuated SIV genome based on a
reduced capacity to activate the IFN-I response, we synthesized artificial SIV
genomes whose biased sequences were optimized toward macaque average nucleotide
composition without altering their regulatory elements or amino acid sequences. A
synthetic SIV optimized with 169 synonymous mutations in gag and pol genes showed
a 100-fold decrease in replicative capacity. Interestingly, a synthetic SIV
optimized with 70 synonymous mutations in pol had a normal replicative capacity. 
Its ability to stimulate IFN-I was reduced when infected cells were cocultured
with reporter cells. IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) transcription factor was
required for IFN-I stimulation, implicating cytosolic sensors in the detection of
SIV-biased RNA in infected cells. No reversion of introduced mutations was
observed for either of the optimized viruses after 10 serial passages. In
conclusion, we have designed large-scale nucleotide-modified SIVs that may
display attenuated pathogenic potential.IMPORTANCE: In this study, we synthesized
artificial SIV genomes in which the most hyperbiased sequences were optimized to 
bring them closer to the nucleotide composition of the macaque SIV host.
Interestingly, we generated a stable synthetic SIV optimized with 70 synonymous
mutations in pol gene, which had a normal replicative capacity but a reduced
ability to stimulate type I IFN. This demonstrates the possibility to rationally 
change viral nucleotide composition to design replicative and genetically stable 
lentiviruses with attenuated pathogenic potentials.

PMCID: PMC3993766
PMID: 24478441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(8):3942-52. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03109-13. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Activation of the interferon induction cascade by influenza a viruses requires
viral RNA synthesis and nuclear export.

Killip MJ(1), Smith M, Jackson D, Randall RE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, Biomedical Sciences Research Complex, North Haugh,
University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, Fife, United Kingdom.

We have examined the requirements for virus transcription and replication and
thus the roles of input and progeny genomes in the generation of interferon
(IFN)-inducing pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by influenza A
viruses using inhibitors of these processes. Using IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
phosphorylation as a marker of activation of the IFN induction cascade that
occurs upstream of the IFN-ß promoter, we demonstrate strong activation of the
IFN induction cascade in A549 cells infected with a variety of influenza A
viruses in the presence of cycloheximide or nucleoprotein (NP) small interfering 
RNA (siRNA), which inhibits viral protein synthesis and thus complementary
ribonucleoprotein (cRNP) and progeny viral RNP (vRNP) synthesis. In contrast,
activation of the IFN induction cascade by influenza viruses was very effectively
abrogated by treatment with actinomycin D and other transcription inhibitors,
which correlated with the inhibition of the synthesis of all viral RNA species.
Furthermore, 5,6-dichloro-1-ß-d-ribofuranosyl-benzimidazole, an inhibitor that
prevents viral RNA export from the nucleus, was also a potent inhibitor of IRF3
activation; thus, both viral RNA synthesis and nuclear export are required for
IFN induction by influenza A viruses. While the exact nature of the viral PAMPs
remains to be determined, our data suggest that in this experimental system the
major influenza A virus PAMPs are distinct from those of incoming genomes or
progeny vRNPs.IMPORTANCE: The host interferon system exerts an extremely potent
antiviral response that efficiently restricts virus replication and spread; the
interferon response can thus dictate the outcome of a virus infection, and it is 
therefore important to understand how viruses induce interferon. Both input and
progeny genomes have been linked to interferon induction by influenza viruses.
However, our experiments in tissue culture cells show that viral RNA synthesis
and nuclear export are required to activate this response. Furthermore, the
interferon induction cascade is activated under conditions in which the synthesis
of progeny genomes is inhibited. Therefore, in tissue culture cells, input and
progeny genomes are not the predominant inducers of interferon generated by
influenza A viruses; the major viral interferon inducer(s) still remains to be
identified.

PMCID: PMC3993719
PMID: 24478437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Respir Res. 2014 Jan 29;15:9. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-15-9.

dsRNA-induced changes in gene expression profiles of primary nasal and bronchial 
epithelial cells from patients with asthma, rhinitis and controls.

Wagener AH(1), Zwinderman AH, Luiten S, Fokkens WJ, Bel EH, Sterk PJ, van Drunen 
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
a.h.wagener@amc.uva.nl.

BACKGROUND: Rhinovirus infections are the most common cause of asthma
exacerbations. The complex responses by airway epithelium to rhinovirus can be
captured by gene expression profiling. We hypothesized that: a) upper and lower
airway epithelium exhibit differential responses to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), 
and b) that this is modulated by the presence of asthma and allergic rhinitis.
OBJECTIVES: Identification of dsRNA-induced gene expression profiles of primary
nasal and bronchial epithelial cells from the same individuals and examining the 
impact of allergic rhinitis with and without concomitant allergic asthma on
expression profiles.
METHODS: This study had a cross-sectional design including 18 subjects: 6
patients with allergic asthma with concomitant rhinitis, 6 patients with allergic
rhinitis, and 6 healthy controls. Comparing 6 subjects per group, the estimated
false discovery rate was approximately 5%. RNA was extracted from isolated and
cultured primary epithelial cells from nasal biopsies and bronchial brushings
stimulated with dsRNA (poly(I:C)), and analyzed by microarray (Affymetrix U133+
PM Genechip Array). Data were analysed using R and the Bioconductor Limma
package. Overrepresentation of gene ontology groups were captured by GeneSpring
GX12.
RESULTS: In total, 17 subjects completed the study successfully (6 allergic
asthma with rhinitis, 5 allergic rhinitis, 6 healthy controls). dsRNA-stimulated 
upper and lower airway epithelium from asthma patients demonstrated significantly
fewer induced genes, exhibiting reduced down-regulation of mitochondrial genes.
The majority of genes related to viral responses appeared to be similarly induced
in upper and lower airways in all groups. However, the induction of several
interferon-related genes (IRF3, IFNAR1, IFNB1, IFNGR1, IL28B) was impaired in
patients with asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: dsRNA differentially changes transcriptional profiles of primary
nasal and bronchial epithelial cells from patients with allergic rhinitis with or
without asthma and controls. Our data suggest that respiratory viruses affect
mitochondrial genes, and we identified disease-specific genes that provide
potential targets for drug development.

PMCID: PMC3916078
PMID: 24475887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1840(6):1755-64. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2014.01.024. Epub 2014 Jan 23.

Glycyrrhizin inhibits lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory response by
reducing TLR4 recruitment into lipid rafts in RAW264.7 cells.

Fu Y(1), Zhou E(1), Wei Z(1), Song X(1), Liu Z(1), Wang T(1), Wang W(1), Zhang
N(1), Liu G(2), Yang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130062, PR China. (2)Department of
Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin Province 130062, PR China. Electronic address:
liuguowen2008@163.com. (3)Department of Clinical Veterinary Medicine, College of 
Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin Province 130062, PR
China. Electronic address: yzt@jlu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of glycyrrhizin
on LPS-induced endotoxemia in mice and clarify the possible mechanism.
METHODS: An LPS-induced endotoxemia mouse model was used to confirm the
anti-inflammatory activity of glycyrrhizin in vivo. In vitro, RAW264.7 cells were
stimulated with LPS in the presence or absence of glycyrrhizin. The expression of
cytokines was determined by ELISA. Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) was determined by 
Western blot analysis. Nuclear factor-kB (NF-<U+03BA>B) and Interferon regulatory factor
3 (IRF3) activation were detected by Western blotting and luciferase assay. Lipid
raft staining was detected by immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: In vivo, the results showed that glycyrrhizin can improve survival
during lethal endotoxemia. In vitro, glycyrrhizin dose-dependently inhibited the 
expression of TNF-a, IL-6, IL-1ß and RANTES in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 cells.
Western blot analysis showed that glycyrrhizin suppressed LPS-induced NF-<U+03BA>B and
IRF3 activation. However, glycyrrhizin did not inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 activation 
induced by MyD88-dependent (MyD88, IKKß) or TRIF-dependent (TRIF, TBK1)
downstream signaling components. Moreover, glycyrrhizin did not affect the
expression of TLR4 and CD14 induced by LPS. Significantly, we found that
glycyrrhizin decreased the levels of cholesterol of lipid rafts and inhibited
translocation of TLR4 to lipid rafts. Moreover, glycyrrhizin activated ABCA1,
which could induce cholesterol efflux from lipid rafts.
CONCLUSION: Glycyrrhizin exerts an anti-inflammatory property by disrupting lipid
rafts and inhibiting translocation of TLR4 to lipid rafts, thereby attenuating
LPS-mediated inflammatory response.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Learning the anti-inflammatory mechanism of glycyrrhizin is
crucial for the anti-inflammatory drug development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24462946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Phytomedicine. 2014 May 15;21(6):815-23. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2013.12.003. Epub 
2014 Jan 24.

Effects of total glucosides of paeony on immune regulatory toll-like receptors
TLR2 and 4 in the kidney from diabetic rats.

Xu XX(1), Qi XM(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang CQ(1), Wu XX(1), Wu YG(2), Wang K(1), Shen 
JJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui, PR China. (2)Department of Nephrology, the First
Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, PR China. Electronic
address: wuyonggui@medmail.com.cn. (3)Department of Pathobiology, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, Anhui, PR China.

TLRs are a family of receptors that play a critical role in the pathogenesis of
diabetic nephropathy. TGP have been shown to have anti-inflammatory and
immuno-regulatory activities. However, the relation between TGP and TLRs on
diabetic nephropathy remains unknown. In this study, we examined effects of TGP
on immune regulatory TLR2 and 4 in the kidney from streptozotocin-induced
diabetic rats. TGP decreased the levels of 24h urinary albumin excretion rate
significantly in diabetic rats. Western blot analysis showed that TGP
significantly inhibited the expression of TLR2 and 4, MyD88, p-IRAK1, NF-<U+03BA>B p65, 
p-IRF3, TNF-a and IL-1ß. Quantitative real-time PCR analysis showed that the
significantly increased levels of TLR2 and 4, and MyD88mRNA in the kidneys of
diabetic rats were significantly suppressed by TGP treatment. Macrophages
infiltration were also markedly increased in the kidneys of the diabetic rats,
but were significantly inhibited by TGP in a dose-dependent manner. These results
suggest that TGP has protective effects on several pharmacological targets in the
progress of diabetic nephropathy by selectively blocking TLRs activation in vivo.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24462407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Cell Microbiol. 2014 Aug;16(8):1201-10. doi: 10.1111/cmi.12272. Epub 2014 Feb 21.

Phosphorylation and membrane association of the Rubella virus capsid protein is
important for its anti-apoptotic function.

Willows S(1), Ilkow CS, Hobman TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alberta, 5-14 Medical Sciences
Building, Edmonton, Canada, T6G 2H7.

Rubella virus (RV), a member of Togaviridae, is an important human pathogen that 
can cause severe defects in the developing fetus. Compared to other togaviruses, 
RV replicates very slowly suggesting that it must employ effective mechanisms to 
delay the innate immune response. A recent study by our laboratory revealed that 
the capsid protein of RV is a potent inhibitor of apoptosis. A primary mechanism 
by which RV capsid interferes with programmed cell death appears to be through
interaction with the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member Bax. In the present study,
we report that the capsid protein also blocks IRF3-dependent apoptosis induced by
the double-strand RNA mimic polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid. In addition,
analyses of cis-acting elements revealed that phosphorylation and membrane
association are important for its anti-apoptotic function. Finally, the
observation that hypo-phosphorylated capsid binds Bax just as well as wild-type
capsid protein suggests that interaction with this pro-apoptotic host protein in 
and of itself is not sufficient to block programmed cell death. This provides
additional evidence that this viral protein inhibits apoptosis through multiple
mechanisms.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24456140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Jun;50(6):1136-43. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0357OC.

Modulation of airway epithelial antiviral immunity by fungal exposure.

Zhu L(1), Lee B, Zhao F, Zhou X, Chin V, Ling SC, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy, University of
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona; and.

Multiple pathogens, such as bacteria, fungi, and viruses, have been frequently
found in asthmatic airways and are associated with the pathogenesis and
exacerbation of asthma. Among these pathogens, Alternaria alternata (Alt), a
universally present fungus, and human rhinovirus have been extensively studied.
However, their interactions have not been investigated. In the present study, we 
tested the effect of Alt exposure on virus-induced airway epithelial immunity
using live virus and a synthetic viral mimicker, double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). Alt
treatment was found to significantly enhance the production of proinflammatory
cytokines (e.g., IL-6 and IL-8) induced by virus infection or dsRNA treatment. In
contrast to this synergistic effect, Alt significantly repressed type I and type 
III IFN production, and this impairment led to elevated viral replication.
Mechanistic studies suggested the positive role of NF-<U+03BA>B and mitogen-activated
protein kinase pathways in the synergism and the attenuation of the TBK1-IRF3
pathway in the inhibition of IFN production. These opposite effects are caused by
separate fungal components. Protease-dependent and -independent mechanisms appear
to be involved. Thus, Alt exposure alters the airway epithelial immunity to viral
infection by shifting toward more inflammatory but less antiviral responses.

PMCID: PMC4068913
PMID: 24428709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Virus Res. 2014 Jul 17;187:65-71. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2013.12.041. Epub 2014 
Jan 8.

Hantavirus interferon regulation and virulence determinants.

Mackow ER(1), Dalrymple NA(2), Cimica V(2), Matthys V(2), Gorbunova E(2),
Gavrilovskaya I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794-5122, United States. Electronic address:
Erich.Mackow@stonybrook.edu. (2)Department of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794-5122, United States.

Hantaviruses predominantly replicate in primary human endothelial cells and cause
2 diseases characterized by altered barrier functions of vascular endothelium.
Most hantaviruses restrict the early induction of interferon-ß (IFNß) and
interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) within human endothelial cells to permit their
successful replication. PHV fails to regulate IFN induction within human
endothelial cells which self-limits PHV replication and its potential as a human 
pathogen. These findings, and the altered regulation of endothelial cell barrier 
functions by pathogenic hantaviruses, suggest that virulence is determined by the
ability of hantaviruses to alter key signaling pathways within human endothelial 
cells. Our findings indicate that the Gn protein from ANDV, but not PHV, inhibits
TBK1 directed ISRE, kB and IFNß induction through virulence determinants in the
Gn cytoplasmic tail (GnT) that inhibit TBK1 directed IRF3 phosphorylation.
Further studies indicate that in response to hypoxia induced VEGF, ANDV infection
enhances the permeability and adherens junction internalization of microvascular 
and lymphatic endothelial cells. These hypoxia/VEGF directed responses are
rapamycin sensitive and directed by mTOR signaling pathways. These results
demonstrate the presence of at least two hantavirus virulence determinants that
act on endothelial cell signaling pathways: one that regulates antiviral IFN
signaling responses, and a second that enhances normal hypoxia-VEGF-mTOR
signaling pathways to facilitate endothelial cell permeability. These findings
suggest signaling pathways as potential targets for therapeutic regulation of
vascular deficits that contribute to hantavirus diseases and viral protein
targets for attenuating pathogenic hantaviruses.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4058395
PMID: 24412542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1003861. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003861. Epub
2014 Jan 2.

STING-dependent type I IFN production inhibits cell-mediated immunity to Listeria
monocytogenes.

Archer KA(1), Durack J(1), Portnoy DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, United States of America. (2)Department of Molecular and
Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United
States of America ; School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley, 
Berkeley, California, United States of America.

Infection with Listeria monocytogenes strains that enter the host cell cytosol
leads to a robust cytotoxic T cell response resulting in long-lived cell-mediated
immunity (CMI). Upon entry into the cytosol, L. monocytogenes secretes cyclic
diadenosine monophosphate (c-di-AMP) which activates the innate immune sensor
STING leading to the expression of IFN-ß and co-regulated genes. In this study,
we examined the role of STING in the development of protective CMI to L.
monocytogenes. Mice deficient for STING or its downstream effector IRF3
restricted a secondary lethal challenge with L. monocytogenes and exhibited
enhanced immunity that was MyD88-independent. Conversely, enhancing STING
activation during immunization by co-administration of c-di-AMP or by infection
with a L. monocytogenes mutant that secretes elevated levels of c-di-AMP resulted
in decreased protective immunity that was largely dependent on the type I
interferon receptor. These data suggest that L. monocytogenes activation of STING
downregulates CMI by induction of type I interferon.

PMCID: PMC3879373
PMID: 24391507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Immunol. 2014 Feb 1;192(3):1162-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300798. Epub 2014
Jan 3.

An alternative splicing isoform of MITA antagonizes MITA-mediated induction of
type I IFNs.

Chen H(1), Pei R, Zhu W, Zeng R, Wang Y, Wang Y, Lu M, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430071, China;

Mediator of IFN regulatory transcription factor 3 activation (MITA) is an
important adaptor protein to mediate the induction of type I IFNs. In this study,
we identified an alternatively spliced isoform of MITA lacking exon 7, termed
MITA-related protein (MRP). MRP shares the N-terminal portion aa 1-253 with MITA 
but possesses a unique 30-aa sequence at the carboxyl terminal part, therefore
lacking the conserved domains including TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and cyclic
diguanylate binding domain. MRP is expressed in multiple tissues and distinct
cell lines. Overexpression of MRP inhibited MITA-mediated activation of IFN-ß
promoter by sendai virus infection and cyclic diguanylate treatment but enhanced 
that in HSV-1 infection. Interestingly, MRP expression was reduced after Sendai
virus infection but was upregulated after HSV-1 infection. Overexpression of MRP 
inhibited MITA-mediated induction of IFN-ß via TBK1-IFN regulatory transcription 
factor 3 by disrupting the MITA-TBK1 interaction. However, NF-<U+03BA>B pathway was
still activated by MRP, as MRP retained the ability to interact with inducible
inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B (i<U+03BA>B) kinase. Thus, MRP acts as a dominant negative regulator 
of MITA-mediated induction of IFN production.

PMID: 24391220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Virol. 2014 Mar;88(6):3369-78. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02712-13. Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Enterovirus 2Apro targets MDA5 and MAVS in infected cells.

Feng Q(1), Langereis MA, Lork M, Nguyen M, Hato SV, Lanke K, Emdad L, Bhoopathi
P, Fisher PB, Lloyd RE, van Kuppeveld FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Division, Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Faculty
of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) MDA5 and RIG-I are key players in the innate
antiviral response. Upon recognition of viral RNA, they interact with MAVS,
eventually inducing type I interferon production. The interferon induction
pathway is commonly targeted by viruses. How enteroviruses suppress interferon
production is incompletely understood. MDA5 has been suggested to undergo
caspase- and proteasome-mediated degradation during poliovirus infection.
Additionally, MAVS is reported to be cleaved during infection with coxsackievirus
B3 (CVB3) by the CVB3 proteinase 3C(pro), whereas MAVS cleavage by enterovirus 71
has been attributed to 2A(pro). As yet, a detailed examination of the RLR pathway
as a whole during any enterovirus infection is lacking. We performed a
comprehensive analysis of crucial factors of the RLR pathway, including MDA5,
RIG-I, LGP2, MAVS, TBK1, and IRF3, during infection of CVB3, a human enterovirus 
B (HEV-B) species member. We show that CVB3 inhibits the RLR pathway upstream of 
TBK1 activation, as demonstrated by limited phosphorylation of TBK1 and a lack of
IRF3 phosphorylation. Furthermore, we show that MDA5, MAVS, and RIG-I all undergo
proteolytic degradation in CVB3-infected cells through a caspase- and
proteasome-independent manner. We convincingly show that MDA5 and MAVS cleavages 
are both mediated by CVB3 2A(pro), while RIG-I is cleaved by 3C(pro). Moreover,
we show that proteinases 2A(pro) and 3C(pro) of poliovirus (HEV-C) and
enterovirus 71 (HEV-A) exert the same functions. This study identifies a critical
role of 2A(pro) by cleaving MDA5 and MAVS and shows that enteroviruses use a
common strategy to counteract the interferon response in infected
cells.IMPORTANCE: Human enteroviruses (HEVs) are important pathogens that cause a
variety of diseases in humans, including poliomyelitis, hand, foot, and mouth
disease, viral meningitis, cardiomyopathy, and more. Like many other viruses,
enteroviruses target the host immune pathways to gain replication advantage. The 
MDA5/MAVS pathway is responsible for recognizing enterovirus infections in the
host cell and leads to expression of type I interferons (IFN-I), crucial
antiviral signaling molecules. Here we show that three species of HEVs all employ
the viral proteinase 2A (2A(pro)) to proteolytically target MDA5 and MAVS,
leading to an efficient blockade upstream of IFN-I transcription. These
observations suggest that MDA5/MAVS antagonization is an evolutionarily conserved
and beneficial mechanism of enteroviruses. Understanding the molecular mechanisms
of enterovirus immune evasion strategies will help to develop countermeasures to 
control infections with these viruses in the future.

PMCID: PMC3957915
PMID: 24390337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Virol. 2014 Mar;88(6):3392-410. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02723-13. Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Deletion of the vaccinia virus N2L gene encoding an inhibitor of IRF3 improves
the immunogenicity of modified vaccinia virus Ankara expressing HIV-1 antigens.

García-Arriaza J(1), Gómez CE, Sorzano CÓ, Esteban M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Madrid,
Spain.

A modified vaccinia virus Ankara poxvirus vector expressing the HIV-1 Env, Gag,
Pol, and Nef antigens from clade B (MVA-B) is currently being tested in clinical 
trials. To improve its immunogenicity, we have generated and characterized the
immune profile of MVA-B containing a deletion of the vaccinia viral gene N2L,
which codes for an inhibitor of IRF3 (MVA-B <U+0394>N2L). Deletion of N2L had no effect 
on virus growth kinetics or on the expression of HIV-1 antigens; hence, the N2
protein is not essential for MVA replication. The innate immune responses
triggered by MVA-B <U+0394>N2L revealed an increase in beta interferon, proinflammatory 
cytokines, and chemokines. Mouse prime-boost protocols showed that MVA-B <U+0394>N2L
improves the magnitude and polyfunctionality of HIV-1-specific CD4(+) and CD8(+) 
T cell adaptive and memory immune responses, with most of the HIV-1 responses
mediated by CD8(+) T cells. In the memory phase, HIV-1-specific CD8(+) T cells
with an effector phenotype were predominant and in a higher percentage with MVA-B
<U+0394>N2L than with MVA-B. In both immunization groups, CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cell
responses were directed mainly against Env. Furthermore, MVA-B <U+0394>N2L in the memory
phase enhanced levels of antibody against Env. For the vector immune responses,
MVA-B <U+0394>N2L induced a greater magnitude and polyfunctionality of VACV-specific
CD8(+) T memory cells than MVA-B, with an effector phenotype. These results
revealed the immunomodulatory role of N2L, whose deletion enhanced the innate
immunity and improved the magnitude and quality of HIV-1-specific T cell adaptive
and memory immune responses. These findings are relevant for the optimization of 
poxvirus vectors as vaccines.IMPORTANCE: On the basis of the limited efficacy of 
the RV144 phase III clinical trial, new optimized poxvirus vectors as vaccines
against HIV/AIDS are needed. Here we have generated and characterized a new
HIV/AIDS vaccine candidate on the basis of the poxvirus MVA vector expressing
HIV-1 Env, Gag, Pol, and Nef antigens (MVA-B) and containing a deletion in the
vaccinia virus N2L gene. Our findings revealed the immunomodulatory role of N2L
and proved that its deletion from the MVA-B vector triggered an enhanced innate
immune response in human macrophages and monocyte-derived dendritic cells.
Furthermore, in immunized mice, MVA-B <U+0394>N2L induced improvements in the magnitude 
and quality of adaptive and memory HIV-1-specific CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cell immune
responses, together with an increase in the memory phase of levels of antibody
against Env. Thus, the selective deletion of the N2L viral immunomodulatory gene 
is important for the optimization of MVA vectors as HIV-1 vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3957918
PMID: 24390336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(4):2246-59. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02647-13. Epub 2014 Jan 3.

Hantavirus GnT elements mediate TRAF3 binding and inhibit RIG-I/TBK1-directed
beta interferon transcription by blocking IRF3 phosphorylation.

Matthys VS(1), Cimica V, Dalrymple NA, Glennon NB, Bianco C, Mackow ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York, USA.

Hantaviruses successfully replicate in primary human endothelial cells by
restricting the early induction of beta interferon (IFN-ß) and
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). Gn proteins from NY-1V, ANDV, and TULV, but
not PHV, harbor elements in their 142-residue cytoplasmic tails (GnTs) that
inhibit RIG-I/MAVS/TBK1-TRAF3-directed IFN-ß induction. Here, we define GnT
interactions and residues required to inhibit TRAF3-TBK1-directed IFN-ß induction
and IRF3 phosphorylation. We observed that GnTs bind TRAF3 via residues within
the TRAF-N domain (residues 392 to 415) and that binding is independent of the
MAVS-interactive TRAF-C domain (residues 415 to 568). We determined that GnT
binding to TRAF3 is mediated by C-terminal degrons within NY-1V or ANDV GnTs and 
that mutations that add degrons to TULV or PHV GnTs confer TRAF3 binding. Further
analysis of GnT domains revealed that TRAF3 binding is a discrete GnT function,
independent of IFN regulation, and that residues 15 to 42 from the NY-1V GnT C
terminus are required for inhibiting TBK1-directed IFN-ß transcription.
Mutagenesis of the NY-1V GnT revealed that altering tyrosine 627 (Y627A/S/F)
abolished GnT regulation of RIG-I/TBK1-directed IRF3 phosphorylation and
transcriptional responses of ISRE, <U+03BA>B, and IFN-ß promoters. Moreover, GnTs from
NY-1V, ANDV, and TULV, but not PHV, inhibited RIG-I-directed IRF3
phosphorylation. Collectively, these findings suggest a novel role for GnTs in
regulating RIG-I/TBK1 pathway-directed IRF3 phosphorylation and IFN-ß induction
and define virulence determinants within GnTs that may permit the attenuation of 
pathogenic hantaviruses. IMPORTANCE These findings provide a mechanism for
selected hantavirus GnT interactions to regulate RIG-I/TBK1 signaling responses
required for IFN-ß induction by inhibiting TBK1 phosphorylation of IRF3. These
studies culminate in showing that a single GnT residue, Y627, is required for the
NY-1V GnT to inhibit RIG-I/TBK1-directed IRF3 phosphorylation and IFN-ß
induction. These findings define a potential virulence determinant within the
NY-1V GnT that may permit hantavirus attenuation.

PMCID: PMC3911538
PMID: 24390324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 21;289(8):5310-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.536102. Epub 2014
Jan 2.

Transcriptional regulation of IFN-<U+03BB> genes in hepatitis C virus-infected
hepatocytes via IRF-3·IRF-7·NF-<U+03BA>B complex.

Lee HC(1), Narayanan S, Park SJ, Seong SY, Hahn YS.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology, Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology
Research, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 25;289(17):11861.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in hepatocytes stimulates innate antiviral
responses including the production of type III interferons (IFN-<U+03BB>), including
IL-28A, IL-28B, and IL-29. However, the molecular mechanism(s) regulating the
expression of IFN-<U+03BB> genes in HCV-infected hepatocytes remains undefined. In this 
study, we examined regulatory elements involved in the induction of IFN-<U+03BB> genes
following HCV infection in hepatocytes and further determined the binding of
specific transcription factor(s) to promoter regions of IFN-<U+03BB> genes. Our studies 
reveal that the regulatory portion for IL-28A, IL-28B, and IL-29 genes is
localized to a 1-kb region in their respective promoters. Notably, interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and -7 are the key transcriptional factors for the
induction of IL-28A and IL-28B genes, whereas NF-<U+03BA>B is an additional requirement 
for the induction of the IL-29 gene. Ligation of Toll-like receptors (TLR) 3, 7, 
8, and 9, which also activate IRFs and NF-<U+03BA>B, resulted in more robust production 
of IFN-<U+03BB> than that observed with HCV infection, verifying the importance of TLR
pathways in IFN-<U+03BB> production. Furthermore, the addition of IFN-<U+03BB> to HCV-infected 
hepatocytes decreased viral replication and produced a concurrent reduction in
microRNA-122 (miR-122). The decrease in viral replication was enhanced by the
co-administration of IFN-<U+03BB> and miR-122 inhibitor (miRIDIAN), suggesting that such
combinatorial therapies may be beneficial for the treatment of chronic HCV
infection.

PMCID: PMC3931086
PMID: 24385435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 14;111(2):E265-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1314569111. Epub 2013 Dec 30.

Inhibition of interferon gene activation by death-effector domain-containing
proteins from the molluscum contagiosum virus.

Randall CM(1), Biswas S, Selen CV, Shisler JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois,
Urbana, IL 61801.

Apoptosis, NF-<U+03BA>B activation, and IRF3 activation are a triad of intrinsic immune 
responses that play crucial roles in the pathogenesis of infectious diseases,
cancer, and autoimmunity. FLIPs are a family of viral and cellular proteins
initially found to inhibit apoptosis and more recently to either up- or
down-regulate NF-<U+03BA>B. As such, a broad role for FLIPs in disease regulation is
postulated, but exactly how a FLIP performs such multifunctional roles remains to
be established. Here we examine FLIPs (MC159 and MC160) encoded by the molluscum 
contagiosum virus, a dermatotropic poxvirus causing skin infections common in
children and immunocompromised individuals, to better understand their roles in
viral pathogenesis. While studying their molecular mechanisms responsible for
NF-<U+03BA>B inhibition, we discovered that each protein inhibited IRF3-controlled
luciferase activity, identifying a unique function for FLIPs. MC159 and MC160
each inhibited TBK1 phosphorylation, confirming this unique function.
Surprisingly, MC159 coimmunoprecipitated with TBK1 and IKKe but MC160 did not,
suggesting that these homologs use distinct molecular mechanisms to inhibit IRF3 
activation. Equally surprising was the finding that the FLIP regions necessary
for TBK1 inhibition were distinct from those MC159 or MC160 regions previously
defined to inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B or apoptosis. These data reveal previously unappreciated
complexities of FLIPs, and that subtle differences within the conserved regions
of FLIPs possess distinct molecular and structural fingerprints that define
crucial differences in biological activities. A future comparison of mechanistic 
differences between viral FLIP proteins can provide new means of precisely
manipulating distinct aspects of intrinsic immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3896184
PMID: 24379396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Eur J Pharmacol. 2014 Feb 5;724:43-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.12.032. Epub
2013 Dec 27.

Candesartan and glycyrrhizin ameliorate ischemic brain damage through
downregulation of the TLR signaling cascade.

Barakat W(1), Safwet N(2), El-Maraghy NN(2), Zakaria MN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Zagazig
University, 44519 Zagazig, Egypt. Electronic address: waled055@yahoo.com.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Zagazig
University, 44519 Zagazig, Egypt.

Stroke is the second leading cause of death in industrialized countries and the
most frequent cause of permanent disability in adults worldwide. The final
outcome of stroke is determined not only by the volume of the ischemic core, but 
also by the extent of secondary brain damage inflicted to penumbral tissues by
brain swelling, impaired microcirculation, and inflammation. The only drug
approved for the treatment ischemic stroke is recombinant tissue plasminogen
activator (rt-PA). The current study was designed to investigate the protective
effects of candesartan (0.15 mg/kg, orally) and glycyrrhizin (30 mg/kg, orally)
experimentally-induced ischemic brain damage in C57BL/6 mice (middle cerebral
artery occlusion, MCAO) in comparison to the effects of a standard
neuroprotective drug (cerebrolysin, 7.5 mg/kg, IP). All drugs were administered
30 min before and 24h after MCAO. Both candesartan and glycyrrhizin ameliorated
the deleterious effects of MCAO as indicated by the improvement in the
performance of the animals in behaviour tests, reduction in brain infarction,
neuronal degeneration, and leukocyte infiltration. In addition, MCAO induced a
significant upregulation in the different elements of the TLR pathway including
TLR-2 and TLR-4, Myd88, TRIF and IRF-3 and the downstream effectors TNF-a, IL-1ß,
IL-6 and NF-kB. All these changes were significantly ameliorated by treatment
with candesartan and glycyrrhizin. The results of the current study represent a
new indication for both candesartan and glycyrrhizin in the management of
ischemic stroke with effects comparable to those of the standard neuroprotective 
drug cerebrolysin.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24378346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Methods Enzymol. 2014;535:371-87. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-397925-4.00021-3.

TSLP expression induced via Toll-like receptor pathways in human keratinocytes.

Takai T(1), Chen X(2), Xie Y(3), Vu AT(4), Le TA(5), Kinoshita H(6), Kawasaki
J(6), Kamijo S(7), Hara M(7), Ushio H(7), Baba T(8), Hiramatsu K(8), Ikeda S(6), 
Ogawa H(6), Okumura K(7).

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic address: t-takai@juntendo.ac.jp. (2)Atopy
(Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan; Department of Dermatology, Peking University People's Hospital,
Beijing, China. (3)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Dermatology, The 3rd Affiliated
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (4)Atopy (Allergy) Research
Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department
of Dermatology and Allergology, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan; Quyhoa National Leprosy-Dermatology Hospital, Quynhon, Vietnam.
(5)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Dermatology and Allergology, Juntendo
University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Dermatology
and Allergology, Institute of Clinical Medical and Pharmaceutical Sciences 108,
Hanoi, Vietnam. (6)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate 
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Dermatology and Allergology,
Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (7)Atopy (Allergy)
Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(8)Department of Microbiology and Infection Control Science, Juntendo University 
Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

The skin epidermis and mucosal epithelia (airway, ocular tissues, gut, and so on)
are located at the interface between the body and environment and have critical
roles in the response to various stimuli. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), a 
cytokine expressed mainly by epidermal keratinocytes (KCs) and mucosal epithelial
cells, is a critical factor linking the innate response at barrier surfaces to
Th2-skewed acquired immune response. TSLP is highly expressed in skin lesions of 
atopic dermatitis patients. Here, we describe on Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-mediated induction of TSLP expression in primary cultured human KCs,
placing emphasis on experimental methods used in our studies. Double-stranded RNA
(TLR3 ligand), flagellin (TLR5 ligand), and diacylated lipopeptide (TLR2-TLR6
ligand) stimulated human KCs to express TSLP and Staphylococcus aureus membranes 
did so via the TLR2-TLR6 pathway. Atopic cytokine milieu upregulated the
TLR-mediated induction of TSLP. Culturing in the absence of glucocorticoid before
stimulation enhanced the TSLP expression. Extracellular double-stranded RNA
induced TSLP via endosomal acidification- and NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent pathway. Specific
measurement of the long TSLP transcript, which contributes to the production of
the TSLP protein, rather than total or the short transcript is useful for
accurate detection of functional human TSLP gene expression. The results suggest 
that environment-, infection-, and/or self-derived TLR ligands contribute to the 
initiation and/or amplification of Th2-type skin inflammation including atopic
dermatitis and atopic march through the induction of TSLP expression in KCs and
include information helpful for understanding the role of the gene-environment
interaction relevant in allergic diseases.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24377934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Uirusu. 2014;64(1):83-94. doi: 10.2222/jsv.64.83.

[Innate immune DNA sensing pathways].

[Article in Japanese]

Abe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of System Biology, and Microbiology & Immunology, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032 USA.

How the cells triggers the induction of innate immune genes in response to
nucleic acids derived from microbes, such as DNA viruses, intracellular bacteria,
and parasites, or self DNA, has not been elucidated fully. We have previously
shown that an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated multiple transmembrane
protein, so-called STING (stimulator of interferon genes), functions as an
essential molecules for triggering DNA-mediated gene induction. STING may
directly associate with stimulatory ligands, which include DNA, as well as with
cyclic dinucleotides (CDNs), which are secreted by intracellular bacteria. After 
DNA or CDN stimulation, STING traffics with kinase TBK1 in an autophagic
signaling complex, from ER to perinuclear endosomal compartments harboring IRF3
and NF-<U+03BA>B. STING may involve in autoinflammatory disease manifested by aberrant
self-DNA. Understanding of STING function may conceivably lead to the development
of potent adjuvants for vaccine development or conversely therapeutics that could
control inflammation aggravated disease.

PMID: 25765984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Cancer Lett. 2014 Apr 28;346(1):122-8. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.12.022. Epub
2013 Dec 22.

Interferon response factor 3 is crucial to poly-I:C induced NK cell activity and 
control of B16 melanoma growth.

Moore TC(1), Kumm PM(2), Brown DM(3), Petro TM(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, United States. 
(2)Department of Oral Biology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, United
States. (3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, United 
States; Nebraska Center for Virology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, United
States. (4)Nebraska Center for Virology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, United
States; Department of Oral Biology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, United
States. Electronic address: tpetro@unmc.edu.

Interferon Response Factor 3 (IRF3) induces several NK-cell activating factors,
is activated by poly-I:C, an experimental cancer therapeutic, but is suppressed
during many viral infections. IRF3 Knockout (KO) mice exhibited enhanced B16
melanoma growth, impaired intratumoral NK cell infiltration, but not an impaired 
poly-I:C therapeutic effect due to direct suppression of B16 growth. IRF3 was
responsible for poly-I:C decrease in TIM-3 expression by intratumoral dendritic
cells, induction of NK-cell Granzyme B and IFN-<U+03B3>, and induction of macrophage
IL-12, IL-15, IL-6, and IRF3-dependent NK-activating molecule (INAM). Thus, IRF3 
is a key factor controlling melanoma growth through NK-cell activities,
especially during poly-I:C therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3963264
PMID: 24368188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Cell Res. 2014 Apr;24(4):400-16. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.170. Epub 2013 Dec 24.

USP3 inhibits type I interferon signaling by deubiquitinating RIG-I-like
receptors.

Cui J(1), Song Y(2), Li Y(3), Zhu Q(4), Tan P(3), Qin Y(5), Wang HY(4), Wang
RF(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, State Key 
Laboratory of Biocontrol, College of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510275, China [2] Center for Inflammation and Epigenetics, The
Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)1] Center for
Inflammation and Epigenetics, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston,
TX 77030, USA [2] Central Laboratory, The First Affiliated Hospital, Jilin
University, Changchun 130012, China. (3)1] Center for Inflammation and
Epigenetics, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA
[2] Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science 
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Center for Inflammation and Epigenetics, The
Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (5)Key Laboratory 
of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory of
Biocontrol, College of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275,
China.

Lysine 63 (K63)-linked ubiquitination of RIG-I plays a critical role in the
activation of type I interferon pathway, yet the molecular mechanism responsible 
for its deubiquitination is still poorly understood. Here we report that the
deubiquitination enzyme ubiquitin-specific protease 3 (USP3) negatively regulates
the activation of type I interferon signaling by targeting RIG-I. Knockdown of
USP3 specifically enhanced K63-linked ubiquitination of RIG-I, upregulated the
phosphorylation of IRF3 and augmented the production of type I interferon
cytokines and antiviral immunity. We further show that there is no interaction
between USP3 and RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) in unstimulated or uninfected cells,
but upon viral infection or ligand stimulation, USP3 binds to the caspase
activation recruitment domain of RLRs and then cleaves polyubiquitin chains
through cooperation of its zinc-finger Ub-binding domain and USP catalytic
domains. Mutation analysis reveals that binding of USP3 to polyubiquitin chains
on RIG-I is a prerequisite step for its cleavage of polyubiquitin chains. Our
findings identify a previously unrecognized role of USP3 in RIG-I activation and 
provide insights into the mechanisms by which USP3 inhibits RIG-I signaling and
antiviral immunity.

PMCID: PMC3975496
PMID: 24366338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Gen Virol. 2014 Mar;95(Pt 3):614-26. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.059014-0. Epub 2013 Dec
20.

Proteolytic processing, deubiquitinase and interferon antagonist activities of
Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus papain-like protease.

Yang X(1), Chen X, Bian G, Tu J, Xing Y, Wang Y, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infection and Immunity, Department of Electromagnetic and Laser
Biology, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, PR China.

The emerging Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) causes
severe pulmonary disease in humans and represents the second example of a highly 
pathogenic coronavirus (CoV) following severe acute respiratory syndrome
coronavirus (SARS-CoV). Genomic studies revealed that two viral proteases,
papain-like protease (PLpro) and 3C-like protease (3CLpro), process the
polyproteins encoded by the MERS-CoV genomic RNA. We previously reported that
SARS-CoV PLpro acts as both deubiquitinase (DUB) and IFN antagonist, but the
function of the MERS-CoV PLpro was poorly understood. In this study, we
characterized MERS-CoV PLpro, which is a protease and can recognize and process
the cleavage sites (CS) of nsp1-2, nsp2-3 and nsp3-4. The LXGG consensus cleavage
sites in the N terminus of pp1a/1ab, which is generally essential for CoV
PLpro-mediated processing, were also characterized in MERS-CoV. MERS-CoV PLpro,
like human SARS-CoV PLpro and NL63-CoV PLP2, is a viral deubiquitinating enzyme. 
It acts on both K48- and K63-linked ubiquitination and ISG15-linked ISGylation.
We confirmed that MERS-CoV PLpro acts as an IFN antagonist through blocking the
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3).
These findings indicate that MERS-CoV PLpro acts as a viral DUB and suppresses
production of IFN-ß by an interfering IRF3-mediated signalling pathway, in
addition to recognizing and processing the CS at the N terminus of replicase
polyprotein to release the non-structural proteins. The characterization of
proteolytic processing, DUB and IFN antagonist activities of MERS-CoV PLpro would
reveal the interactions between MERS-CoV and its host, and be applicable to
develop strategies targeting PLpro for the effective control of MERS-CoV
infection.

PMID: 24362959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Nat Med. 2014 Jan;20(1):47-53. doi: 10.1038/nm.3424. Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Host-cell sensors for Plasmodium activate innate immunity against liver-stage
infection.

Liehl P(1), Zuzarte-Luís V(1), Chan J(2), Zillinger T(3), Baptista F(1), Carapau 
D(1), Konert M(1), Hanson KK(1), Carret C(1), Lassnig C(4), Müller M(4), Kalinke 
U(5), Saeed M(6), Chora AF(1), Golenbock DT(7), Strobl B(4), Prudêncio M(1),
Coelho LP(1), Kappe SH(8), Superti-Furga G(9), Pichlmair A(9), Vigário AM(10),
Rice CM(6), Fitzgerald KA(7), Barchet W(11), Mota MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina Universidade de Lisboa,
Lisboa, Portugal. (2)1] Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases
and Immunology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, USA. [2]. (3)1] Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical
Pharmacology, University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. [2]. (4)Institute of
Animal Breeding and Genetics and Biomodels, Austria University of Veterinary
Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (5)Institute for Experimental Infection
Research, TWINCORE, Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research,
Hannover Medical School and Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Hannover,
Germany. (6)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Diseases, Center for the Study 
of Hepatitis C, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA. (9)CeMM
Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Vienna, Austria. (10)1] Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. [2] Unidade de Ciências Médicas, Centro
de compentência de ciências da vida, Universidade da Madeira, Funchal, Portugal. 
(11)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University
Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2014 Jan;20(1):17-9.

Before they infect red blood cells and cause malaria, Plasmodium parasites
undergo an obligate and clinically silent expansion phase in the liver that is
supposedly undetected by the host. Here, we demonstrate the engagement of a type 
I interferon (IFN) response during Plasmodium replication in the liver. We
identified Plasmodium RNA as a previously unrecognized pathogen-associated
molecular pattern (PAMP) capable of activating a type I IFN response via the
cytosolic pattern recognition receptor Mda5. This response, initiated by
liver-resident cells through the adaptor molecule for cytosolic RNA sensors,
Mavs, and the transcription factors Irf3 and Irf7, is propagated by hepatocytes
in an interferon-a/ß receptor-dependent manner. This signaling pathway is
critical for immune cell-mediated host resistance to liver-stage Plasmodium
infection, which we find can be primed with other PAMPs, including hepatitis C
virus RNA. Together, our results show that the liver has sensor mechanisms for
Plasmodium that mediate a functional antiparasite response driven by type I IFN.

PMCID: PMC4096771
PMID: 24362933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Gene. 2014 Feb 25;536(2):326-31. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.12.004. Epub 2013 Dec
18.

Arsenic programmes cellular genomic-immunity through miR-2909 RNomics.

Kaul D(1), Sharma S(2), Sharma M(2), Arora M(2), Arora M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine & Biotechnology, Post-graduate Institute
of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh 160012, India. Electronic address:
dkaul_24@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Experimental Medicine & Biotechnology,
Post-graduate Institute of Medical Education & Research, Chandigarh 160012,
India.

It is widely recognized that human cells are equipped with innate antiviral-RNA
armour involving the production of type I interferons and APOBEC3G
(apolipoprotein B mRNA-editing, enzyme-catalytic, polypeptide-like 3G)
gene-product. Although arsenic has been shown to have paradoxical effect on one
arm of this armour involving APOBEC3G, the exact molecular mechanism of its
action in this regard is far from clear. The present study, addressed to explore 
as to how arsenic programmes this innate antiviral-RNA cellular-sensing pathway, 
clearly revealed that arsenic programmes this innate cellular antiviral genomic
response through its inherent capacity to initiate cellular miR-2909 RNomics
pathway, involving not only the modulation of APOBEC3G gene but also KLF4
(Kruppel-like factor 4) dependent regulation of gene coding for IKBKe (Inhibitor 
of nuclear factor kappa-B kinase subunit epsilon) which in turn modulates RIG-I
(retinoic acid-inducible gene 1) pathway responsible for the production of IFNß
(interferon beta) through restriction of CYLD (Cylindromatosis) deubiqutinating
activity. This restricted inhibitory enzyme activity of CYLD upon NFkB (nuclear
factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells) also ensures sustained
expression of miR-2909. Our results for the first time show that cellular
miR-2909 RNomics may constitute an innate genomic armour to promote as well as
restrict retroviral infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24361962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 9;8(12):e83639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083639. eCollection
2013.

Cell type-specific subcellular localization of phospho-TBK1 in response to
cytoplasmic viral DNA.

Suzuki T(1), Oshiumi H(1), Miyashita M(1), Aly HH(1), Matsumoto M(1), Seya T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Hokkaido, Japan.

Cytoplasmic viral RNA and DNA are recognized by RIG-I-like receptors and DNA
sensors that include DAI, IFI16, DDX41, and cGAS. The RNA and DNA sensors evoke
innate immune responses through the IPS-1 and STING adaptors. IPS-1 and STING
activate TBK1 kinase. TBK1 is phosphorylated in its activation loop, leading to
IRF3/7 activation and Type I interferon (IFN) production. IPS-1 and STING
localize to the mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, respectively, whereas it 
is unclear where phosphorylated TBK1 is localized in response to cytoplasmic
viral DNA. Here, we investigated phospho-TBK1 (p-TBK1) subcellular localization
using a p-TBK1-specific antibody. Stimulation with vertebrate DNA by transfection
increased p-TBK1 levels. Interestingly, stimulation-induced p-TBK1 exhibited
mitochondrial localization in HeLa and HepG2 cells and colocalized with
mitochondrial IPS-1 and MFN-1. Hepatitis B virus DNA stimulation or herpes
simplex virus type-1 infection also induced p-TBK1 mitochondrial localization in 
HeLa cells, indicating that cytoplasmic viral DNA induces p-TBK1 mitochondrial
localization in HeLa cells. In contrast, p-TBK1 did not show mitochondrial
localization in RAW264.7, L929, or T-23 cells, and most of p-TBK1 colocalized
with STING in response to cytoplasmic DNA in those mammalian cells, indicating
cell type-specific localization of p-TBK1 in response to cytoplasmic viral DNA. A
previous knockout study showed that mouse IPS-1 was dispensable for Type I IFN
production in response to cytoplasmic DNA. However, we found that knockdown of
IPS-1 markedly reduced p-TBK1 levels in HeLa cells. Taken together, our data
elucidated the cell type-specific subcellular localization of p-TBK1 and a cell
type-specific role of IPS-1 in TBK1 activation in response to cytoplasmic viral
DNA.

PMCID: PMC3857317
PMID: 24349538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Dec 12;4:e967. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.504.

Functional RIG-I-like receptors control the survival of mesenchymal stem cells.

Yang K(1), Wang J(1), Xiang AP(2), Zhan X(1), Wang Y(1), Wu M(1), Huang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Immunology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Institute of Human 
Virology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China [2] Key Laboratory of
Tropical Diseases Control (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education,
Guangzhou 510080, China. (2)Center for Stem Cell Biology and Tissue Engineering, 
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510080, China. (3)1] Department of Immunology, 
Zhongshan School of Medicine, Institute of Human Virology, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China [2] Key Laboratory of Tropical Diseases
Control (Sun Yat-sen University), Ministry of Education, Guangzhou 510080, China 
[3] State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060, China.

Because of their potent regenerative and immunomodulatory properties, mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs) have promising therapeutic benefits in clinical treatment of
inflammatory and infectious diseases. Recent studies suggest that many biological
activities of MSCs are largely determined by pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs), such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs). However, the role of PRRs in
regulating the survival of MSCs remains unknown. In the present study, we
examined the viability of MSCs after stimulation of distinct PRRs. Activation of 
TLRs by direct addition with their respective ligands showed no significant
effect on the survival of MSCs, whereas transfection with double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA) resulted in marked cell death in MSCs. Transfection of dsRNA upregulated 
cytosolic retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), including
RIG-I and melanoma differentiation-associated antigen 5 (MDA5). Moreover,
transfection of dsRNA activated downstream transcription factors interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), as well as induced the 
expression of interferon-ß (IFN-ß) and pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin 6
(IL-6) via RLR signaling. Furthermore, we found that transfection of dsRNA
triggered both extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic responses via RLRs. However,
ectopic expression of RIG-I or MDA5 was not sufficient to induce apoptosis of
MSCs without dsRNA transfection. Our study also revealed that I<U+03BA>B kinase a/ß
(IKKa/ß) was required for RLR-mediated apoptosis in MSCs, while TANK-binding
kinase 1 (TBK1)/IKK<U+025B> served a pro-survival role. Moreover, neither overexpression
of B-cell lymphoma 2 (Bcl2) nor neutralizing autocrined IFN-ß reduced
RLR-mediated apoptosis. In addition, autophagy was induced upon activation of
RLRs, however, blocking autophagy did not rescue MSCs from the dsRNA-induced cell
death. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to explore the role 
of RLRs in controlling the survival of MSCs, which may provide a clue to
understand the pathogenesis of viral infection in MSCs.

PMCID: PMC3877571
PMID: 24336087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(4):2268-78. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03278-13. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Primary macrophages rely on histone deacetylase 1 and 2 expression to induce type
I interferon in response to gammaherpesvirus infection.

Mounce BC(1), Mboko WP, Kanack AJ, Tarakanova VL.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 
Wisconsin, USA.

Type I interferon is induced shortly following viral infection and represents a
first line of host defense against a majority of viral pathogens. Not
surprisingly, both replication and latency of gammaherpesviruses, ubiquitous
cancer-associated pathogens, are attenuated by type I interferon, although the
mechanism of attenuation remains poorly characterized. Gammaherpesviruses also
target histone deacetylases (HDACs), a family of pleiotropic enzymes that modify 
gene expression and several cell signaling pathways. Specifically, we have
previously shown that a conserved gammaherpesvirus protein kinase interacts with 
HDAC1 and -2 to promote gammaherpesvirus replication in primary macrophages. In
the current study, we have used genetic approaches to show that expression of
HDAC1 and -2 is critical for induction of a type I interferon response following 
gammaherpesvirus infection of primary macrophages. Specifically, expression of
HDAC1 and -2 was required for phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) and accumulation of IRF3 at the beta interferon promoter in
gammaherpesvirus-infected primary macrophages. To our knowledge, this is the
first demonstration of a specific role for HDAC1 and -2 in the induction of type 
I interferon responses in primary immune cells following virus infection.
Furthermore, because HDAC1 and -2 are overexpressed in several types of cancer,
our findings illuminate potential side effects of HDAC1- and -2-specific
inhibitors that are currently under development as cancer therapy agents.
IMPORTANCE Gammaherpesviruses establish chronic infection in a majority of the
adult population and are associated with several malignancies. Infected cells
counteract gammaherpesvirus infection via innate immune signaling mediated
primarily through type I interferon. The induction of type I interferon
expression proceeds through several stages using molecular mechanisms that are
still incompletely characterized. In this study, we show that expression of HDAC1
and -2 by macrophages is required to mount a type I interferon response to
incoming gammaherpesvirus. The involvement of HDAC1 and -2 in the type I
interferon response highlights the pleiotropic roles of these enzymes in cellular
signaling. Interestingly, HDAC1 and -2 are deregulated in cancer and are
attractive targets of new cancer therapies. Due to the ubiquitous and chronic
nature of gammaherpesvirus infection, the role of HDAC1 and -2 in the induction
of type I interferon responses should be considered during the clinical
development of HDAC1- and -2-specific inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3911555
PMID: 24335310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(4):2157-67. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03055-13. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Innate immune response induced by baculovirus attenuates transgene expression in 
mammalian cells.

Ono C(1), Ninomiya A, Yamamoto S, Abe T, Wen X, Fukuhara T, Sasai M, Yamamoto M, 
Saitoh T, Satoh T, Kawai T, Ishii KJ, Akira S, Okamoto T, Matsuura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

The baculovirus Autographa californica nucleopolyhedrovirus (AcNPV) has been
widely used to achieve a high level of foreign gene expression in insect cells,
as well as for efficient gene transduction into mammalian cells without any
replication. In addition to permitting efficient gene delivery, baculovirus has
been shown to induce host innate immune responses in various mammalian cells and 
in mice. In this study, we examined the effects of the innate immune responses on
gene expression by recombinant baculoviruses in cultured cells. The reporter gene
expression in IRF3-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) infected with the
recombinant baculovirus was shown to be enhanced in accordance with the
suppression of beta interferon (IFN-ß) production. Furthermore, efficient gene
transduction by the recombinant baculovirus was achieved in MEFs deficient for
stimulator of interferon genes (STING), TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1), IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), or IFN-ß promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), but not in
those deficient for IRF7, MyD88, or Z-DNA binding protein 1 (ZBP1)/DAI.
Enhancement of gene expression by the recombinant baculovirus was also observed
in human hepatoma cell lines replicating hepatitis C virus (HCV), in which innate
immunity was impaired by the cleavage of IPS-1 by the viral protease. In
addition, infection with the recombinant baculovirus expressing the BH3-only
protein, BIMS, a potent inducer of apoptosis, resulted in a selective cell death 
in the HCV replicon cells. These results indicate that innate immune responses
induced by infection with baculovirus attenuate transgene expression, and this
characteristic might be useful for a selective gene transduction into cells with 
impaired innate immunity arising from infection with various viruses.

PMCID: PMC3911546
PMID: 24335288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Virol. 2014 Mar;88(6):3067-76. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03510-13. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Evasion of antiviral immunity through sequestering of TBK1/IKKe/IRF3 into viral
inclusion bodies.

Wu X(1), Qi X, Qu B, Zhang Z, Liang M, Li C, Cardona CJ, Li D, Xing Z.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School and State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

Cells are equipped with pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) such as the
Toll-like and RIG-I-like receptors that mount innate defenses against viruses.
However, viruses have evolved multiple strategies to evade or thwart host
antiviral responses. Viral inclusion bodies (IBs), which are accumulated
aggregates of viral proteins, are commonly formed during the replication of some 
viruses in infected cells, but their role in viral immune evasion has rarely been
explored. Severe fever with thrombocytopenia syndrome (SFTS) is an emerging
febrile illness caused by a novel phlebovirus in the Bunyaviridae. The SFTS viral
nonstructural protein NSs can suppress host beta interferon (IFN-ß) responses.
NSs can form IBs in infected and transfected cells. Through interaction with
tank-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), viral NSs was able to sequester the IKK complex,
including IKKe and IRF3, into IBs, although NSs did not interact with IKKe or
IRF3 directly. When cells were infected with influenza A virus, IRF3 was
phosphorylated and active phosphorylated IRF3 (p-IRF3) was translocated into the 
nucleus. In the presence of NSs, IRF3 could still be phosphorylated, but p-IRF3
was trapped in cytoplasmic IBs, resulting in reduced IFN-ß induction and enhanced
viral replication. Sequestration of the IKK complex and active IRF3 into viral
IBs through the interaction of NSs and TBK1 is a novel mechanism for viral
evasion of innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC3957960
PMID: 24335286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Mol Biol. 2014 Mar 20;426(6):1161-77. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.12.003. Epub 2013
Dec 8.

Innate antiviral immune signaling, viral evasion and modulation by HIV-1.

Rustagi A(1), Gale M Jr(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Immunology and Global Health, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA 98195-8059, USA. (2)Departments of Immunology and Global Health,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195-8059, USA. Electronic address:
mgale@uw.edu.

The intracellular innate antiviral response in human cells is an essential
component of immunity against virus infection. As obligate intracellular
parasites, all viruses must evade the actions of the host cell's innate immune
response in order to replicate and persist. Innate immunity is induced when
pathogen recognition receptors of the host cell sense viral products including
nucleic acid as "non-self". This process induces downstream signaling through
adaptor proteins to activate latent transcription factors that drive the
expression of genes encoding antiviral and immune modulatory effector proteins
that restrict virus replication and regulate adaptive immunity. The interferon
regulatory factors (IRFs) are transcription factors that play major roles in
innate immunity. In particular, IRF3 is activated in response to infection by a
range of viruses including RNA viruses, DNA viruses and retroviruses. Among these
viruses, human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) remains a major global
health problem mediating chronic infection in millions of people wherein recent
studies show that viral persistence is linked with the ability of the virus to
dysregulate and evade the innate immune response. In this review, we discuss
viral pathogen sensing, innate immune signaling pathways and effectors that
respond to viral infection, the role of IRF3 in these processes and how it is
regulated by pathogenic viruses. We present a contemporary overview of the
interplay between HIV-1 and innate immunity, with a focus on understanding how
innate immune control impacts infection outcome and disease.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 24326250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Immunol. 2014 Jan 1;192(1):492-502. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301812. Epub 2013
Dec 4.

MPYS/STING-mediated TNF-a, not type I IFN, is essential for the mucosal adjuvant 
activity of (3'-5')-cyclic-di-guanosine-monophosphate in vivo.

Blaauboer SM(1), Gabrielle VD, Jin L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology and Microbial Disease, Albany Medical College, Albany,
NY 12208.

The bacterial second messenger (3'-5')-cyclic-di-guanosine-monophosphate (CDG) is
a promising mucosal adjuvant candidate that activates balanced Th1/Th2/Th17
responses. We showed previously that CDG activates stimulator of IFN genes
(STING)-dependent IFN-I production in vitro. However, it is unknown whether STING
or IFN-I is required for the CDG adjuvant activity in vivo. In this study, we
show that STING(-/-) mice (Tmem173(<tm1Camb>)) do not produce Ag-specific Abs or 
Th1/Th2/Th17 cytokines during CDG/Ag immunization. Intranasal administration of
CDG did not induce TNF-a, IL-1ß, IL-6, IL-12, or MCP-1 production in STING(-/-)
mice. Surprisingly, we found that the cytokine and Ab responses were unaltered in
CDG/Ag-immunized IFNAR(-/-) mice. Instead, we found that CDG activates
STING-dependent, IFN-I-independent TNF-a production in vivo and in vitro.
Furthermore, using a TNFR1(-/-) mouse, we demonstrate that TNF-a signaling is
critical for CDG-induced Ag-specific Ab and Th1/Th2 cytokine production. This is 
distinct from STING-mediated DNA adjuvant activity, which requires IFN-I, but not
TNF-a, production. Finally, we found that CDG activates STING-dependent, but IRF3
stimulation-independent, NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Our results established an essential
role for STING-mediated TNF-a production in the mucosal adjuvant activity of CDG 
in vivo and revealed a novel IFN-I stimulation-independent STING-NF-<U+03BA>B-TNF-a
pathway.

PMID: 24307739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 17;289(3):1364-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.499194. Epub 2013 
Dec 2.

The small GTPase Arf6 is essential for the Tram/Trif pathway in TLR4 signaling.

Van Acker T(1), Eyckerman S, Vande Walle L, Gerlo S, Goethals M, Lamkanfi M,
Bovijn C, Tavernier J, Peelman F.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Protein Research, Cytokine Receptor Lab, VIB,
Ghent B-9000, Belgium.

Recognition of lipopolysaccharides (LPS) by Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) at the
plasma membrane triggers NF-<U+03BA>B activation through recruitment of the adaptor
proteins Mal and MyD88. Endocytosis of the activated TLR4 allows recruitment of
the adaptors Tram and Trif, leading to activation of the transcription factor
IRF3 and interferon production. The small GTPase ADP-ribosylation factor 6 (Arf6)
was shown to regulate the plasma membrane association of Mal. Here we demonstrate
that inhibition of Arf6 also markedly reduced LPS-induced cytokine production in 
Mal(-/-) mouse macrophages. In this article, we focus on a novel role for Arf6 in
the MyD88-independent TLR4 pathway. MyD88-independent IRF3 activation and
IRF3-dependent gene transcription were strictly dependent on Arf6. Arf6 was
involved in transport of Tram to the endocytic recycling compartment and
internalization of LPS, possibly explaining its requirement for LPS-induced IRF3 
activation. Together, these results show a critical role for Arf6 in regulating
Tram/Trif-dependent TLR4 signaling.

PMCID: PMC3894321
PMID: 24297182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;39(4):849-59. doi: 10.3233/JAD-131706.

Inflammatory and neurodegeneration markers during asymptomatic HSV-1
reactivation.

Martin C(1), Aguila B(1), Araya P(2), Vio K(2), Valdivia S(1), Zambrano A(3),
Concha MI(3), Otth C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Microbiología Clínica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Austral 
de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. (2)Instituto de Anatomía, Histología y Patología,
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile. (3)Instituto
de Bioquímica y Microbiología, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Austral de
Chile, Valdivia, Chile. (4)Instituto de Microbiología Clínica, Facultad de
Medicina, Universidad Austral de Chile, Valdivia, Chile Centro de Investigación
Sur-Austral en Enfermedades del Sistema Nervioso (CISNE), Universidad Austral de 
Chile, Valdivia, Chile.

BACKGROUND: Currently, it is unclear whether asymptomatic recurrent reactivations
of herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) occur in the central nervous systems of
infected people, and if these events could lead to a progressive deterioration of
neuronal function. In this context, HSV-1 constitutes an important candidate to
be included among the risk factors for the development of neuropathies associated
with chronic neuroinflammation.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess in vivo inflammatory and
neurodegenerative markers in the brain during productive and latent HSV-1
infection using a mouse model of herpes simplex encephalitis.
METHODS: Neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration markers were evaluated in mice
trigeminal ganglia and cerebral cortex during HSV-1 infection, by
immunohistochemistry, western blot, and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Neuronal ICP4 viral antigen expression indicative of a reactivation
episode during asymptomatic latency of HSV-1 infection in mice was accompanied by
upregulation of neuroinflammatory (toll-like receptor-4, interferon a/ß, and
p-IRF3) and early neurodegenerative markers (phospho-tau and TauC3).
CONCLUSIONS: HSV-1 reactivation from latency induced neuroinflammatory and
neurodegenerative markers in the brain of asymptomatic mice suggesting that
recurrent reactivations could be associated with cumulative neuronal
dysfunctions.

PMID: 24296813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Nature. 2014 Jan 30;505(7485):691-5. doi: 10.1038/nature12862. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

Pan-viral specificity of IFN-induced genes reveals new roles for cGAS in innate
immunity.

Schoggins JW(1), MacDuff DA(2), Imanaka N(3), Gainey MD(4), Shrestha B(5), Eitson
JL(6), Mar KB(6), Richardson RB(6), Ratushny AV(7), Litvak V(8), Dabelic R(9),
Manicassamy B(10), Aitchison JD(7), Aderem A(8), Elliott RM(11), García-Sastre
A(12), Racaniello V(9), Snijder EJ(13), Yokoyama WM(4), Diamond MS(14), Virgin
HW(2), Rice CM(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Disease, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, New York 10065, USA [2] Department of Microbiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA (J.W.S.); MRC-University of
Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, Scotland G61 1QH, UK (R.M.E.).
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA. (3)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious
Disease, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10065, USA.
(4)Rheumatology Division, Department of Medicine, and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110,
USA. (5)Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Medicine and Department of
Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA. (6)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA. (7)1] Seattle Biomedical
Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA [2] Institute for Systems
Biology, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA. (8)Seattle Biomedical Research
Institute, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA. (9)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA. (10)Department of
Microbiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. (11)1] School 
of Biology, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Scotland KY16 9ST, UK [2]
Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA (J.W.S.); MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus
Research, Glasgow, Scotland G61 1QH, UK (R.M.E.). (12)1] Department of
Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, 
USA [2] Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine 
at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA [3] Department of Medicine,
Division of Infectious Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, New York 10029, USA. (13)Department of Medical Microbiology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden 2300 RC, The Netherlands. (14)1] Department of 
Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA [2] Infectious Diseases Division, Department of Medicine and 
Department of Molecular Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2015 Sep 3;525(7567):144.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2014 Sep;60(3):1098-100.

The type I interferon (IFN) response protects cells from viral infection by
inducing hundreds of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), some of which encode
direct antiviral effectors. Recent screening studies have begun to catalogue ISGs
with antiviral activity against several RNA and DNA viruses. However, antiviral
ISG specificity across multiple distinct classes of viruses remains largely
unexplored. Here we used an ectopic expression assay to screen a library of more 
than 350 human ISGs for effects on 14 viruses representing 7 families and 11
genera. We show that 47 genes inhibit one or more viruses, and 25 genes enhance
virus infectivity. Comparative analysis reveals that the screened ISGs target
positive-sense single-stranded RNA viruses more effectively than negative-sense
single-stranded RNA viruses. Gene clustering highlights the cytosolic DNA sensor 
cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS, also known as MB21D1) as a gene whose expression
also broadly inhibits several RNA viruses. In vitro, lentiviral delivery of
enzymatically active cGAS triggers a STING-dependent, IRF3-mediated antiviral
program that functions independently of canonical IFN/STAT1 signalling. In vivo, 
genetic ablation of murine cGAS reveals its requirement in the antiviral response
to two DNA viruses, and an unappreciated contribution to the innate control of an
RNA virus. These studies uncover new paradigms for the preferential specificity
of IFN-mediated antiviral pathways spanning several virus families.

PMCID: PMC4077721
PMID: 24284630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(11):e1003773. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003773. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

Type I and type III interferons drive redundant amplification loops to induce a
transcriptional signature in influenza-infected airway epithelia.

Crotta S(1), Davidson S, Mahlakoiv T, Desmet CJ, Buckwalter MR, Albert ML,
Staeheli P, Wack A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunoregulation, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, London, United Kingdom.

Interferons (IFNs) are a group of cytokines with a well-established antiviral
function. They can be induced by viral infection, are secreted and bind to
specific receptors on the same or neighbouring cells to activate the expression
of hundreds of IFN stimulated genes (ISGs) with antiviral function. Type I IFN
has been known for more than half a century. However, more recently, type III IFN
(IFN<U+03BB>, IL-28/29) was shown to play a similar role and to be particularly
important at epithelial surfaces. Here we show that airway epithelia, the primary
target of influenza A virus, produce both IFN I and III upon infection, and that 
induction of both depends on the RIG-I/MAVS pathway. While IRF3 is generally
regarded as the transcription factor required for initiation of IFN transcription
and the so-called "priming loop", we find that IRF3 deficiency has little impact 
on IFN expression. In contrast, lack of IRF7 reduced IFN production
significantly, and only IRF3(-/-)IRF7(-/-) double deficiency completely abolished
it. The transcriptional response to influenza infection was largely dependent on 
IFNs, as it was reduced to a few upregulated genes in epithelia lacking receptors
for both type I and III IFN (IFNAR1(-/-)IL-28Ra(-/-)). Wild-type epithelia and
epithelia deficient in either the type I IFN receptor or the type III IFN
receptor exhibit similar transcriptional profiles in response to virus,
indicating that none of the induced genes depends selectively on only one IFN
system. In chimeric mice, the lack of both IFN I and III signalling in the
stromal compartment alone significantly increased the susceptibility to influenza
infection. In conclusion, virus infection of airway epithelia induces, via a
RIG-I/MAVS/IRF7 dependent pathway, both type I and III IFNs which drive two
completely overlapping and redundant amplification loops to upregulate ISGs and
protect from influenza infection.

PMCID: PMC3836735
PMID: 24278020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 3;289(1):299-311. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.519934. Epub 2013
Nov 25.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated licensing of interferon regulatory
factor 3/7 reinforces the cell response to virus.

Schmid S(1), Sachs D, tenOever BR.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Microbiology and.

The induction of the intrinsic antiviral defense in mammals relies on the
accumulation of foreign genetic material. As such, complete engagement of this
response is limited to replication-competent viruses. Interferon regulatory
factors (IRFs) are mediators of this defense with shared enhancer elements but
display a spectrum of transcriptional potential. Here we describe a mechanism
designed to enhance this response should a pathogen not be successfully
inhibited. We find that activation of IRF7 results in the induction of MAP3K8 and
restructuring of the antiviral transcriptome. MAP3K8 mediates the phosphorylation
and repression of IRF3 homodimers to promote greater transcriptional activity
through utilization of IRF3:IRF7 heterodimers. Among the genes influenced by the 
MAP3K8/IRF7 signaling axis are members of the SP100 gene family that serve as
general transcriptional enhancers of the antiviral defense. We propose that this 
feed forward loop serves to reinforce the cellular response and is reserved for
imminent threats to the host.

PMCID: PMC3879553
PMID: 24275658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 10;289(2):1174-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.523167. Epub 2013 
Nov 25.

CD14 mediates Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) endocytosis and spleen tyrosine kinase 
(Syk) and interferon regulatory transcription factor 3 (IRF3) activation in
epithelial cells and impairs neutrophil infiltration and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
killing in vivo.

Roy S(1), Karmakar M, Pearlman E.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio 44095.

In the current study, we examined the role of CD14 in regulating LPS activation
of corneal epithelial cells and Pseudomonas aeruginosa corneal infection. Our
findings demonstrate that LPS induces Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) internalization
in corneal epithelial cells and that blocking with anti-CD14 selectively inhibits
TLR4 endocytosis, spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) and IRF3 phosphorylation, and
production of CCL5/RANTES and IFN-ß, but not IL-8. Using a murine model of P.
aeruginosa corneal infection, we show that although infected CD14(-/-) corneas
produce less CCL5, they exhibit significantly increased CXC chemokine production,
neutrophil recruitment to the corneal stroma, and bacterial clearance than
C57BL/6 mice. We conclude that CD14 has a critical role in mediating TLR4
signaling through IRF3 in resident corneal epithelial cells and macrophages and
thereby modulates TLR4 cell surface activation of the MyD88/NF-<U+03BA>B/AP-1 pathway
and production of CXC chemokines and neutrophil infiltration to infected tissues.

PMCID: PMC3887184
PMID: 24275652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Nat Immunol. 2014 Jan;15(1):63-71. doi: 10.1038/ni.2766. Epub 2013 Nov 24.

GEF-H1 controls microtubule-dependent sensing of nucleic acids for antiviral host
defenses.

Chiang HS(1), Zhao Y(1), Song JH(2), Liu S(2), Wang N(3), Terhorst C(3), Sharpe
AH(4), Basavappa M(2), Jeffrey KL(2), Reinecker HC(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Gastrointestinal Unit and Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel
Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2]. (2)Gastrointestinal Unit and Center for the Study of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Division of Immunology, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center and Center for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (4)Department of
Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Detailed understanding of the signaling intermediates that confer the sensing of 
intracellular viral nucleic acids for induction of type I interferons is critical
for strategies to curtail viral mechanisms that impede innate immune defenses.
Here we show that the activation of the microtubule-associated guanine nucleotide
exchange factor GEF-H1, encoded by Arhgef2, is essential for sensing of foreign
RNA by RIG-I-like receptors. Activation of GEF-H1 controls RIG-I-dependent and
Mda5-dependent phosphorylation of IRF3 and induction of IFN-ß expression in
macrophages. Generation of Arhgef2(-/-) mice revealed a pronounced signaling
defect that prevented antiviral host responses to encephalomyocarditis virus and 
influenza A virus. Microtubule networks sequester GEF-H1 that upon activation is 
released to enable antiviral signaling by intracellular nucleic acid detection
pathways.

PMCID: PMC4066330
PMID: 24270516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 18;8(11):e80976. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080976.
eCollection 2013.

Ubiquitin-specific proteases 25 negatively regulates virus-induced type I
interferon signaling.

Zhong H(1), Wang D, Fang L, Zhang H, Luo R, Shang M, Ouyang C, Ouyang H, Chen H, 
Xiao S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China.

Ubiquitination and deubiquitination have emerged as critical regulatory processes
in the virus-triggered type I interferon (IFN) induction pathway. In this study, 
we carried out a targeted siRNA screen of 54 ubiquitin-specific proteases (USPs) 
and identified USP25 as a negative regulator of the virus-triggered type I IFN
signaling pathway. Overexpression of USP25 inhibited virus-induced activation of 
IFN-ß, interferon regulation factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B), 
as well as the phosphorylation of IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B subunit p65. Furthermore,
Knockdown of USP25 potentiated virus-induced induction of the IFN-ß. In addition,
detailed analysis demonstrated that USP25 cleaved lysine 48- and lysine 63-linked
polyubiquitin chains in vitro and in vivo, and its deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB) 
activity, were dependent on a cysteine residue (Cys178) and a histidine residue
(His607). USP25 mutants lacking DUB activity lost the ability to block
virus-induced type I IFN to some degree. Mechanistically, USP25 deubiquitinated
retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), tumornecrosis factor (TNF)
receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2), and TRAF6 to inhibit RIG-I-like
receptor-mediated IFN signaling. Our findings suggest that USP25 is a novel DUB
negatively regulating virus-induced type I IFN production.

PMCID: PMC3832446
PMID: 24260525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(3):1582-90. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02007-13. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Direct, interferon-independent activation of the CXCL10 promoter by NF-<U+03BA>B and
interferon regulatory factor 3 during hepatitis C virus infection.

Brownell J(1), Bruckner J, Wagoner J, Thomas E, Loo YM, Gale M Jr, Liang TJ,
Polyak SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of Washington, Harborview
Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection of hepatocytes leads to transcriptional
induction of the chemokine CXCL10, which is considered an interferon
(IFN)-stimulated gene. However, we have recently shown that IFNs are not required
for CXCL10 induction in hepatocytes during acute HCV infection. Since the CXCL10 
promoter contains binding sites for several proinflammatory transcription
factors, we investigated the contribution of these factors to CXCL10
transcriptional induction during HCV infection in vitro. Wild-type and mutant
CXCL10 promoter-luciferase reporter constructs were used to identify critical
sites of transcriptional regulation. The proximal IFN-stimulated response element
(ISRE) and NF-<U+03BA>B binding sites positively regulated CXCL10 transcription during
HCV infection as well as following exposure to poly(I·C) (a Toll-like receptor 3 
[TLR3] stimulus) and 5' poly(U) HCV RNA (a retinoic acid-inducible gene I [RIG-I]
stimulus) from two viral genotypes. Conversely, binding sites for AP-1 and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBP-ß) negatively regulated CXCL10 induction 
in response to TLR3 and RIG-I stimuli, while only C/EBP-ß negatively regulated
CXCL10 during HCV infection. We also demonstrated that interferon-regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3) is transiently recruited to the proximal ISRE during HCV
infection and localizes to the nucleus in HCV-infected primary human hepatocytes.
Furthermore, IRF3 activated the CXCL10 promoter independently of type I or type
III IFN signaling. The data indicate that sensing of HCV infection by RIG-I and
TLR3 leads to direct recruitment of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 to the CXCL10 promoter. Our
study expands upon current knowledge regarding the mechanisms of CXCL10 induction
in hepatocytes and lays the foundation for additional mechanistic studies that
further elucidate the combinatorial and synergistic aspects of immune signaling
pathways.

PMCID: PMC3911583
PMID: 24257594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Pharm. 2014 Jan 6;11(1):254-64. doi: 10.1021/mp400431f. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

Stability and immunogenicity properties of the gene-silencing polypurine reverse 
Hoogsteen hairpins.

Villalobos X(1), Rodríguez L, Prévot J, Oleaga C, Ciudad CJ, Noé V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona , Av. Diagonal 643, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Gene silencing by either small-interference RNAs (siRNA) or antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides (aODN) is widely used in biomedical research. However,
their use as therapeutic agents is hindered by two important limitations: their
low stability and the activation of the innate immune response. Recently, we
developed a new type of molecule to decrease gene expression named polypurine
reverse Hoogsteen hairpins (PPRHs) that bind to polypyrimidine targets in the
DNA. Herein, stability experiments performed in mouse, human, and fetal calf
serum and in PC3 cells revealed that the half-life of PPRHs is much longer than
that of siRNAs in all cases. Usage of PPRHs with a nicked-circular structure
increased the binding affinity to their target sequence and their half-life in
FCS when bound to the target. Regarding the innate immune response, we determined
that the levels of the transcription factors IRF3 and its phosphorylated form, as
well as NF-<U+03BA>B were increased by siRNAs and not by PPRHs; that the expression
levels of several proinflammatory cytokines including IL-6, TNF-a, IFN-a, IFN-ß, 
IL-1ß, and IL-18 were not significantly increased by PPRHs; and that the cleavage
and activation of the proteolytic enzyme caspase-1 was not triggered by PPRHs.
These determinations indicated that PPRHs, unlike siRNAs, do not activate the
innate inflammatory response.

PMID: 24251728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Dec 3;110(49):19884-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1320145110. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Beneficial innate signaling interference for antibacterial responses by a
Toll-like receptor-mediated enhancement of the MKP-IRF3 axis.

Negishi H(1), Matsuki K, Endo N, Sarashina H, Miki S, Matsuda A, Fukazawa K,
Taguchi-Atarashi N, Ikushima H, Yanai H, Nishio J, Honda K, Fujioka Y, Ohba Y,
Noda T, Taniguchi S, Nishida E, Zhang Y, Chi H, Flavell RA, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Industrial Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan.

A major function of innate immune receptors is to recognize pathogen-associated
molecular patterns and then evoke immune responses appropriate to the nature of
the invading pathogen(s). Because innate immune cells express various types of
these receptors, distinct combinations of signaling pathways are activated in
response to a given pathogen. Although the conventional wisdom is that these
signaling pathways cooperate with one another to ensure an effective host
response, a more nuanced view recognizes antagonism between the individual
pathways, where the attenuation of a signaling pathway(s) by others may shape the
immune response. In this study, we show that, on Listeria monocytogenes
infection, Toll-like receptor-triggered MyD88 signaling pathways suppress type I 
IFN gene induction, which is detrimental to macrophage bactericidal activity.
These pathways target and suppress the IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
transcription factor that is activated by the stimulator of IFN
genes-TANK-binding kinase-1 kinase pathway. We also provide evidence for the
involvement of the MAPK phosphatase family members, which renders IRF3
hypophosphorylated on Toll-like receptor signaling by enhancing the formation of 
an MAPK phosphatase-IRF3-TANK-binding kinase-1 ternary complex. This study,
therefore, reveals a hitherto unrecognized and important contribution of a
beneficial innate signaling interference against bacterial infections.

PMCID: PMC3856811
PMID: 24248350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Immunol. 2013 Dec 15;191(12):6231-40. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301696. Epub 2013 
Nov 15.

Optineurin insufficiency impairs IRF3 but not NF-<U+03BA>B activation in immune cells.

Munitic I(1), Giardino Torchia ML, Meena NP, Zhu G, Li CC, Ashwell JD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immune Cell Biology, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Optineurin is a widely expressed polyubiquitin-binding protein that has been
implicated in regulating cell signaling via its NF-<U+03BA>B essential
modulator-homologous C-terminal ubiquitin (Ub)-binding region. Its functions are 
controversial, with in vitro studies finding that optineurin suppressed
TNF-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and virus-induced activation of IFN regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3), whereas bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) from mice
carrying an optineurin Ub-binding point mutation had normal TLR-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B
activation and diminished IRF3 activation. We have generated a mouse model in
which the entire Ub-binding C-terminal region is deleted (Optn(470T)). Akin to
C-terminal optineurin mutations found in patients with certain neurodegenerative 
diseases, Optn(470T) was expressed at substantially lower levels than the native 
protein, allowing assessment not only of the lack of Ub binding, but also of
protein insufficiency. Embryonic lethality with incomplete penetrance was
observed for 129 × C57BL/6 Optn(470T/470T) mice, but after further backcrossing
to C57BL/6, offspring viability was restored. Moreover, the mice that survived
were indistinguishable from wild type littermates and had normal immune cell
distributions. Activation of NF-<U+03BA>B in Optn(470T) BMDM and BM-derived dendritic
cells with TNF or via TLR4, T cells via the TCR, and B cells with LPS or
anti-CD40 was normal. In contrast, optineurin and/or its Ub-binding function was 
necessary for optimal TANK binding kinase 1 and IRF3 activation, and both
Optn(470T) BMDMs and bone marrow-derived dendritic cells had diminished IFN-ß
production upon LPS stimulation. Importantly, Optn(470T) mice produced less IFN-ß
upon LPS challenge. Therefore, endogenous optineurin is dispensable for NF-<U+03BA>B
activation but necessary for optimal IRF3 activation in immune cells.

PMCID: PMC3886234
PMID: 24244017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Feb;1842(2):144-53. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.11.006.
Epub 2013 Nov 13.

Antiviral signaling protein MITA acts as a tumor suppressor in breast cancer by
regulating NF-<U+03BA>B induced cell death.

Bhatelia K(1), Singh A(2), Tomar D(1), Singh K(1), Sripada L(1), Chagtoo M(2),
Prajapati P(1), Singh R(1), Godbole MM(2), Singh R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology,
Indian Institute of Advanced Research, Gandhinagar, India. (2)Deptartment of
Endocrinology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow 
226014, UP, India. (3)Department of Bio-Chemistry, The M. S. University of
Baroda, Vadodara 390005, Gujarat, India. Electronic address:
singhraj1975@gmail.com.

Emerging evidences suggest that chronic inflammation is one of the major causes
of tumorigenesis. The role of inflammation in regulation of breast cancer
progression is not well established. Recently Mediator of IRF3 Activation (MITA) 
protein has been identified that regulates NF-<U+03BA>B and IFN pathways. Role of MITA
in the context of inflammation and cancer progression has not been investigated. 
In the current report, we studied the role of MITA in the regulation of cross
talk between cell death and inflammation in breast cancer cells. The expression
of MITA was significantly lower on in estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast
cancer cells than ER negative cells. Similarly, it was significantly down
regulated in tumor tissue as compared to the normal tissue. The overexpression of
MITA in MCF-7 and T47D decreases the cell proliferation and increases the cell
death by activation of caspases. MITA positively regulates NF-<U+03BA>B transcription
factor, which is essential for MITA induced cell death. The activation of NF-<U+03BA>B
induces TNF-a production which further sensitizes MITA induced cell death by
activation of death receptor pathway through capsase-8. MITA expression decreases
the colony forming units and migration ability of MCF-7 cells. Thus, our finding 
suggests that MITA acts as a tumor suppressor which is down regulated during
tumorigenesis providing survival advantage to tumor cell.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24239807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Cell Host Microbe. 2013 Nov 13;14(5):591-9. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2013.10.007.

Human cytomegalovirus tegument protein pUL83 inhibits IFI16-mediated DNA sensing 
for immune evasion.

Li T(1), Chen J, Cristea IM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Washington Road,
Princeton, NJ 08544, USA.

Nuclear sensing of viral DNA has emerged as an essential step in innate immune
responses against herpesviruses. Here, we provide mechanistic insight into host
recognition of human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and subsequent immune evasion by this
prominent DNA virus. We establish that the interferon-inducible protein IFI16
acts as a nuclear DNA sensor following HCMV infection, binding viral DNA and
triggering expression of antiviral cytokines via the STING-TBK1-IRF3 signaling
pathway. The HCMV tegument protein pUL83 inhibits this response by interacting
with the IFI16 pyrin domain, blocking its oligomerization upon DNA sensing and
subsequent immune signals. pUL83 disrupts IFI16 by concerted action of its N- and
C-terminal domains, in which an evolutionarily conserved N-terminal pyrin
association domain (PAD) binds IFI16. Additionally, phosphorylation of the
N-terminal domain modulates pUL83-mediated inhibition of pyrin aggregation.
Collectively, our data elucidate the interplay between host DNA sensing and HCMV 
immune evasion, providing targets for restoring antiviral immunity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3876934
PMID: 24237704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Viral Immunol. 2013 Dec;26(6):366-77. doi: 10.1089/vim.2013.0016. Epub 2013 Nov
16.

Innate immune mechanisms in Japanese encephalitis virus infection: effect on
transcription of pattern recognition receptors in mouse neuronal cells and brain 
tissue.

Fadnis PR(1), Ravi V, Desai A, Turtle L, Solomon T.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Neurovirology, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro
Sciences (NIMHANS) , Bangalore, India .

Very little information is available on the role of innate immune mechanisms in
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) infection. This study was designed to
investigate the role of all Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs) in JEV infection
in a mouse neuronal cell line in comparison to events that occur in vivo, using
JEV infected suckling and adult mice. Analysis of mRNA expression was carried out
using RT-PCR for detection of PRR genes and their downstream pathway genes, while
a PCR array technique was used to examine the complete transcription analysis.
Amongst the various innate immune receptors, TLR3 gene exhibited differential
expression in JEV-infected Neuro2a, in suckling mice and adult mouse brain cells 
but not in uninfected control cells. The downstream events of TLR3 were confirmed
by increased mRNA expression of IRF3 and interferon-ß in JEV-infected Neuro2a
cells and suckling mice brain tissue. To confirm the functional significance of
this observation, TLR3 gene silencing experiments were carried using specific
siRNA in Neuro2a cells. The results revealed a significant enhancement of JEV
replication in TLR3 gene silenced JEV-infected Neuro2a cells, thereby suggesting 
that TLR3 serves a protective role against JEV. The expression levels of other
PRRs varied. JEV-infected adult mice showed significant upregulation of TLR2 and 
MDA5 as compared to JEV-infected suckling mice and Neuro2a cells. In addition,
upregulation of Myd88 and IRF7 was also noted in adult mice. These observations, 
coupled with the fact that adult mice infected with JEV exhibited longer survival
rates, suggests that the host antiviral TLR2 response seen in adult mice was
eventually countered by the virus by using MDA5 receptor. Our findings suggest
that different PRRs appear to be involved in JEV infection in Neuro2a cells and
brains of suckling and adult mice.

PMCID: PMC4649254
PMID: 24236856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Oncogenesis. 2013 Nov 11;2:e79. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2013.42.

Deregulated expression of TANK in glioblastomas triggers pro-tumorigenic ERK1/2
and AKT signaling pathways.

Stellzig J(1), Chariot A, Shostak K, Ismail Göktuna S, Renner F, Acker T,
Pagenstecher A, Schmitz ML.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Justus-Liebig-University, Medical Faculty,
Friedrichstraße 24, Gießen, Germany.

Signal transmission by the noncanonical IkappaB kinases (IKKs), TANK-binding
kinase 1 (TBK1) and IKK<U+025B>, requires interaction with adapter proteins such as TRAF
associated NF-<U+03BA>B activator (TANK). Although increased expression or dysregulation
of both kinases has been described for a variety of human cancers, this study
shows that deregulated expression of the TANK protein is frequently occurring in 
glioblastomas (GBMs). The functional relevance of TANK was analyzed in a panel of
GBM-derived cell lines and revealed that knockdown of TANK arrests cells in the
S-phase and prohibits tumor cell migration. Deregulated TANK expression affects
several signaling pathways controlling cell proliferation and the inflammatory
response. Interference with stoichiometrically assembled signaling complexes by
overexpression or silencing of TANK prevented constitutive interferon-regulatory 
factor 3 (IRF3) phosphorylation. Knockdown of TANK frequently prevents
constitutive activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2
(ERK1/2). TANK-mediated ERK1/2 activation is independent from the canonical MAP
kinase or ERK kinase (MEK) 1/2-mediated pathway and utilizes an alternative
pathway that uses a TBK1/IKK<U+025B>/Akt signaling axis, thus identifying a novel
pathway suitable to block constitutive ERK1/2 activity.

PMCID: PMC3849693
PMID: 24217713  [PubMed]


421. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 21;8(10):e77846. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077846.
eCollection 2013.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms of human STING can affect innate immune response 
to cyclic dinucleotides.

Yi G(1), Brendel VP, Shu C, Li P, Palanathan S, Cheng Kao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Indiana University,
Bloomington, Indiana, United States of America.

The STING (stimulator of interferon genes) protein can bind cyclic dinucleotides 
to activate the production of type I interferons and inflammatory cytokines. The 
cyclic dinucleotides can be bacterial second messengers c-di-GMP and c-di-AMP,
3'5'-3'5' cyclic GMP-AMP (3'3' cGAMP) produced by Vibrio cholerae and metazoan
second messenger 2'5'-3'5' Cyclic GMP-AMP (2'3' cGAMP). Analysis of single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data from the 1000 Genome Project revealed that
R71H-G230A-R293Q (HAQ) occurs in 20.4%, R232H in 13.7%, G230A-R293Q (AQ) in 5.2%,
and R293Q in 1.5% of human population. In the absence of exogenous ligands, the
R232H, R293Q and AQ SNPs had only modest effect on the stimulation of IFN-ß and
NF-<U+03BA>B promoter activities in HEK293T cells, while HAQ had significantly lower
intrinsic activity. The decrease was primarily due to the R71H substitution. The 
SNPs also affected the response to the cyclic dinucleotides. In the presence of
c-di-GMP, the R232H variant partially decreased the ability to activate
IFN-ßsignaling, while it was defective for the response to c-di-AMP and 3'3'
cGAMP. The R293Q dramatically decreased the stimulatory response to all bacterial
ligands. Surprisingly, the AQ and HAQ variants maintained partial abilities to
activate the IFN-ß signaling in the presence of ligands due primarily to the
G230A substitution. Biochemical analysis revealed that the recombinant G230A
protein could affect the conformation of the C-terminal domain of STING and the
binding to c-di-GMP. Comparison of G230A structure with that of WT revealed that 
the conformation of the lid region that clamps onto the c-di-GMP was
significantly altered. These results suggest that hSTING variation can affect
innate immune signaling and that the common HAQ haplotype expresses a STING
protein with reduced intrinsic signaling activity but retained the ability to
response to bacterial cyclic dinucleotides.

PMCID: PMC3804601
PMID: 24204993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Oct;9(10):e1003703. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003703. Epub
2013 Oct 31.

Defective viral genomes arising in vivo provide critical danger signals for the
triggering of lung antiviral immunity.

Tapia K(1), Kim WK, Sun Y, Mercado-López X, Dunay E, Wise M, Adu M, López CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The innate immune response to viruses is initiated when specialized cellular
sensors recognize viral danger signals. Here we show that truncated forms of
viral genomes that accumulate in infected cells potently trigger the sustained
activation of the transcription factors IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B and the production type I 
IFNs through a mechanism independent of IFN signaling. We demonstrate that these 
defective viral genomes (DVGs) are generated naturally during respiratory
infections in vivo even in mice lacking the type I IFN receptor, and their
appearance coincides with the production of cytokines during infections with
Sendai virus (SeV) or influenza virus. Remarkably, the hallmark antiviral
cytokine IFNß is only expressed in lung epithelial cells containing DVGs, while
cells within the lung that contain standard viral genomes alone do not express
this cytokine. Together, our data indicate that DVGs generated during viral
replication are a primary source of danger signals for the initiation of the host
immune response to infection.

PMCID: PMC3814336
PMID: 24204261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Virol. 2014 Jan;88(2):974-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02702-13. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

Adenovirus detection by the cGAS/STING/TBK1 DNA sensing cascade.

Lam E(1), Stein S, Falck-Pedersen E.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Molecular Biology Graduate Program, New York, New York, USA.

Adenovirus (Ad) infection triggers a cell-specific antiviral response following
exposure of viral DNA to the intracellular compartment. A variety of DNA sensors 
(DAI, AIM2, DDx41, RNA polymerase [Pol] III, and IFI16 [p204]) have been
identified in recent years; however, the DNA sensor involved in detection of
adenovirus has not been established. Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS), a DNA sensor
that produces a cyclic guanine-adenine dinucleotide (cGAMP) inducer of STING, has
been examined to determine its role in generating an antiadenoviral response.
Short hairpin RNA (shRNA) lentiviral vectors targeting TBK1, STING, and cGAS were
established in murine MS1 endothelial and RAW 264.7 macrophage cell lines.
Knockdown of TBK1, STING, and cGAS results in a dramatic reduction in the
activation of the primary antiviral response marker phosphorylated interferon
(IFN) response factor 3 (IRF3) following exposure to adenovirus. Furthermore,
activation of secondary type I IFN signaling targets ((ptyr)STAT1 and (ptyr)STAT2
[(ptyr)STAT1/2]) was also compromised. Consistent with compromised activation of 
primary and secondary response markers, transcriptional activation of
IRF3-responsive genes (beta IFN [IFN-ß], ISG15, ISG54) and secondary response
transcripts were diminished in cells knocked down in cGAS, STING, or TBK1. These 
data establish cGAS as the dominant cytosolic DNA sensor responsible for
detection of internalized adenovirus leading to induction of the type I
interferon antiviral cascade.

PMCID: PMC3911663
PMID: 24198409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Immunol. 2013 Dec 15;191(12):6101-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300849. Epub 2013
Nov 6.

An alanine-to-proline mutation in the BB-loop of TLR3 Toll/IL-1R domain switches 
signalling adaptor specificity from TRIF to MyD88.

Verstak B(1), Arnot CJ, Gay NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1GA, United
Kingdom.

A functionally important proline residue is highly conserved in the cytosolic
Toll/IL-1R signaling domains of human TLRs. The antiviral Toll, TLR3, is unusual 
because it has alanine instead of proline at this position and is the only human 
TLR that associates directly with the adaptor molecule TIR domain-containing
adaptor inducing IFN-ß (TRIF) rather than MyD88. In this article, we report that 
a mutant TLR3 that substitutes the BB-loop alanine for proline (A795P) enhances
NF-<U+03BA>B activation but is incapable of mediating TRIF-dependent IFN response factor
3 responses. Wild-type and A795P TLR3 associate constitutively with both TRIF and
MyD88, and activation induces additional binding of TRIF to the wild-type and of 
MyD88 to the A795P mutant receptors, respectively. In addition, activation of
A795P, but not wild-type TLR3, leads to the recruitment of TRAF6, a downstream
signal transducer of the MyD88-dependent pathway. These results show that adaptor
specificity can be conferred by minimal determinants of the Toll/IL-1R domain.

PMCID: PMC3858240
PMID: 24198284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Nature. 2013 Nov 21;503(7476):402-5. doi: 10.1038/nature12769. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

HIV-1 evades innate immune recognition through specific cofactor recruitment.

Rasaiyaah J(1), Tan CP, Fletcher AJ, Price AJ, Blondeau C, Hilditch L, Jacques
DA, Selwood DL, James LC, Noursadeghi M, Towers GJ.

Author information: 
(1)University College London, Medical Research Council Centre for Medical
Molecular Virology, Division of Infection and Immunity, University College
London, 90 Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2013 Nov 21;503(7476):352-3.

Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 is able to replicate in primary human
macrophages without stimulating innate immunity despite reverse transcription of 
genomic RNA into double-stranded DNA, an activity that might be expected to
trigger innate pattern recognition receptors. We reasoned that if correctly
orchestrated HIV-1 uncoating and nuclear entry is important for evasion of innate
sensors then manipulation of specific interactions between HIV-1 capsid and host 
factors that putatively regulate these processes should trigger pattern
recognition receptors and stimulate type 1 interferon (IFN) secretion. Here we
show that HIV-1 capsid mutants N74D and P90A, which are impaired for interaction 
with cofactors cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor subunit 6 (CPSF6) 
and cyclophilins (Nup358 and CypA), respectively, cannot replicate in primary
human monocyte-derived macrophages because they trigger innate sensors leading to
nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3, the production of soluble type 1 IFN and
induction of an antiviral state. Depletion of CPSF6 with short hairpin RNA
expression allows wild-type virus to trigger innate sensors and IFN production.
In each case, suppressed replication is rescued by IFN-receptor blockade,
demonstrating a role for IFN in restriction. IFN production is dependent on viral
reverse transcription but not integration, indicating that a viral reverse
transcription product comprises the HIV-1 pathogen-associated molecular pattern. 
Finally, we show that we can pharmacologically induce wild-type HIV-1 infection
to stimulate IFN secretion and an antiviral state using a non-immunosuppressive
cyclosporine analogue. We conclude that HIV-1 has evolved to use CPSF6 and
cyclophilins to cloak its replication, allowing evasion of innate immune sensors 
and induction of a cell-autonomous innate immune response in primary human
macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3928559
PMID: 24196705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Autoimmun Rev. 2014 Mar;13(3):266-71. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2013.10.011. Epub
2013 Nov 1.

The role of PTPN22 in autoimmunity: learning from mice.

Zheng J(1), Petersen F(2), Yu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Autoimmunity, The Medical College of Xiamen University, Xiamen
University, 361005 Xiamen, China. (2)Priority Area Asthma and Allergy, Research
Center Borstel, 23845, Borstel, Germany. (3)Laboratory of Autoimmunity, The
Medical College of Xiamen University, Xiamen University, 361005 Xiamen, China;
Priority Area Asthma and Allergy, Research Center Borstel, 23845, Borstel,
Germany. Electronic address: xinhuayu@fz-borstel.de.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor 22 (PTPN22) represents a strong
susceptibility gene which is shared by many autoimmune diseases. Exploring the
mechanism behind this association could help to understand their pathogenesis as 
well as to identify novel therapeutical targets. Recently, multiple mouse models 
including knock-out, knock-in, knock-down and transgenic mice were generated to
delineate PTPN22s function in this context. Depending on the genetic background, 
mouse PTPN22_619W mutation results in spontaneous autoimmunity, essentially
replicating the risk effect of the PTPN22_620W in human autoimmune diseases.
Furthermore, findings from mouse models shed new light on both cellular as well
as molecular mechanisms of the effect of PTPN22 on adaptive and innate immunity. 
Here we review recently emerged evidence of the interconnection between mouse
PTPN22 and autoimmunity. We also discuss the consistence and discrepancy between 
findings derived from human and mouse studies.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24189282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Nat Immunol. 2013 Dec;14(12):1237-46. doi: 10.1038/ni.2756. Epub 2013 Nov 3.

ELF4 is critical for induction of type I interferon and the host antiviral
response.

You F(1), Wang P, Yang L, Yang G, Zhao YO, Qian F, Walker W, Sutton R, Montgomery
R, Lin R, Iwasaki A, Fikrig E.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 May;11(3):218-20.

Induction of type I interferon is a central event of innate immunity, essential
for host defense. Here we report that the transcription factor ELF4 is induced by
type I interferon and upregulates interferon expression in a feed-forward loop.
ELF4 deficiency leads to reduced interferon production, resulting in enhanced
susceptibility to West Nile virus encephalitis in mice. After viral infection,
ELF4 is recruited by STING, interacts with and is activated by the MAVS-TBK1
complex, and translocates into the nucleus to bind interferon promoters.
Cooperative binding with ELF4 increases the binding affinity of interferon
regulatory factors IRF3 and IRF7, which is mediated by EICE elements. Thus, in
addition to identifying a regulator of innate immune signaling, we uncovered a
role for EICE elements in interferon transactivation.

PMCID: PMC3939855
PMID: 24185615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Curr Med Chem. 2014;21(8):1050-60.

Stimulation of DDX3 expression by ginsenoside Rg3 through the Akt/p53 pathway
activates the innate immune response via TBK1/IKKe/IRF3 signalling.

Choi YJ, Kang LJ, Lee SG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757,
Korea. sglee3@chonnam.ac.kr.

DEAD-box RNA helicase DDX3 is a well-known host factor that inhibits hepatitis B 
viral proliferation and boosts innate immune responses via TANK-binding kinase 1 
(TBK1)/IKKe-mediated and/or interferon (IFN)-ß promoter stimulator-1
(IPS-1)-mediated IFN-ß induction. Previously, we demonstrated the anti-hepatitis 
B activity of Rg3 via stimulation of TRAF6/TAK1 degradation and inhibition of
JNK/AP-1 signaling. To determine the effects of Rg3 on innate immunity, an IFN-ß 
promoter assay was performed. Rg3 ameliorated IFN-ß expression via upregulation
of both the TBK1/IKKe pathway and DDX3 expression. In addition, Rg3 induced the
phosphorylation of IRF3 and its translocation into nucleus, which is a key
molecule to induction of IFN-ß expression. To evaluate the molecular mechanism of
Rg3 on DDX3 expression, the DDX3 promoter (-1406/+105) was subjected to
luciferase assay and ChIP analysis. p53 phosphorylation resulted in upregulation 
of DDX3 expression, which enhanced DDX3 promoter transactivation activity.
Transient transfection with wild-type p53 increased DDX3 promoter activity in
Hep3B cells which have null mutant of p53, whereas knockdown p53 by si-p53
reduced DDX3 promoter activity in HepG2.2.15 and HepG2 cells, respectively. Rg3- 
mediated phosphorylation of p53 resulted in inhibition of Akt phosphorylation,
which in turn reduced MDM2-mediated p53 degradation. An Akt inhibitor augmented
DDX3 promoter activity and reduced the secretion of hepatitis B surface antigen. 
Our data indicate that Rg3 enhances innate immunity by inducing IFN-ß expression 
through upregulation of DDX3 promoter activity via p53-mediated transactivation
and activation of the TBK1/IKKe/IRF3 pathway.

PMID: 24180280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 22;441(3):531-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.10.100. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Relevance of signaling molecules for apoptosis induction on influenza A virus
replication.

Iwai A(1), Shiozaki T, Miyazaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Aureo Science Co., Ltd., North 21, West 12, Kita-Ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido
001-0021, Japan.

Apoptosis is an important mechanism to maintain homeostasis in mammals, and
disruption of the apoptosis regulation mechanism triggers a range of diseases,
such as cancer, autoimmune diseases, and developmental disorders. The severity of
influenza A virus (IAV) infection is also closely related to dysfunction of
apoptosis regulation. In the virus infected cells, the functions of various host 
cellular molecules involved in regulation of induction of apoptosis are modulated
by IAV proteins to enable effective virus replication. The modulation of the
intracellular signaling pathway inducing apoptosis by the IAV infection also
affects extracellular mechanisms controlling apoptosis, and triggers abnormal
host responses related to the disease severity of IAV infections. This review
focuses on apoptosis related molecules involved in IAV replication and
pathogenicity, the strategy of the virus propagation through the regulation of
apoptosis is also discussed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24177013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2014 Jan;21(1):29-38. doi: 10.1128/CVI.00500-13. Epub 2013 
Oct 30.

Dengue virus subverts the interferon induction pathway via NS2B/3 protease-I<U+03BA>B
kinase epsilon interaction.

Angleró-Rodríguez YI(1), Pantoja P, Sariol CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Medical Zoology, University of Puerto Rico,
Medical Science Campus, San Juan, Puerto Rico.

Dengue is the world's most common mosquito-borne viral infection and a leading
cause of morbidity throughout the tropics and subtropics. Viruses are known to
evade the establishment of an antiviral state by regulating the activation of
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a critical transcription factor in the
alpha/beta interferon induction pathway. Here, we show that dengue virus (DENV)
circumvents the induction of the retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like receptor
(RLR) pathway during infection by blocking serine 386 phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation of IRF3. This effect is associated with the expression of
nonstructural 2B/3 protein (NS2B/3) protease in human cells. Using interaction
assays, we found that NS2B/3 interacts with the cellular I<U+03BA>B kinase e (IKKe).
Docking computational analysis revealed that in this interaction, NS2B/3 masks
the kinase domain of IKKe and potentially affects its functionality. This
observation is supported by the DENV-associated inhibition of the kinase activity
of IKKe. Our data identify IKKe as a novel target of DENV NS2B/3 protease.

PMCID: PMC3910921
PMID: 24173023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;795:233-54. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-8603-9_15.

Measurement of the innate immune response in the airway.

Brasier AR(1), Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Medical Branch, 8.128 Medical Research Building, 301
University Blvd, Galveston, TX, USA, arbrasie@utmb.edu.

Asthma is an idiopathic disease associated with episodic inflammation and
reversible airway obstruction that is triggered by environmental agents. Allergic
and infectious agents trigger asthmatic exacerbations through the innate immune
response (IIR). The IIR is activated by sentinel cells in the airways to
elaborate inflammatory cytokines and protective mucosal interferons whose actions
are designed to limit the spread of the organism, as well as to activate the
adaptive immune response. We address the structure of the IIR pathway in sentinel
cells of the airway and describe observations on its dysregulation. The IIR is
triggered in a cell-type specific manner by germline-encoded pathogen recognition
receptors (PPRs) including plasma membrane Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and the
cytoplasmic Retinoic Acid-inducible Gene (RIG)-I-like RNA helicases, and protein 
kinase R (PKR). Although their mechanisms of intracellular signaling differ, both
pathways converge on a small group of transcriptional effectors, nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), IFN regulatory factor (IRF), and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT). We describe several distinct techniques to
quantitate the IIR including assays based on quantitative real-time PCR
(Q-RT-PCR) of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3-regulated genes, multiplex bead-based analysis of
secreted proteins/cytokines and more recent developments in targeted,
quantitative selected reaction monitoring (SRM)-mass spectrometry (MS).
Application of these methods for quantitation of the IIR will further our
understanding of the role of the IIR in asthma and its contribution to disease
heterogeneity.

PMID: 24162913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):E4571-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1311669110. Epub 2013 Oct 23.

IFI16 senses DNA forms of the lentiviral replication cycle and controls HIV-1
replication.

Jakobsen MR(1), Bak RO, Andersen A, Berg RK, Jensen SB, Tengchuan J, Laustsen A, 
Hansen K, Ostergaard L, Fitzgerald KA, Xiao TS, Mikkelsen JG, Mogensen TH,
Paludan SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine and Aarhus Research Center for Innate Immunology,
Aarhus University, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):19651. Jin, Tengchuan [corrected to
Tengchuan, Jin].

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):19183-4.

Replication of lentiviruses generates different DNA forms, including RNA:DNA
hybrids, ssDNA, and dsDNA. Nucleic acids stimulate innate immune responses, and
pattern recognition receptors detecting dsDNA have been identified. However,
sensors for ssDNA have not been reported, and the ability of RNA:DNA hybrids to
stimulate innate immune responses is controversial. Using ssDNAs derived from
HIV-1 proviral DNA, we report that this DNA form potently induces the expression 
of IFNs in primary human macrophages. This response was stimulated by stem
regions in the DNA structure and was dependent on IFN-inducible protein 16
(IFI16), which bound immunostimulatory DNA directly and activated the stimulator 
of IFN genes -TANK-binding kinase 1 - IFN regulatory factors 3/7
(STING-TBK1-IRF3/7) pathway. Importantly, IFI16 colocalized and associated with
lentiviral DNA in the cytoplasm in macrophages, and IFI16 knockdown in this cell 
type augmented lentiviral transduction and also HIV-1 replication. Thus, IFI16 is
a sensor for DNA forms produced during the lentiviral replication cycle and
regulates HIV-1 replication in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3845190
PMID: 24154727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2013 Nov 15;156(1-2):135-40. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2013.09.015. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus inhibition of interferon-ß
transcription by IRF3-independent mechanisms in MARC-145 cells in early
infection.

Hu H(1), Zhang X, Zhang H, Wen G, Zhang Q, Li X, Fang W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Preventive Veterinary Medicine and Zhejiang Provincial Key
Laboratory of Preventive Veterinary Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310058, China.

Interferon ß is an important antiviral molecule whose expression is triggered
through recognition of viral components by pattern recognition receptors via a
cascade of signaling molecules, while viruses could target these molecules to
evade from innate immunity. IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) plays a crucial role
in innate immune responses. Here, we demonstrate that PRRSV infection did not
induce IFN-ß gene transcription in MARC-145 cells, but inhibited poly (I:C)
stimulated IFN-ß gene transcription instead. Such inhibition is time-dependent
with the progression of PRRSV infection. We also show that the inhibition of
IFN-ß transcription in the early stage of infection could not be due to
inhibition of phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF3, though
significant decrease of p-IRF3 and its nuclear translocation in PRRSV-infected
and poly (I:C) cells was observed later at 48 h post-infection. The different
patterns of inhibition for IFN-ß transcription and IRF3 phosphorylation have
important implications as to the mechanism(s) by which PRRSV suppresses the type 
I IFN signaling at early stage of infection. There could be mechanism(s) other
than effecting on IRF3 or molecules upstream that require further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24148827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(10):e1003704. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003704. Epub 2013
Oct 17.

The structure of classical swine fever virus N(pro): a novel cysteine
Autoprotease and zinc-binding protein involved in subversion of type I interferon
induction.

Gottipati K(1), Ruggli N, Gerber M, Tratschin JD, Benning M, Bellamy H, Choi KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sealy Center for Structural 
Biology and Molecular Biophysics, The University of Texas Medical Branch at
Galveston, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

Pestiviruses express their genome as a single polypeptide that is subsequently
cleaved into individual proteins by host- and virus-encoded proteases. The
pestivirus N-terminal protease (N(pro)) is a cysteine autoprotease that cleaves
between its own C-terminus and the N-terminus of the core protein. Due to its
unique sequence and catalytic site, it forms its own cysteine protease family
C53. After self-cleavage, N(pro) is no longer active as a protease. The released 
N(pro) suppresses the induction of the host's type-I interferon-a/ß (IFN-a/ß)
response. N(pro) binds interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF3), the key
transcriptional activator of IFN-a/ß genes, and promotes degradation of IRF3 by
the proteasome, thus preventing induction of the IFN-a/ß response to pestivirus
infection. Here we report the crystal structures of pestivirus N(pro). N(pro) is 
structurally distinct from other known cysteine proteases and has a novel "clam
shell" fold consisting of a protease domain and a zinc-binding domain. The unique
fold of N(pro) allows auto-catalysis at its C-terminus and subsequently conceals 
the cleavage site in the active site of the protease. Although many viruses
interfere with type I IFN induction by targeting the IRF3 pathway, little
information is available regarding structure or mechanism of action of viral
proteins that interact with IRF3. The distribution of amino acids on the surface 
of N(pro) involved in targeting IRF3 for proteasomal degradation provides insight
into the nature of N(pro)'s interaction with IRF3. The structures thus establish 
the mechanism of auto-catalysis and subsequent auto-inhibition of trans-activity 
of N(pro), and its role in subversion of host immune response.

PMCID: PMC3798407
PMID: 24146623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Dec 12;150(3):1007-15. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.09.056.
Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Lysimachia clethroides Duby extract attenuates inflammatory response in Raw 264.7
macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide and in acute lung injury mouse
model.

Shim DW(1), Han JW, Sun X, Jang CH, Koppula S, Kim TJ, Kang TB, Lee KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, College of Biomedical and Health Science,
Research Institute of Inflammatory Diseases, Konkuk University, Chungju 380-701, 
Republic of Korea.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Lysimachia clethroides Duby (LC) is a traditional
medicinal herb used to treat edema, hepatitis and inflammatory diseases in China 
and other Asian countries. In this study, the anti-inflammatory effects of LC
extract and the mechanisms underlying were explored in both in vitro cell lines
and acute lung injury (ALI) animal model of inflammation in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated Raw 264.7 murine
macrophages were used to study the regulatory effects of LC extract on
inflammatory mediators such as nitric oxide (NO) and proinflammatory cytokine
expression. Western blotting or ELISA techniques were employed to estimate
protein levels. RT-PCR was used for analyzing the interferon (IFN)-ß production. 
LPS-induced ALI mouse model in vivo was employed to study the effect of LC
extract. Further high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fingerprinting
technique was used to evaluate the active constituents present in LC extract,
compared with reference standards.
RESULTS: Pre-treatment with LC extract inhibited the LPS-stimulated NO release,
interleukin (IL)-1ß and IL-6 production in Raw 264.7 cells dose dependently. LC
extract inhibited the LPS-stimulated IRF3 and STAT1 phosphorylation. Further, in 
vivo experiments revealed that LC extract suppressed the infiltration of immune
cells into the lung and proinflammatory cytokine production in broncho-alveolar
lavage fluid (BALF) in the LPS-induced ALI mouse model.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that LC extract attenuates LPS-stimulated
inflammatory responses in macrophages via regulating the key inflammatory
mechanisms, providing a scientific support for its traditional use in treating
various inflammatory diseases.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24145006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Virus Res. 2013 Dec 26;178(2):226-33. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2013.10.003. Epub
2013 Oct 17.

IRF3 helps control acute TMEV infection through IL-6 expression but contributes
to acute hippocampus damage following TMEV infection.

Moore TC(1), Cody L, Kumm PM, Brown DM, Petro TM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, United States.

IRF3 is an innate anti-viral factor whose role in limiting Theiler's murine
encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) infection and preventing TMEV-induced disease is
unclear. Acute disease and innate immune responses of macrophages were examined
in IRF3 knockout mice compared with C57Bl/6 mice following in vitro or
intracranial infection with either TMEV GDVII or DA. IRF3 deficiency augmented
viral infection, as well as morbidity and mortality following intracranial
infection with neurovirulent TMEV GDVII. In contrast, IRF3 deficiency prevented
hippocampal injury following intracranial infection with persistent TMEV DA. The 
extent of TMEV infection in macrophages from C57Bl/6 mice was significantly less 
than that in IRF3 deficient macrophages, which was associated with poor IFN-ß and
IL-6 expression in response to TMEV. Reestablishing IRF3 expression in IRF3
deficient macrophages increased control of TMEV replication and increased
expression of IFN-ß and IL-6. In addition, IRF3 deficient macrophages failed to
exhibit IL-6 antiviral effects, which was associated with inability to sustain
IL-6-induced STAT1 activation compared with C57BL/6 macrophages. Altogether, IRF3
contributes to early control of TMEV replication through induction of IL-6 and
IFN-ß and support of IL-6 antiviral effects, but contributes to TMEV-induced
hippocampal injury.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3867013
PMID: 24140628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Cell Host Microbe. 2013 Oct 16;14(4):422-34. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2013.09.009.

Host restriction factor SAMHD1 limits human T cell leukemia virus type 1
infection of monocytes via STING-mediated apoptosis.

Sze A(1), Belgnaoui SM, Olagnier D, Lin R, Hiscott J, van Grevenynghe J.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, QC 
H3T 1E2, Canada.

Human T cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is the causative agent of adult
T cell leukemia and HTLV-1-associated myelopathies. In addition to T cells,
HTLV-1 infects cells of the myeloid lineage, which play critical roles in the
host innate response to viral infection. Investigating the monocyte depletion
observed during HTLV-1 infection, we discovered that primary human monocytes
infected with HTLV-1 undergo abortive infection accompanied by apoptosis
dependent on SAMHD1, a host restriction factor that hydrolyzes endogenous dNTPs
to below the levels required for productive reverse transcription. Reverse
transcription intermediates (RTI) produced in the presence of SAMHD1 induced
IRF3-mediated antiviral and apoptotic responses. Viral RTIs complexed with the
DNA sensor STING to trigger formation of an IRF3-Bax complex leading to
apoptosis. This study provides a mechanistic explanation for abortive HTLV-1
infection of monocytes and reports a link between SAMHD1 restriction, HTLV-1 RTI 
sensing by STING, and initiation of IRF3-Bax driven apoptosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24139400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Immunology. 2014 Mar;141(3):345-52. doi: 10.1111/imm.12193.

Involvement of a membrane potassium channel in heparan sulphate-induced
activation of macrophages.

Ren JD(1), Fan L, Tian FZ, Fan KH, Yu BT, Jin WH, Tan YH, Cheng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, General Hospital of Chengdu Military Region, Chengdu, 
China.

Increasing evidence has demonstrated that Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) -mediated
systemic inflammatory response syndrome accompanied by multiple organ failure, is
one of the most common causes of death in patients with severe acute
pancreatitis. Recent reports have revealed that heparan sulphate (HS)
proteoglycan, a component of extracellular matrices, potentiates the activation
of intracellular pro-inflammatory responses via TLR4, contributing to the
aggravation of acute pancreatitis. However, little is known about the
participants in the HS/TLR4-mediated inflammatory cascades. Our previous work
provided a clue that a membrane potassium channel (MaxiK) is responsible for
HS-induced production of inflammatory cytokines. Therefore, in this report we
attempted to reveal the roles of MaxiK in the activation of macrophages
stimulated by HS. Our results showed that incubation of RAW264.7 cells with HS
up-regulated MaxiK and TLR4 expression levels. HS could also activate MaxiK
channels to promote the efflux of potassium ions from cells, as measured by the
elevated activity of caspase-1, whereas this was significantly abolished by
treatment with paxilline, a specific blocker of the MaxiK channel. Moreover, it
was found that paxilline substantially inhibited HS-induced activation of several
different transcription factors in macrophages, including nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B, p38 
and interferon regulatory factor-3, followed by decreased production of tumour
necrosis factor-a and interferon-ß. Taken together, our investigation provides
evidence that the HS/TLR4-mediated intracellular inflammatory cascade depends on 
the activation of MaxiK, which may offer an important opportunity for a new
approach in therapeutic strategies of severe acute pancreatitis.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3930373
PMID: 24138091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Innate Immun. 2014 Oct;20(7):751-9. doi: 10.1177/1753425913507097. Epub 2013 Oct 
16.

Identification of a negative feedback loop between cyclic di-GMP-induced levels
of IFI16 and p202 cytosolic DNA sensors and STING.

Panchanathan R(1), Liu H(1), Xin D(2), Choubey D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, OH, USA
Cincinnati VA Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (2)Department of Environmental
Health, University of Cincinnati, OH, USA. (3)Department of Environmental Health,
University of Cincinnati, OH, USA Cincinnati VA Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH,
USA Divaker.choubey@uc.edu.

A host type I IFN response is induced by cytosolic sensing of the bacterial
second messenger cyclic-di-GMP (c-di-GMP) by STING (stimulator of IFN genes).
Because the STING, an adaptor protein, links the cytosolic detection of DNA by
the cytosolic DNA sensors such as the IFN-inducible human IFI16 and murine p202
proteins to the TBK1/IRF3 axis, we investigated whether c-di-GMP-induced
signaling could regulate expression of IFI16 and p202 proteins. Here, we report
that activation of c-di-GMP-induced signaling in human and murine cells increased
steady-state levels of IFI16 and p202 proteins. The increase was c-di-GMP
concentration- and time-dependent. Unexpectedly, treatment of cells with type I
IFN decreased levels of the adaptor protein STING. Therefore, we investigated
whether the IFI16 or p202 protein could regulate the expression of STING and
activation of the TBK1/IRF3 axis. We found that constitutive knockdown of IFI16
or p202 expression in cells increased steady-state levels of STING. Additionally,
the knockdown of IFI16 resulted in activation of the TBK1/IRF3 axis. Accordingly,
increased levels of the IFI16 or p202 protein in cells decreased STING levels.
Together, our observations identify a novel negative feedback loop between
c-di-GMP-induced levels of IFI16 and p202 cytosolic DNA sensors and the adaptor
protein STING.

© The Author(s) 2013 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

PMID: 24131791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Virol. 2014 Jan;88(1):41-53. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01501-13. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Rotavirus NSP1 protein inhibits interferon-mediated STAT1 activation.

Sen A(1), Rott L, Phan N, Mukherjee G, Greenberg HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford,
California, USA.

Rotavirus (RV) replicates efficiently in intestinal epithelial cells (IECs) in
vivo despite the activation of a local host interferon (IFN) response.
Previously, we demonstrated that homologous RV efficiently inhibits IFN induction
in single infected and bystander villous IECs in vivo. Paradoxically, RV also
induces significant type I IFN expression in the intestinal hematopoietic cell
compartment in a relatively replication-independent manner. This suggests that RV
replication and spread in IECs must occur despite exogenous stimulation of the
STAT1-mediated IFN signaling pathway. Here we report that RV inhibits
IFN-mediated STAT1 tyrosine 701 phosphorylation in human IECs in vitro and
identify RV NSP1 as a direct inhibitor of the pathway. Infection of human HT29
IECs with simian (RRV) or porcine (SB1A or OSU) RV strains, which inhibit IFN
induction by targeting either IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) or NF-<U+03BA>B,
respectively, resulted in similar regulation of IFN secretion. By flow cytometric
analysis at early times during infection, neither RRV nor SB1A effectively
inhibited the activation of Y701-STAT1 in response to exogenously added IFN.
However, at later times during infection, both RV strains efficiently inhibited
IFN-mediated STAT1 activation within virus-infected cells, indicating that RV
encodes inhibitors of IFN signaling targeting STAT1 phosphorylation. Expression
of RV NSP1 in the absence of other viral proteins resulted in blockage of
exogenous IFN-mediated STAT1 phosphorylation, and this function was conserved in 
NSP1 from simian, bovine, and murine RV strains. Analysis of NSP1 determinants
responsible for the inhibition of IFN induction and signaling pathways revealed
that these determinants are encoded on discrete domains of NSP1. Finally, we
observed that at later times during infection with SB1A, there was almost
complete inhibition of IFN-mediated Y701-STAT1 in bystander cells staining
negative for viral antigen. This property segregated with the NSP1 gene and was
observed in a simian SA11 monoreassortant that encoded porcine OSU NSP1 but not
in wild-type SA11 or a reassortant encoding simian RRV NSP1.

PMCID: PMC3911692
PMID: 24131713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Liver Int. 2014 Apr;34(4):558-66. doi: 10.1111/liv.12330. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

A polymorphism linked to RRAS, SCAF1, IRF3 and BCL2L12 genes is associated with
cirrhosis in hepatitis C virus carriers.

Real LM(1), Caruz A, Rivero-Juarez A, Soriano V, Neukam K, Rivero A, Cifuentes C,
Mira JA, Macías J, Pineda JA.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Enfermedades Infecciosas y Microbiología, Hospital Universitario de 
Valme, Sevilla, Spain; Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBIS), Sevilla,
Spain.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Host genetic factors could play a primary role in determining 
risk for cirrhosis development in HCV-infected patients. The aims of this study
were to discover new genetic variants associated with this trait and to replicate
some associations formerly reported.
METHODS: Three hundred and thirty-seven HCV carriers with available data about
liver fibrosis status, who initiated treatment with pegylated interferon plus
ribavirin, were included. Of them, 77 (22.85%) were cirrhotic. One hundred and
forty-four SNPs from 40 genes related to cholesterol metabolism/transport,
sustained viral response to HCV therapy, liver fibrosis, or immune response, were
genotyped in all samples. Plink software was used to perform univariate
association analyses. The results obtained were adjusted by other parameters
related to cirrhosis using multivariate logistic regression models.
RESULTS: Only the SNP rs12104272, linked to RRAS, SCAF1, IRF3 and BCL2L12 genes, 
was associated with cirrhosis. It was observed a higher proportion of rs12104272 
A allele carriers in the non-cirrhotic group (60.63%) than in the cirrhotic group
(38.15%) (adjusted OR = 0.36, 95% CI = 0.180-0.746, P = 0.006). This effect was
stronger in the background of rs12979860 CC genotype of IL28B (adjusted OR =
0.069, 95% CI = 0.014-0.349, P = 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The rs12104272 SNP could have clinical value to select those
individuals at lower risk for cirrhosis development.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24131527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Hepatology. 2014 Mar;59(3):870-85. doi: 10.1002/hep.26751. Epub 2014 Jan 30.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 constrains IKKß/NF-<U+03BA>B signaling to alleviate
hepatic steatosis and insulin resistance.

Wang XA(1), Zhang R, She ZG, Zhang XF, Jiang DS, Wang T, Gao L, Deng W, Zhang SM,
Zhu LH, Guo S, Chen K, Zhang XD, Liu DP, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, P.R.
China; Cardiovascular Research Institute, Wuhan University, Wuhan, P.R. China.

Obesity and related metabolic diseases associated with chronic low-grade
inflammation greatly compromise human health. Previous observations on the roles 
of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) in the regulation of metabolism prompted 
investigation of the involvement of a key family member, IRF3, in metabolic
disorders. IRF3 expression in the liver is decreased in animals with diet-induced
and genetic obesity. The global knockout (KO) of IRF3 significantly promotes
chronic high-fat diet (HFD)-induced hepatic insulin resistance and steatosis; in 
contrast, adenoviral-mediated hepatic IRF3 overexpression preserves glucose and
lipid homeostasis. Furthermore, systemic and hepatic inflammation, which is
increased in IRF3 KO mice, is attenuated by the overexpression of hepatic IRF3.
Importantly, inhibitor of nuclear factor kappa B kinase beta subunit / nuclear
factor kappa B (IKKß/NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling is repressed by IRF3, and hepatic
overexpression of the inhibitor of <U+03BA>B-a (I<U+03BA>Ba) reverses HFD-induced insulin
resistance and steatosis in IRF3 KO mice. Mechanistically, IRF3 interacts with
the kinase domain of IKKß in the cytoplasm and inhibits its downstream signaling.
Moreover, deletion of the region of IRF3 responsible for the IRF3/IKKß
interaction inhibits the capacity of IRF3 to preserve glucose and lipid
homeostasis.CONCLUSION: IRF3 interacts with IKKß in the cytoplasm to inhibit
IKKß/NF-<U+03BA>B signaling, thus alleviating hepatic inflammation, insulin resistance, 
and hepatic steatosis.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 24123166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Mol Biol. 2013 Dec 13;425(24):5009-19. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.10.007. Epub
2013 Oct 9.

Mechanisms of MAVS regulation at the mitochondrial membrane.

Jacobs JL(1), Coyne CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases and Microbiology, School of Public Health,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15219, USA.

Mitochondria have emerged as critical platforms for antiviral innate immune
signaling. This is due in large part to the mitochondrial localization of the
innate immune signaling adaptor MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein),
which coordinates signals received from two independent cytosolic pathogen
recognition receptors (PRRs) to induce antiviral genes. The existence of a shared
adaptor for two central PRRs presents an ideal target by which the host cell can 
prevent cellular damage induced by uncontrolled inflammation through alteration
of MAVS expression and/or signaling. In this review, we focus on the MAVS
regulome and review the cellular factors that regulate MAVS by (1)
protein-protein interactions, (2) alterations in mitochondrial dynamics, and/or
(3) post-translational modifications.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC4562275
PMID: 24120683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cell. 2013 Oct 24;155(3):688-98. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.049. Epub 2013 Oct
10.

Cyclic dinucleotides trigger ULK1 (ATG1) phosphorylation of STING to prevent
sustained innate immune signaling.

Konno H(1), Konno K, Barber GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Comment in
    Trends Immunol. 2014 Jan;35(1):1-2.

Activation of the stimulator of interferon genes (STING) pathway by microbial or 
self-DNA, as well as cyclic dinucleotides (CDNs), results in the induction of
numerous genes that suppress pathogen replication and facilitate adaptive
immunity. However, sustained gene transcription is rigidly prevented to avoid
lethal STING-dependent proinflammatory disease by mechanisms that remain unknown.
We demonstrate here that, after autophagy-dependent STING delivery of
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) to endosomal/lysosomal compartments and activation
of transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-<U+03BA>B, STING
is subsequently phosphorylated by serine/threonine UNC-51-like kinase
(ULK1/ATG1), and IRF3 function is suppressed. ULK1 activation occurred following 
disassociation from its repressor AMP activated protein kinase (AMPK) and was
elicited by CDNs generated by the cGAMP synthase, cGAS. Thus, although CDNs may
initially facilitate STING function, they subsequently trigger negative-feedback 
control of STING activity, thus preventing the persistent transcription of innate
immune genes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3881181
PMID: 24119841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 7;8(10):e76983. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076983. eCollection
2013.

Structural and functional analyses of DNA-sensing and immune activation by human 
cGAS.

Kato K(1), Ishii R, Goto E, Ishitani R, Tokunaga F, Nureki O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biochemistry, Graduate School of Science, The
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan ; Global Research Cluster, RIKEN,
Wako, Saitama, Japan.

The detection of cytosolic DNA, derived from pathogens or host cells, by
cytosolic receptors is essential for appropriate host immune responses. Cyclic
GMP-AMP synthase (cGAS) is a newly identified cytosolic DNA receptor that
produces cyclic GMP-AMP, which activates stimulator of interferon genes (STING), 
resulting in TBK1-IRF3 pathway activation followed by the production of type I
interferons. Here we report the crystal structure of human cGAS. The structure
revealed that a cluster of lysine and arginine residues forms the positively
charged DNA binding surface of human cGAS, which is important for the
STING-dependent immune activation. A structural comparison with other previously 
determined cGASs and our functional analyses suggested that a conserved zinc
finger motif and a leucine residue on the DNA binding surface are crucial for the
DNA-specific immune response of human cGAS, consistent with previous work. These 
structural features properly orient the DNA binding to cGAS, which is critical
for DNA-induced cGAS activation and STING-dependent immune activation.
Furthermore, we showed that the cGAS-induced activation of STING also involves
the activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 pathways. Our results indicated that cGAS is
a DNA sensor that efficiently activates the host immune system by inducing two
distinct pathways.

PMCID: PMC3792152
PMID: 24116191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Mol Immunol. 2014 Feb;57(2):100-10. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.08.007. Epub 2013 
Oct 4.

MAVS-dependent IRF3/7 bypass of interferon ß-induction restricts the response to 
measles infection in CD150Tg mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells.

Takaki H(1), Honda K, Atarashi K, Kobayashi F, Ebihara T, Oshiumi H, Matsumoto M,
Shingai M, Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Measles virus (MV) infects CD150Tg/Ifnar (IFN alpha receptor)(-/-) mice but not
CD150 (a human MV receptor)-transgenic (Tg) mice. We have shown that bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) from CD150Tg/Ifnar(-/-) mice are
permissive to MV in contrast to those from simple CD150Tg mice, which reveals a
crucial role of type I interferon (IFN) in natural tropism against MV. Yet, the
mechanism whereby BMDCs produce initial type I IFN has not been elucidated in MV 
infection. RNA virus infection usually allows cells to generate double-stranded
RNA and induce activation of IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3/7 transcription
factors, leading to the production of type I IFN through the retinoic
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)/melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5
(MDA5)-mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) pathway. In mouse
experimental BMDCs models, we found CD150Tg/Mavs(-/-)BMDCs, but not
CD150Tg/Irf3(-/-)/Irf7(-/-)BMDCs, permissive to MV. IFN-a/ß were not induced in
MV-infected CD150Tg/Mavs(-/-)BMDCs, while IFN-ß was subtly induced in
CD150Tg/Irf3(-/-)/Irf7(-/-)BMDCs. In vivo systemic infection was therefore
established by transfer of MV-infected CD150Tg/Mavs(-/-) BMDCs to
CD150Tg/Ifnar(-/-) mice. These data indicate that MAVS-dependent,
IRF3/7-independent IFN-ß induction triggers the activation of the IFNAR pathway
so as to restrict the spread of MV by infected BMDCs. Hence, MAVS participates in
the initial induction of type I IFN in BMDCs and IFNAR protects against MV
spreading. We also showed the importance of IL-10-producing CD4(+) T cells
induced by MV-infected BMDCs in vitro, which may account for immune modulation
due to the functional aberration of DCs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24096085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Mol Biol. 2013 Dec 13;425(24):4995-5008. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2013.09.041. Epub
2013 Oct 3.

The antiviral activities of ISG15.

Morales DJ(1), Lenschow DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Post-translational protein modification is an important strategy for the
regulation of the cell proteome independent of the need for new gene expression. 
Ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like modifiers mediate the regulation of protein levels, 
signaling pathways, vesicular trafficking, and many other cellular processes
through their covalent conjugation to proteins. Interferon stimulated gene 15
(ISG15) is a ubiquitin-like modifier induced by type I interferon. In addition to
conjugating to potentially hundreds of target proteins, ISG15 can be found in an 
unconjugated form both inside of the cell and released from interferon stimulated
cells into the extracellular environment. Due to its robust expression after type
I interferon stimulation and the broad panel of proteins that it targets, ISG15
has drawn much attention as a potential regulator of the immune response and has 
been shown to mediate protection in a number of different viral infection models.
Here we will review the current state of the field of ISG15, the viruses against 
which ISG15 mediates protection, and the mechanisms by which ISG15 exerts
antiviral activity.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC4090058
PMID: 24095857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2013;78:105-16. doi:
10.1101/sqb.2013.78.020321. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

The IRF family transcription factors at the interface of innate and adaptive
immune responses.

Ikushima H(1), Negishi H(1), Taniguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Industrial Science, The
University of Tokyo, Komaba 4-6-1, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan.

The interferon-regulatory factor (IRF) family, originally identified as
transcriptional regulators of the type I interferon system, consists of nine
members in mammals. A large number of studies have revealed the versatile and
critical functions performed by this transcription factor family in immunity and 
other biological processes. Most notably, the advances in the study of signal
transducing innate immune receptors have placed many IRF members as central
mediators in the regulation of innate immune responses. In parallel, mechanistic 
studies have made it clearer that many IRFs exert their function either in
cooperation or competition with other factors. In this article, we discuss
current advances on the multipurpose and critical functions of IRFs in the
regulation of innate immunity, particularly as they instruct adaptive immunity.

Copyright © 2013 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 24092468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Virol. 2013 Dec;87(24):13422-32. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02474-13. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

The viral ubiquitin ligase ICP0 is neither sufficient nor necessary for
degradation of the cellular DNA sensor IFI16 during herpes simplex virus 1
infection.

Cuchet-Lourenço D(1), Anderson G, Sloan E, Orr A, Everett RD.

Author information: 
(1)MRC-University of Glasgow Centre for Virus Research, Glasgow, Scotland, United
Kingdom.

The cellular protein IFI16 colocalizes with the herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1)
ubiquitin ligase ICP0 at early times of infection and is degraded as infection
progresses. Here, we report that the factors governing the degradation of IFI16
and its colocalization with ICP0 are distinct from those of promyelocytic
leukemia protein (PML), a well-characterized ICP0 substrate. Unlike PML, IFI16
colocalization with ICP0 was dependent on the ICP0 RING finger and did not occur 
when proteasome activity was inhibited. Expression of ICP0 in the absence of
infection did not destabilize IFI16, the degradation occurred efficiently in the 
absence of ICP0 if infection was progressing efficiently, and IFI16 was
relatively stable in wild-type (wt) HSV-1-infected U2OS cells. Therefore, IFI16
stability appears to be regulated by cellular factors in response to active HSV-1
infection rather than directly by ICP0. Because IFI16 is a DNA sensor that
becomes associated with viral genomes during the early stages of infection, we
investigated its role in the recruitment of PML nuclear body (PML NB) components 
to viral genomes. Recruitment of PML and hDaxx was less efficient in a proportion
of IFI16-depleted cells, and this correlated with improved replication efficiency
of ICP0-null mutant HSV-1. Because the absence of interferon regulatory factor 3 
(IRF3) does not increase the plaque formation efficiency of ICP0-null mutant
HSV-1, we speculate that IFI16 contributes to cell-mediated restriction of HSV-1 
in a manner that is separable from its roles in IRF3-mediated interferon
induction, but that may be linked to the PML NB response to viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3838218
PMID: 24089555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Eur J Pharmacol. 2013 Dec 5;721(1-3):109-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2013.09.045.
Epub 2013 Sep 27.

Suppression of TRIF-dependent signaling pathway of toll-like receptors by
(E)-1-(2-(2-nitrovinyl)phenyl)pyrrolidine.

Gu GJ(1), Eom SH, Suh CW, Koh KO, Kim DY, Youn HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences,
SoonChunHyang University, Chungnam, Asan 336-745, Republic of Korea.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in the recognition of microbial
pathogens and induce innate immune responses. The recognition of microbial
components by TLRs triggers the activation of myeloid differential factor 88
(MyD88)- and toll-interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adapter inducing
interferon-ß (TRIF)-dependent downstream signaling pathways. Previously, we
synthesized (E)-1-(2-(2-nitrovinyl)phenyl)pyrrolidine (NVPP), which contains a
nitrovinyl-phenyl and pyrrolidine. To evaluate the therapeutic potential of NVPP,
its effect on signal transduction via the TRIF-dependent pathway of TLRs induced 
by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly[I:C]) was
examined. NVPP inhibited LPS or poly[I:C]-induced activation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), and the phosphorylation of
IRF3, as well as inhibiting the activation of interferon-inducible genes such as 
interferon inducible protein-10 (IP-10). These results suggest that NVPP can
modulate TRIF-dependent signaling pathways of TLRs, potentially resulting in
effective therapeutics for chronic inflammatory diseases.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24080550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Food Chem Toxicol. 2013 Dec;62:638-44. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.09.011. Epub 2013 
Sep 17.

Anti-inflammatory effect of austroinulin and 6-O-acetyl-austroinulin from Stevia 
rebaudiana in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated RAW264.7 macrophages.

Cho BO(1), Ryu HW, So Y, Cho JK, Woo HS, Jin CH, Seo KI, Park JC, Jeong IY.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Radiation Technology Institute, Korea Atomic Energy Research
Institute, Jeongeup, Jeonbuk 580-185, Republic of Korea.

Austroinulin (AI) and 6-O-acetyl-austroinulin (6-OAAI) are natural diterpenoids
isolated from Stevia rebaudiana with anti-inflammatory activity. However, the
mechanisms underlying their anti-inflammatory effects are not well understood.
The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of AI and 6-OAAI on
nitric oxide (NO) production and their molecular mechanism in LPS-stimulated
RAW264.7 macrophages. We found that AI and 6-OAAI inhibit the production of NO,
iNOS, and pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNF-a, IL-6, IL-1ß, and MCP-1) in
LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 macrophages. In these same cells, AI and 6-OAAI also
suppressed the phosphorylation of STAT1 and the production of interferon-beta
(IFN-ß). Moreover, treatment with AI and 6-OAAI inhibited the activation of
interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF3) and NF-<U+03BA>B. Taken together, our results
suggest that AI and 6-OAAI inhibit NO production and iNOS expression by blocking 
the activation of STAT1, IRF3, and NF-<U+03BA>B in LPS-stimulated RAW264.7 macrophages.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 8;110(41):16544-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1308331110. Epub 2013 Sep 19.

STING-IRF3 pathway links endoplasmic reticulum stress with hepatocyte apoptosis
in early alcoholic liver disease.

Petrasek J(1), Iracheta-Vellve A, Csak T, Satishchandran A, Kodys K, Kurt-Jones
EA, Fitzgerald KA, Szabo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA 01605.

Emerging evidence suggests that innate immunity drives alcoholic liver disease
(ALD) and that the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3),a transcription factor
regulating innate immune responses, is indispensable for the development of ALD. 
Here we report that IRF3 mediates ALD via linking endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress with apoptotic signaling in hepatocytes. We found that ethanol induced ER 
stress and triggered the association of IRF3 with the ER adaptor, stimulator of
interferon genes (STING), as well as subsequent phosphorylation of IRF3.
Activated IRF3 associated with the proapoptotic molecule Bax [B-cell lymphoma 2
(Bcl2)-associated X protein] and contributed to hepatocyte apoptosis. Deficiency 
of STING prevented IRF3 phosphorylation by ethanol or ER stress, and absence of
IRF3 prevented hepatocyte apoptosis. The pathogenic role of IRF3 in ALD was
independent of inflammation or Type-I interferons. Thus, STING and IRF3 are key
determinants of ALD, linking ER stress signaling with the mitochondrial pathway
of hepatocyte apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3799324
PMID: 24052526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Virol. 2013 Dec;87(23):12814-27. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02355-13. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

Herpes simplex virus 1 serine/threonine kinase US3 hyperphosphorylates IRF3 and
inhibits beta interferon production.

Wang S(1), Wang K, Lin R, Zheng C.

Author information: 
(1)Soochow University, Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Suzhou, China.

Viral infection initiates a series of signaling cascades that lead to the
transcription of interferons (IFNs), finally inducing interferon-stimulated genes
(ISGs) to eliminate viruses. Viruses have evolved a variety of strategies to
modulate host IFN-mediated immune responses. Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) US3, 
a Ser/Thr kinase conserved in alphaherpesviruses, was previously reported to
counteract host innate immunity; however, the molecular mechanism is elusive. In 
this study, we report that US3 blocks IFN-ß production by hyperphosphorylating
IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Ectopic expression of US3 protein significantly
inhibited Sendai virus (SeV)-mediated activation of IFN-ß and IFN-stimulated
response element (ISRE) promoters and the transcription of IFN-ß, ISG54, and
ISG56. US3 was also shown to block SeV-induced dimerization and nuclear
translocation of IRF3. The kinase activity was indispensable for its inhibitory
function, as kinase-dead (KD) US3 mutants K220M and D305A could not inhibit IFN-ß
production. Furthermore, US3 interacted with and hyperphosphorylated IRF3 at
Ser175 to prevent IRF3 activation. Finally, the US3 KD mutant viruses were
constructed and denoted K220M or D305A HSV-1, respectively. Cells and mice
infected with both mutant viruses produced remarkably larger amounts of IFN-ß
than those infected with wild-type HSV-1. For the first time, these findings
provide convincing evidence that US3 hyperphosphorylates IRF3, blocks the
production of IFN-ß, and subverts host innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC3838156
PMID: 24049179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jan;42(1):583-98. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt844. Epub 2013 Sep 
18.

siRNA enhances DNA-mediated interferon lambda-1 response through crosstalk
between RIG-I and IFI16 signalling pathway.

Sui H(1), Zhou M, Chen Q, Lane HC, Imamichi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Retrovirology, Clinical Services Program, Applied and
Developmental Directorate, SAIC-Frederick, Inc., Frederick National Laboratory
for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA, Laboratory of Proteomics and
Analytical Technologies, Advanced Technology Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc.,
Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA and
Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

In addition to silencing specific genes, small interfering RNA (siRNA)
transfection is also associated with the non-specific induction of inflammatory
cytokines and type I interferon. Those so-called "off-target" effects have
considerable implications for the interpretation of in vitro studies and clinical
application of siRNA. The present study attempted to develop a better
understanding of the mechanism involved in these off target effects. Synthesized 
siRNA significantly enhances DNA-mediated interferon lambda-1 response
(IFN-<U+03BB>1/IL-29), a newly characterized antiviral interferon in non-immune or
primary immune cells. This enhancement was most pronounced by double-stranded
siRNA with at least a 2-nucleotide overhang at one 3' terminus in a
dose-dependent manner, while the presence of DNA was indispensable. A pull-down
assay using biotinylated siRNA- or DNA-conjugated beads indicated that retinoic
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and interferon gamma-inducible protein 16 (IFI16)
were involved in the sensing of siRNA and DNA, respectively.
Co-immunoprecipitation analysis further revealed that RIG-I and IFI16 formed a
complex via siRNA, and the dissociation of IFI16 from this complex in the
presence of DNA activated the downstream STING-TBK1-IRF3 (stimulator of
interferon genes - tank-binding kinase 1 - interferon regulatory factor 3)
pathway, shedding light on a new physiological signalling pathway to activate
innate immunity. Collectively, these findings may provide rational information
for siRNA-induced innate immunity, with important implications for developing
siRNA-based reagents to control human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3874163
PMID: 24049081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Life Sci. 2013 Nov 19;93(22):847-54. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.09.004. Epub 2013
Sep 15.

TBK1-targeted suppression of TRIF-dependent signaling pathway of Toll-like
receptors by helenalin.

Shin HJ(1), Youn HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, College of Medical Sciences, Soonchunhyang
University, Asan-Si, Chungnam 336-745, Republic of Korea.

AIMS: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the therapeutic potential of the 
helenalin in Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling pathways.
MAIN METHODS: RAW264.7 cells were transfected with a NF-<U+03BA>B, IFNß PRDIII-I, or
IP-10 luciferase plasmid and then luciferase enzyme activities were determined by
luciferase assay. The expression of iNOS, COX-2, and IP-10 and phosphorylation of
IRF3 were determined by Western blotting. The levels of IP-10 were determined
with culture medium by using IP-10 ELISA kit. TBK1 kinase activity was determined
by MBP assay kit.
KEY FINDINGS: Helenalin inhibited transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 activation,
which was induced by TLR agonists as well as its target genes, such as COX-2,
iNOS, and IP-10. Helenalin attenuated ligand-independent activation of NF-<U+03BA>B
induced by MyD88, IKKß, and p65, and IRF3 induced by TRIF, TBK1, or IRF3.
Furthermore, helenalin inhibited TBK1 kinase activity in vitro.
SIGNIFICANCE: TLRs are primary sensors that detect a wide variety of microbial
components and play an important role in the induction of innate immune. To
evaluate the therapeutic potential of helenalin, we examined its effect on signal
transduction via the TLR signaling pathways. Our results suggest that beneficial 
effects of helenalin on chronic inflammatory diseases are mediated through
modulation of TLR signaling pathways by targeting TBK1.

© 2013.

PMID: 24044884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4194-201. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300799. Epub 2013 
Sep 16.

The roles of IRF-3 and IRF-7 in innate antiviral immunity against dengue virus.

Chen HW(1), King K, Tu J, Sanchez M, Luster AD, Shresta S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, CA 92037.

We investigated the roles of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF-7 in innate
antiviral immunity against dengue virus (DENV). Double-deficient Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-)
mice infected with the DENV2 strain S221 possessed 1,000-150,000 fold higher
levels of viral RNA than wild-type and single-deficient mice 24 h postinfection
(hpi); however, they remained resistant to lethal infection. IFN-a/ß was induced 
similarly in wild-type and Irf-3(-/-) mice post-DENV infection, whereas in the
Irf-7(-/-) and Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice, significantly low levels of IFN-a/ß
expression was observed within 24 hpi. IFN-stimulated gene induction was also
delayed in Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice relative to wild-type and single-deficient mice.
In particular, Cxcl10 and Ifna2 were rapidly induced independently of both IRF-3 
and IRF-7 in the Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice with DENV infection. Higher levels of
serum IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-6, CXCL10, IL-8, IL-12 p70, and TNF were also observed in
Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice 24 hpi, at which time point viral titers peaked and started
to be cleared. Ab-mediated blockade experiments revealed that IFN-<U+03B3>, CXCL10, and 
CXCR3 function to restrict DENV replication in Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice.
Additionally, the IFN-stimulated genes Cxcl10, Ifit1, Ifit3, and Mx2 can be
induced via an IRF-3- and IRF-7-independent pathway that does not involve IFN-<U+03B3>
signaling for protection against DENV. Collectively, these results demonstrate
that IRF-3 and IRF-7 are redundant, albeit IRF-7 plays a more important role than
IRF-3 in inducing the initial IFN-a/ß response; only the combined actions of
IRF-3 and IRF-7 are necessary for efficient control of early DENV infection; and 
the late, IRF-3- and IRF-7-independent pathway contributes to anti-DENV immunity.

PMCID: PMC3795795
PMID: 24043884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 Jan;11(1):49-57. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.40. Epub 2013 Sep
16.

The interaction between the helicase DHX33 and IPS-1 as a novel pathway to sense 
double-stranded RNA and RNA viruses in myeloid dendritic cells.

Liu Y(1), Lu N(2), Yuan B(2), Weng L(3), Wang F(1), Liu YJ(3), Zhang Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Hospital, Jilin University,
Changchun, China. (2)Department of Immunology, Center for Cancer Immunology
Research, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas,
TX, USA.

In eukaryotes, there are at least 60 members of the DExD/H helicase family, many 
of which are able to sense viral nucleic acids. By screening all known family
members, we identified the helicase DHX33 as a novel double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) 
sensor in myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs). The knockdown of DHX33 using small
heteroduplex RNA (shRNA) blocked the ability of mDCs to produce type I interferon
(IFN) in response to poly I:C and reovirus. The HELICc domain of DHX33 was shown 
to bind poly I:C. The interaction between DHX33 and IPS-1 is mediated by the
HELICc region of DHX33 and the C-terminal domain of IPS-1 (also referred to MAVS 
and VISA). The inhibition of DHX33 expression by RNA interference blocked the
poly I:C-induced activation of MAP kinases, NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3. The interaction
between the helicase DHX33 and IPS-1 was independent of RIG-I/MDA5 and may be a
novel pathway for sensing poly I:C and RNA viruses in mDCs.

PMCID: PMC4002151
PMID: 24037184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Cell Signal. 2013 Dec;25(12):2752-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.08.042. Epub
2013 Sep 13.

Phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase is involved in Toll-like receptor 4-mediated
BST-2/tetherin regulation.

Jones PH(1), Okeoma CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine,
Iowa City, IA, United States.

BST-2 is a virus restriction factor whose expression is principally induced by
IFNa through the type I IFN receptor. However, expression of BST-2 is modulated
by mitogens, notably the TLR4 agonist - LPS, via mechanisms that are poorly
understood. In this study, the role of TLR4 pathway on BST-2 expression was
examined. We demonstrate that the TLR4/PI3K signaling pathway regulates both
constitutive and LPS-induced BST-2 expression. LPS stimulation induces BST-2
expression in a manner dependent on TLR4/TRIF/IRF3 pathway. Genetic deletion or
pharmacological inhibition of signaling through TLR4, as well as, the deletion of
the TRIF and IRF3 genes blunts BST-2 induction by LPS. However, MYD88-/- cells
have enhanced BST-2 levels and respond to LPS-mediated induction of BST-2. High
level of BST-2 in MYD88 null cells is dependent on IFNß since antibody-mediated
neutralization of IFNß synthesis results in reduced BST-2 levels in these cells. 
Similar to the effect of MYD88, inhibition of PI3K activity elevates basal BST-2 
level and augments LPS-induced BST-2 expression. Importantly, BST-2 regulation
via TLR4 and PI3K is transcriptionally controlled. We discovered that actinomycin
D-mediated blocking of gene transcription and inhibition of protein synthesis
with cycloheximide result in impairment of BST-2 mRNA expression. Taken together,
our results demonstrate that activation of TLR4 results in TRIF/IRF3-mediated
positive regulation of BST-2 or MYD88/PI3K-directed negative regulation of BST-2.
Thus, our findings enlist BST-2 as one of the genes regulated by PI3K downstream 
of TLR4 and identify the TLR4/PI3K signaling as a novel pathway that controls
BST-2 expression.

© 2013.

PMID: 24036213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Antiviral Res. 2013 Nov;100(2):546-54. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.09.001. Epub
2013 Sep 12.

PIAS1 negatively modulates virus triggered type I IFN signaling by blocking the
DNA binding activity of IRF3.

Li R(1), Pan Y, Shi DD, Zhang Y, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Key Laboratory of 
Medical Immunology (Ministry of Health), Peking University Health Science Center,
Beijing 100191, PR China.

During viral infection, production of proinflammatory cytokines including type I 
interferons (IFNs) is under stringent control to avoid detrimental overreaction. 
The protein inhibitor of activated STAT (PIAS) family proteins have been
recognized as anti-inflammatory molecules by restraining type I IFN induced
amplifying signaling. Here we identified PIAS1 as an important negative regulator
of virus-triggered type I IFN signaling. Overexpression of PIAS1 repressed
virus-or RIG-I like receptor stimulated type I IFN transcription, whereas
knockdown of PIAS1 expression augmented virus-induced production of type I IFNs. 
PIAS1 with a mutation in the SAP domain retained the inhibitory function in
virus-induced IFN transcription, but abolished the inhibition in IFN-stimulated
signaling. SUMO E3 ligase activity dead mutant PIAS1/C350S still had the
comparable inhibitory function with WT PIAS1. Further study indicated that PIAS1 
interacted with IRF3 and inhibited the DNA binding activity of IRF3. The
C-terminal region of PIAS1 around a cluster of acidic amino acids is critical for
the interaction with IRF3 and the inhibitory functions of PIAS1. Therefore, these
results unveil PIAS1 functions both at the virus-induced early signaling stage
and IFN stimulated amplifying stage with distinct mechanisms. PIAS1 is important 
in maintaining proper amounts of type I IFNs and restrains its magnitude when the
antiviral response intensifies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Cytotherapy. 2013 Dec;15(12):1511-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2013.06.007. Epub 2013
Sep 10.

The expression and role of miR-301a in human umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal
stromal cells.

Ma F(1), Chen D, Chi Y, Chen F, Li X, Han Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Hospital of Blood Disease, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Tianjin, China.

BACKGROUND AIMS: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are expressed in human umbilical
cord-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (UC-MSCs), and activation of TLRs plays an
important role in proliferation, differentiation and immunoregulatory activity of
UC-MSCs. We investigated whether TLRs regulated the expression of microRNAs
(miRNAs) in UC-MSCs and the role of miRNAs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: With miRNA microarray analysis, we demonstrated that the
expression of many miRNAs varied when UC-MSCs were stimulated with the ligand of 
toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The expression of some
miRNAs was verified by polymerase chain reaction. It was found that microRNA-301a
(miR-301a) was up-regulated by the ligands of TLR3 and TLR4, LPS and polyinosinic
acid:polycytidylic acid poly(I:C). However, the inhibitors of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
NF-<U+03BA>B and interferon regulatory factor 3 IRF3 signal attenuated the effect of LPS
and poly(I:C) on miR-301a expression. Over-expression or lower expression of
miR-301a affected the cytokine secretion of UC-MSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of miR-301a in UC-MSCs was regulated by TLRs, and
miR-301a affected the cytokine secretion of UC-MSCs.

Copyright © 2013 International Society for Cellular Therapy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24035358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 25;288(43):31268-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.462341. Epub
2013 Sep 9.

Toll-like receptor 3-mediated necrosis via TRIF, RIP3, and MLKL.

Kaiser WJ(1), Sridharan H, Huang C, Mandal P, Upton JW, Gough PJ, Sehon CA,
Marquis RW, Bertin J, Mocarski ES.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Vaccine Center,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling is triggered by pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns that mediate well established cytokine-driven pathways, activating NF-<U+03BA>B
together with IRF3/IRF7. In addition, TLR3 drives caspase 8-regulated programmed 
cell death pathways reminiscent of TNF family death receptor signaling. We find
that inhibition or elimination of caspase 8 during stimulation of TLR2, TLR3,
TLR4, TLR5, or TLR9 results in receptor interacting protein (RIP) 3
kinase-dependent programmed necrosis that occurs through either TIR
domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-ß (TRIF) or MyD88 signal
transduction. TLR3 or TLR4 directly activates programmed necrosis through a RIP
homotypic interaction motif-dependent association of TRIF with RIP3 kinase (also 
called RIPK3). In fibroblasts, this pathway proceeds independent of RIP1 or its
kinase activity, but it remains dependent on mixed lineage kinase domain-like
protein (MLKL) downstream of RIP3 kinase. Here, we describe two small molecule
RIP3 kinase inhibitors and employ them to demonstrate the common requirement for 
RIP3 kinase in programmed necrosis induced by RIP1-RIP3, DAI-RIP3, and TRIF-RIP3 
complexes. Cell fate decisions following TLR signaling parallel death receptor
signaling and rely on caspase 8 to suppress RIP3-dependent programmed necrosis
whether initiated directly by a TRIF-RIP3-MLKL pathway or indirectly via TNF
activation and the RIP1-RIP3-MLKL necroptosis pathway.

PMCID: PMC3829437
PMID: 24019532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 1;191(7):3913-21. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203305. Epub 2013
Sep 6.

IFIT2 is an effector protein of type I IFN-mediated amplification of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced TNF-a secretion and LPS-induced endotoxin shock.

Siegfried A(1), Berchtold S, Manncke B, Deuschle E, Reber J, Ott T, Weber M,
Kalinke U, Hofer MJ, Hatesuer B, Schughart K, Gailus-Durner V, Fuchs H, Hrabe de 
Angelis M, Weber F, Hornef MW, Autenrieth IB, Bohn E.

Author information: 
(1)Interfakultäres Institut für Mikrobiologie und Infektionsmedizin, Eberhard
Karl Universität Tuebingen, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany;

Type I IFN signaling amplifies the secretion of LPS-induced proinflammatory
cytokines such as TNF-a or IL-6 and might thus contribute to the high mortality
associated with Gram-negative septic shock in humans. The underlying molecular
mechanism, however, is ill defined. In this study, we report the generation of
mice deficient in IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2 (Ifit2)
and demonstrate that Ifit2 is a critical signaling intermediate for LPS-induced
septic shock. Ifit2 expression was significantly upregulated in response to LPS
challenge in an IFN-a receptor- and IFN regulatory factor (Irf)9-dependent
manner. Also, LPS induced secretion of IL-6 and TNF-a by bone marrow-derived
macrophages (BMDMs) was significantly enhanced in the presence of Ifit2. In
accordance, Ifit2-deficient mice exhibited significantly reduced serum levels of 
IL-6 and TNF-a and reduced mortality in an endotoxin shock model. Investigation
of the underlying signal transduction events revealed that Ifit2 upregulates Irf3
phosphorylation. In the absence of Irf3, reduced Ifn-ß mRNA expression and Ifit2 
protein expression after LPS stimulation was found. Also, Tnf-a and Il-6
secretion but not Tnf-a and Il-6 mRNA expression levels were reduced. Thus,
IFN-stimulated Ifit2 via enhanced Irf3 phosphorylation upregulates the secretion 
of proinflammatory cytokines. It thereby amplifies LPS-induced cytokine
production and critically influences the outcome of endotoxin shock.

PMID: 24014876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Infect Immun. 2013 Nov;81(11):4299-310. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00477-13. Epub 2013 Sep 
3.

Deciphering the contribution of human meningothelial cells to the inflammatory
and antimicrobial response at the meninges.

Royer PJ(1), Rogers AJ, Wooldridge KG, Tighe P, Mahdavi J, Rittig MG, Ala'Aldeen 
D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Medical Sciences and School of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

We have investigated the response of primary human meningothelial cells to
Neisseria meningitidis. Through a transcriptome analysis, we provide a
comprehensive examination of the response of meningothelial cells to bacterial
infection. A wide range of chemokines are elicited which act to attract and
activate the main players of innate and adaptive immunity. We showed that
meningothelial cells expressed a high level of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), and, 
using a gene silencing strategy, we demonstrated the contribution of this
pathogen recognition receptor in meningothelial cell activation. Secretion of
interleukin-6 (IL-6), CXCL10, and CCL5 was almost exclusively TLR4 dependent and 
relied on MyD88 and TRIF adaptor cooperation. In contrast, IL-8 induction was
independent of the presence of TLR4, MyD88, and TRIF. Transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B
p65, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Jun N-terminal protein kinase
(JNK1), IRF3, and IRF7 were activated after contact with bacteria. Interestingly,
the protein kinase IRAK4 was found to play a minor role in the meningothelial
cell response to Neisseria infection. Our work highlights the role of
meningothelial cells in the development of an immune response and inflammation in
the central nervous system (CNS) in response to meningococcal infection. It also 
sheds light on the complexity of intracellular signaling after TLR triggering.

PMCID: PMC3811830
PMID: 24002066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cell Rep. 2013 Sep 12;4(5):959-73. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.07.043. Epub 2013
Aug 29.

Extensive cooperation of immune master regulators IRF3 and NF<U+03BA>B in RNA Pol II
recruitment and pause release in human innate antiviral transcription.

Freaney JE(1), Kim R, Mandhana R, Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL
60208, USA.

Transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
(NF<U+03BA>B) are activated by external stimuli, including virus infection, to
translocate to the nucleus and bind genomic targets important for immunity and
inflammation. To investigate RNA polymerase II (Pol II) recruitment and
elongation in the human antiviral gene regulatory network, a comprehensive
genome-wide analysis was conducted during the initial phase of virus infection.
Results reveal extensive integration of IRF3 and NF<U+03BA>B with Pol II and associated 
machinery and implicate partners for antiviral transcription. Analysis indicates 
that both de novo polymerase recruitment and stimulated release of paused
polymerase work together to control virus-induced gene activation. In addition to
known messenger-RNA-encoding loci, IRF3 and NF<U+03BA>B stimulate transcription at
regions not previously associated with antiviral transcription, including
abundant unannotated loci that encode novel virus-inducible RNAs (nviRNAs). These
nviRNAs are widely induced by virus infections in diverse cell types and
represent a previously overlooked cellular response to virus infection.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3792498
PMID: 23994473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Science. 2013 Sep 20;341(6152):1390-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1244040. Epub 2013
Aug 29.

Pivotal roles of cGAS-cGAMP signaling in antiviral defense and immune adjuvant
effects.

Li XD(1), Wu J, Gao D, Wang H, Sun L, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Invasion of microbial DNA into the cytoplasm of animal cells triggers a cascade
of host immune reactions that help clear the infection; however, self DNA in the 
cytoplasm can cause autoimmune diseases. Biochemical approaches led to the
identification of cyclic guanosine monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate (cGAMP) 
synthase (cGAS) as a cytosolic DNA sensor that triggers innate immune responses. 
Here, we show that cells from cGAS-deficient (cGas(-/-)) mice, including
fibroblasts, macrophages, and dendritic cells, failed to produce type I
interferons and other cytokines in response to DNA transfection or DNA virus
infection. cGas(-/-) mice were more susceptible to lethal infection with herpes
simplex virus 1 (HSV1) than wild-type mice. We also show that cGAMP is an
adjuvant that boosts antigen-specific T cell activation and antibody production
in mice.

PMCID: PMC3863637
PMID: 23989956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Virol. 2013 Nov;87(21):11851-60. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01211-13. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

Herpes simplex virus 1 ubiquitin-specific protease UL36 inhibits beta interferon 
production by deubiquitinating TRAF3.

Wang S(1), Wang K, Li J, Zheng C.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, China;

Interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immune defense is a potent antiviral mechanism. 
Viruses evade innate immunity and limit secretion of beta interferon (IFN-ß) to
replicate and survive in the host. The largest tegument protein of herpes simplex
virus 1 (HSV-1), UL36, contains a novel deubiquitinase (DUB) motif embedded in
its N terminus, denoted UL36 ubiquitin-specific protease (UL36USP). In the
present study, we demonstrate that HSV-1 UL36USP inhibits Sendai virus
(SeV)-induced interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) dimerization, promoter
activation, and transcription of IFN-ß. The DUB activity of UL36USP is essential 
to block IFN-ß production. UL36USP also inhibited IFN-ß promoter activity induced
by overexpression of the N terminus of RIG-I (RIG-IN) and MAVS, but not TBK-1,
I<U+03BA>B kinase e (IKKe), and IRF3/5D. UL36USP was subsequently shown to
deubiquitinate TRAF3 and prevent the recruitment of the downstream adaptor TBK1. 
The recombinant HSV-1 lacking UL36USP DUB activity was generated. Cells infected 
with the mutant virus produced more IFN-ß than wild-type (WT) HSV-1-infected
cells. These findings demonstrate HSV-1 UL36USP removes polyubiquitin chains on
TRAF3 and counteracts the IFN-ß pathway.

PMCID: PMC3807349
PMID: 23986588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Ther. 2013 Nov;21(11):2043-53. doi: 10.1038/mt.2013.187. Epub 2013 Aug 28.

Triptolide-mediated inhibition of interferon signaling enhances vesicular
stomatitis virus-based oncolysis.

Ben Yebdri F(1), Van Grevenynghe J, Tang VA, Goulet ML, Wu JH, Stojdl DF, Hiscott
J, Lin R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General Hospital, McGill
University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Preclinical and clinical trials demonstrated that use of oncolytic viruses (OVs) 
is a promising new therapeutic approach to treat multiple types of cancer. To
further improve their viral oncolysis, experimental strategies are now combining 
OVs with different cytotoxic compounds. In this study, we investigated the
capacity of triptolide - a natural anticancer molecule - to enhance vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) oncolysis in OV-resistant cancer cells. Triptolide
treatment increased VSV replication in the human prostate cancer cell line PC3
and in other VSV-resistant cells in a dose- and time-dependent manner in vitro
and in vivo. Mechanistically, triptolide (TPL) inhibited the innate antiviral
response by blocking type I interferon (IFN) signaling, downstream of IRF3
activation. Furthermore, triptolide-enhanced VSV-induced apoptosis in a
dose-dependent fashion in VSV-resistant cells, as measured by annexin-V, cleaved 
caspase-3, and B-cell lymphoma 2 staining. In vivo, using the TSA mammary
adenocarcinoma and PC3 mouse xenograft models, combination treatment with VSV and
triptolide delayed tumor growth and prolonged survival of tumor-bearing animals
by enhancing viral replication. Together, these results demonstrate that
triptolide inhibition of IFN production sensitizes prostate cancer cells to VSV
replication and virus-mediated apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3831042
PMID: 23985699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Neuroinflammation. 2013 Aug 21;10:104. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-10-104.

TLR-3 receptor activation protects the very immature brain from ischemic injury.

Shi H, Gabarin N, Hickey E, Askalan R.

BACKGROUND: We have shown that preconditioning by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) will
result in 90% reduction in ischemic brain damage in P7 rats. This robust LPS
neuroprotection was not observed in P3 or P5 pups (corresponding to human
premature infant). LPS is a known Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR-4) ligand. We
hypothesized that TLRs other than TLR-4 may mediate preconditioning against
cerebral ischemic injury in the developing brain.
METHODS: TLR-2, TLR-3, TLR-4, and TLR-9 expression was detected in brain sections
from P3, P5, and P7 rats by immuno-staining. In subsequent experiments, P5 rats
were randomly assigned to TLR-3 specific agonist, poly I:C, or saline treated
group. At 48 h after the injections, hypoxic-ischemic (HI) injury was induced by 
unilateral carotid artery ligation followed by hypoxia for 65 min. Brains were
removed 1 week after HI injury and infarct volumes were compared in H&E stained
sections between the two groups.
RESULTS: TLR-2 and TLR-3 were highly expressed in brains of P3 and P5 but not in 
P7 rats. The number of TLR-4 positive cells was lower in P3 and P5 compared to P7
brains (P <0.05). TLR-3 was predominately expressed in P5 pups (P <0.05). There
was no significant difference in TLR-9 expression in the three age groups. There 
was a significant reduction in infarct volume (P=0.01) in poly I:C compared to
saline pre-treated P5 pups. Pre-treatment with poly I:C downregulated NF-<U+03BA>B and
upregulated IRF3 expression in P5 rat ischemic brains. Pre-treatment with poly
I:C did not offer neuroprotection in P7 rat brains.
CONCLUSION: TLRs expression and function is developmentally determined. Poly
I:C-induced preconditioning against ischemic injury may be mediated by modulation
of TLR-3 signaling pathways. This is the first study to show that TLR-3 is
expressed in the immature brain and mediates preconditioning against ischemic
injury.

PMCID: PMC3765441
PMID: 23965176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Immunobiology. 2013 Nov;218(11):1312-21. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2013.07.007. Epub
2013 Jul 29.

The interferon response to intracellular DNA: why so many receptors?

Unterholzner L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Signalling and Immunology, College of Life Sciences,
University of Dundee, DD1 5EH, UK. Electronic address:
l.unterholzner@dundee.ac.uk.

The detection of intracellular DNA has emerged to be a key event in the innate
immune response to viruses and intracellular bacteria, and during conditions of
sterile inflammation and autoimmunity. One of the consequences of the detection
of DNA as a 'stranger' and a 'danger' signal is the production of type I
interferons and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Much work has been dedicated to the
elucidation of the signalling cascades that activate this DNA-induced gene
expression programme. However, while many proteins have been proposed to act as
sensors for intracellular DNA in recent years, none has been met with universal
acceptance, and a theory linking all the recent observations is, as yet, lacking.
This review presents the evidence for the various interferon-inducing DNA
receptors proposed to date, and examines the hypotheses that might explain why so
many different receptors appear to be involved in the innate immune recognition
of intracellular DNA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23962476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Cell Host Microbe. 2013 Aug 14;14(2):148-58. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2013.07.011.

The second messenger phosphatidylinositol-5-phosphate facilitates antiviral
innate immune signaling.

Kawasaki T(1), Takemura N, Standley DM, Akira S, Kawai T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunobiology, Graduate School of Biological Sciences,
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, 8916-5 Takayama, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, 
Japan.

Innate immune receptors, notably Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and RIG-I-like
receptors (RLRs), sense viral infection and activate transcription factors,
including interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF3), to induce type I interferon
(IFN). We demonstrate that the lipid phosphatidylinositol-5-phosphate (PtdIns5P) 
is increased upon viral infection and facilitates type I IFN production by
binding to IRF3 and its upstream kinase TBK1 and promoting TBK1-mediated IRF3
phosphorylation and activation. Additionally, we determine that PtdIns5P is
produced through the kinase PIKfyve, which phosphorylates PtdIns to generate
PtdIns5P. Accordingly, PIKfyve knockdown or pharamoclogical inhibition decreases 
PtdIns5P levels and type I IFN production after TLR or RLR stimulation, and
results in increased viral replication. A synthetic PtdIns5P, C8-PtdIns5P,
promotes IRF3 phosphorylation and cytokine production in dendritic cells and acts
as an adjuvant to boost immune responses in immunized mice. Thus, PtdIns5P
produced during viral infection is a second messenger that targets the TBK1-IRF3 
axis to elicit antiviral immunity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23954154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Elife. 2013 Aug 14;2:e00785. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00785.

MAVS recruits multiple ubiquitin E3 ligases to activate antiviral signaling
cascades.

Liu S(1), Chen J, Cai X, Wu J, Chen X, Wu YT, Sun L, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology , University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center , Dallas , United States.

RNA virus infections are detected by the RIG-I family of receptors, which induce 
type-I interferons through the mitochondrial protein MAVS. MAVS forms large
prion-like polymers that activate the cytosolic kinases IKK and TBK1, which in
turn activate NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3, respectively, to induce interferons. Here we show
that MAVS polymers recruit several TRAF proteins, including TRAF2, TRAF5, and
TRAF6, through distinct TRAF-binding motifs. Mutations of these motifs that
disrupted MAVS binding to TRAFs abrogated its ability to activate IRF3. IRF3
activation was also abolished in cells lacking TRAF2, 5, and 6. These TRAF
proteins promoted ubiquitination reactions that recruited NEMO to the MAVS
signaling complex, leading to the activation of IKK and TBK1. These results
delineate the mechanism of MAVS signaling and reveal that TRAF2, 5, and 6, which 
are normally associated with NF-<U+03BA>B activation, also play a crucial role in IRF3
activation in antiviral immune responses.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00785.001.

PMCID: PMC3743401
PMID: 23951545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Virol. 2013 Oct;87(20):11244-54. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01248-13. Epub 2013 Aug 14.

Soluble interleukin-6 receptor-mediated innate immune response to DNA and RNA
viruses.

Wang Q(1), Chen X, Feng J, Cao Y, Song Y, Wang H, Zhu C, Liu S, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei, China.

The interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptor, which exists as membrane-bound and soluble
forms, plays critical roles in the immune response. The soluble IL-6 receptor
(sIL6R) has been identified as a potential therapeutic target for preventing
coronary heart disease. However, little is known about the role of this receptor 
during viral infection. In this study, we show that sIL6R, but not IL-6, is
induced by viral infection via the cyclooxygenase-2 pathway. Interestingly,
sIL6R, but not IL-6, exhibited extensive antiviral activity against DNA and RNA
viruses, including hepatitis B virus, influenza virus, human enterovirus 71, and 
vesicular stomatitis virus. No synergistic effects on antiviral action were
observed by combining sIL6R and IL-6. Furthermore, sIL6R mediated antiviral
action via the p28 pathway and induced alpha interferon (IFN-a) by promoting the 
nuclear translocation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-<U+03BA>B, which led to
the activation of downstream IFN effectors, including 2',5'-oligoadenylate
synthetase (OAS), double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR), and
myxovirus resistance protein (Mx). Thus, our results demonstrate that sIL6R, but 
not IL-6, plays an important role in the host antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC3807281
PMID: 23946454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2013 Oct;45(10):867-74. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmt088. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

IFIT5 potentiates anti-viral response through enhancing innate immune signaling
pathways.

Zhang B(1), Liu X, Chen W, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Regulatory Biology, Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, School of Life Sciences, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241,
China.

Humans have a distinct combination of IFIT (IFN-induced protein with
tetratricopeptide repeats) family orthologs, including IFIT1 (ISG56), IFIT2
(ISG54), IFIT3 (ISG60), and IFIT5 (ISG58). The function of IFIT1/IFIT2/IFIT3 has 
been intensively investigated. However, little is known about the role of IFIT5
in any cellular processes. In this study, we reported that both the mRNA and
protein levels of IFIT5 are up-regulated in response to RNA virus infection or
polyinosinic-cytidylic acid stimulation. Ectopic expression of IFIT5 could
synergize IRF3- and NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated gene expression, whereas knockdown of IFIT5
impairs the transcription of these genes. Consistently, anti-viral responses of
host cells are significantly increased or decreased in the presence or absence of
IFIT5. Mechanistically, IFIT5 co-localizes partly with mitochondria and interacts
with RIG-I and MAVS. Our study identified that IFIT5 is an important enhancer in 
innate immune response.

PMID: 23942572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Sep 6;438(4):619-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.006. Epub 2013 Aug 11.

Borna disease virus nucleoprotein inhibits type I interferon induction through
the interferon regulatory factor 7 pathway.

Song W(1), Kao W, Zhai A, Qian J, Li Y, Zhang Q, Zhao H, Hu Y, Li H, Zhang F.

Author information: 
(1)The Heilongjiang Key Laboratory of Immunity and Infection, Heilongjiang,
China.

The expression of type I interferon (IFN) is one of the most potent innate
defences against viral infection in higher vertebrates. Borna disease virus (BDV)
establishes persistent, noncytolytic infections in animals and in cultured cells.
Early studies have shown that the BDV phosphoprotein can inhibit the activation
of type I IFN through the TBK1-IRF3 pathway. The function of the BDV
nucleoprotein in the inhibition of IFN activity is not yet clear. In this study, 
we demonstrated IRF7 activation and increased IFN-a/ß expression in a
BDV-persistently infected human oligodendroglia cell line following RNA
interference-mediated BDV nucleoprotein silencing. Furthermore, we showed that
BDV nucleoprotein prevented the nuclear localisation of IRF7 and inhibited
endogenous IFN induction by poly(I:C), coxsackie virus B3 and IFN-ß. Our findings
provide evidence for a previously undescribed mechanism by which the BDV
nucleoprotein inhibits type I IFN expression by interfering with the IRF7
pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23939047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Antiviral Res. 2013 Oct;100(1):226-37. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.07.019. Epub
2013 Aug 6.

Human monoclonal ScFv specific to NS1 protein inhibits replication of influenza
viruses across types and subtypes.

Yodsheewan R(1), Maneewatch S, Srimanote P, Thueng-In K, Songserm T, Dong-Din-On 
F, Bangphoomi K, Sookrung N, Choowongkomon K, Chaicumpa W.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Immunology, Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine 
Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand.

Currently, there is a need of new anti-influenza agents that target influenza
virus proteins other than ion channel M2 and neuraminidase. Non-structural
protein-1 (NS1) is a highly conserved multifunctional protein which is
indispensable for the virus replication cycle. In this study, fully human single 
chain antibody fragments (HuScFv) that bound specifically to recombinant and
native NS1 were produced from three huscfv-phagemid transformed Escherichia coli 
clones (nos. 3, 10 and 11) selected from a human ScFv phage display library.
Western blot analysis, mimotope searching/epitope identification, homology
modeling/molecular docking and phage mimotope ELISA inhibition indicated that
HuScFv of clone no. 3 reacted with NS1 R domain important for host innate
immunity suppression; HuScFv of clone nos. 10 and 11 bound to E domain sites
necessary for NS1 binding to the host eIF4GI and CPSF30, respectively. The HuScFv
of all clones could enter the influenza virus infected cells and interfered with 
the NS1 activities leading to replication inhibition of viruses belonging to
various heterologous A subtypes and type B by 2-64-fold as semi-quantified by
hemagglutination assay. Influenza virus infected cells treated with
representative HuScFv (clone 10) had up-expression of IRF3 and IFN-ß genes by
14.75 and 4.95-fold, respectively, in comparison with the controls, indicating
that the antibodies could restore the host innate immune response. The fully
human single chain antibodies have high potential for developing further as a
safe (adjunctive) therapeutic agent for mitigating, if not abrogating, severe
symptoms of influenza.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23928258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Aug 20;110(34):E3189-97. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1219221110. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 controls interleukin-17 expression in CD8 T
lymphocytes.

Ysebrant de Lendonck L(1), Tonon S, Nguyen M, Vandevenne P, Welsby I, Martinet V,
Molle C, Charbonnier LM, Leo O, Goriely S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology, Walloon Excellence in Life sciences and
BIOtechnology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, B-6041 Charleroi-Gosselies,
Belgium.

IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 plays a key role in innate responses against
viruses. Herein we assessed its contribution to T-cell activation. We observed
that poly(I:C)-induced IRF3 activation in CD8 T cells represses IL-17 expression 
in a type I IFN-independent fashion. Even in the absence of poly(I:C),
polyclonally activated naïve IRF3(-/-) CD8 T cells expressed high levels of IL-17
and IL-23R in comparison with wild-type cells. Furthermore, IRF3(-/-) OT1 cells
adoptively transferred into wild-type hosts also produced higher IL-17 levels
upon immunization than their wild-type counterparts. This phenotype could be
reversed by ectopic expression of IRF3, confirming that this effect is intrinsic 
to T cells. We show that IRF3 directly interacts with ROR<U+03B3>t in the cytoplasm
through its IRF interaction domain and limits its ability to bind and
transactivate the IL-17 promoter. These observations uncover an unexpected role
of IRF3 in the control of CD8 T-cell polarization.

PMCID: PMC3752229
PMID: 23918362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Dec;41(4):534-43. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.07.017. Epub
2013 Aug 1.

Expression regulation of zebrafish interferon regulatory factor 9 by promoter
analysis.

Shi J(1), Zhang YB, Zhang JS, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China; Department of
Bioengineering & Environmental Science, Changsha University, Changsha 410003,
China.

We previously showed that a fish interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 9 (IRF9)
homologue, crucian carp Carassius auratus IRF9, displays constitutively nuclear
localization and involvement in fish IFN-dependent JAK-STAT signaling; however,
little is known about the expression regulation of fish IRF9. Here, we
characterized the expression of zebrafish IRF9 by promoter analysis. Zebrafish
IRF9 gene promoter contained several putative transcription factor binding sites,
including one ISRE (IFN-stimulated response element), one GAS (IFN gamma
activation sequence) and three GATEs (IFN<U+03B3> activated transcriptional element,
GATE1/2/3). Further sequence analyses revealed that GAS and GATE motifs existed
in all promoters of IRF9 from mammals and fishes. Luciferase assays confirmed
that zebrafish IRF9 promoter could be activated by zebrafish IFNfs and zebrafish 
IFN<U+03B3>2, as well as transcription factors IRF3, IRF7, and combination of IRF9 and
STAT2. Treatment of recombinant crucian carp IFN protein or overexpression of
zebrafish IFN<U+03B3>2 both led to significant increase in crucian carp IRF9 mRNA and
protein in cultured fish cells. Comparison of IFN-stimulated promoter activity
revealed much more significant induction of zebrafish IRF9 by zebrafish IFN<U+03B3>2
than by zebrafish IFNfs. Mutation analyses showed that the putative GAS and GATE3
contributed to zebrafish IFN<U+03B3>2-triggered IRF9 expression, whereas the putative
ISRE and the other two GATEs were not functional for induction of zebrafish IRF9.
These results together indicated that the expression property of IRF9 might be
conserved from fish to mammals and that some not yet identified mechanisms could 
exist in IRF9 gene transcription regulation in response to IFNs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Oct;94(4):759-68. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0712351. Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Nucleotide receptor P2RX7 stimulation enhances LPS-induced interferon-ß
production in murine macrophages.

Gavala ML(1), Liu YP, Lenertz LY, Zeng L, Blanchette JB, Guadarrama AG, Denlinger
LC, Bertics PJ, Smith JA.

Author information: 
(1)2.University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, 600 Highland
Ave., CSC H4/472, Madison, WI 53792-9988, USA. jsmith27@pediatrics.wisc.edu.

Stimulation of P2RX(7) with extracellular ATP potentiates numerous LPS-induced
proinflammatory events, including cytokine induction in macrophages, but the
molecular mechanisms underlying this process are not well defined. Although
P2RX(7) ligation has been proposed to activate several transcription factors,
many of the LPS-induced mediators affected by P2RX(7) activation are not induced 
by P2RX(7) agonists alone, suggesting a complementary role for P2RX(7) in
transcriptional regulation. Type I IFN production, whose expression is tightly
controlled by multiple transcription factors that form an enhanceosome, is
critical for resistance against LPS-containing bacteria. The effect of purinergic
receptor signaling on LPS-dependent type I IFN is unknown and would be of great
relevance to a diverse array of inflammatory conditions. The present study
demonstrates that stimulation of macrophages with P2RX(7) agonists substantially 
enhances LPS-induced IFN-ß expression, and this enhancement is ablated in
macrophages that do not express functional P2RX(7) or when the MAPK MEK1/2
pathways are inhibited. Potentiation of LPS-induced IFN-ß expression following
P2RX(7) stimulation is likely transcriptionally regulated, as this enhancement is
observed at the IFN-ß promoter level. Furthermore, P2RX(7) stimulation is able to
increase the phosphorylation and subsequent IFN-ß promoter occupancy of IRF-3, a 
transcription factor that is critical for IFN-ß transcription by TLR agonists.
This newly discovered role for P2RX(7) in IFN regulation may have implications in
antimicrobial defense, which has been linked to P2RX(7) activation in other
studies.

PMCID: PMC3774844
PMID: 23911869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. FEBS Lett. 2013 Sep 17;587(18):3014-20. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.07.025. Epub 
2013 Jul 23.

IRF3 and ERK MAP-kinases control nitric oxide production from macrophages in
response to poly-I:C.

Moore TC(1), Petro TM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE,
USA.

Understanding nitric oxide (NO) in innate anti-viral immunity and immune-mediated
pathology is hampered by incomplete details of its transcriptional and signaling 
factors. We found in macrophages that IRF3, ERK MAP-kinases, and PKR are
essential to NO production in response to RNA-virus mimic, poly I:C, a TLR3
agonist. ERK's role in NO induction may be through phosphorylation of serine-171 
of IRF3 and expression of NO-inducing cytokines, IL-6 and IFN-ß. However, these
cytokines induced less NO in IRF3 knockout or knockdown macrophages. These
findings show that ERK and IRF3 coordinate induction of NO by macrophages in
response to stimulation of TLR3.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3777643
PMID: 23892079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2013 Oct;9(10):2189-95. doi: 10.4161/hv.25699. Epub 2013
Jul 24.

NF-<U+03BA>B activation during intradermal DNA vaccination is essential for eliciting
tumor protective antigen-specific CTL responses.

Ligtenberg MA(1), Rojas-Colonelli N(2), Kiessling R(1), Lladser A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immune and Gene Therapy Laboratory; Cancer Center Karolinska; Department of
Oncology and Pathology; Karolinska Institutet; Stockholm, Sweden. (2)Laboratory
of Gene Immunotherapy; Fundación Ciencia & Vida; Santiago, Chile; Facultad de
Ciencias Biológicas; Universidad Andrés Bello; Santiago, Chile. (3)Laboratory of 
Gene Immunotherapy; Fundación Ciencia & Vida; Santiago, Chile; Programa de
Biomedicina; Universidad San Sebastián; Santiago, Chile.

DNA vaccines have been shown to elicit tumor-protective cytotoxic T lymphocyte
(CTL) immunity in preclinical models, but have shown limited efficacy in cancer
patients. Plasmids used for DNA vaccines can stimulate several innate immune
receptors, triggering the activation of master transcription factors, including
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor <U+03BA> B (NF-<U+03BA>B). These
transcription factors drive the production of type I interferons (IFNs) and
pro-inflammatory cytokines, which promote the induction of CTL responses.
Understanding the innate immune signaling pathways triggered by DNA vaccines that
control the generation of CTL responses will increase our ability to design more 
effective vaccines. To gain insight into the contribution of these pathways, we
vaccinated mice lacking different signaling components with plasmids encoding
tyrosinase-related protein 2 (TRP2) or ovalbumin (OVA) using intradermal
electroporation. Antigen-specific CTL responses were detected by intracellular
IFN-<U+03B3> staining and in vivo cytotoxicity. Mice lacking IRF3, IFN-a receptor,
IL-1ß/IL-18, TLR9 or MyD88 showed similar CTL responses to wild-type mice,
arguing that none of these molecules were required for the immunogenicity of DNA 
vaccines. To elucidate the role of NF-<U+03BA>B activation we co-vaccinated mice with
pI<U+03BA>Ba-SR, a plasmid encoding a mutant I<U+03BA>Ba that blocks NF-<U+03BA>B activity. Mice
vaccinated with pI<U+03BA>Ba-SR and the TRP2-encoding plasmid (pTRP2) drastically
reduced the frequencies of TRP2-specific CTLs and were unable to suppress lung
melanoma metastasis in vivo, as compared with mice vaccinated only with pTRP2.
Taken together these results indicate that the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B is essential
for the immunogenicity of intradermal DNA vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3906403
PMID: 23884215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Cell Res. 2013 Aug;23(8):1025-42. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.98. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Viral degradasome hijacks mitochondria to suppress innate immunity.

Goswami R(1), Majumdar T, Dhar J, Chattopadhyay S, Bandyopadhyay SK,
Verbovetskaya V, Sen GC, Barik S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease, and Department of
Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, College of Sciences and Health
Professions, Cleveland State University, 2121 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44115,
USA.

The balance between the innate immunity of the host and the ability of a pathogen
to evade it strongly influences pathogenesis and virulence. The two nonstructural
(NS) proteins, NS1 and NS2, of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) are critically
required for RSV virulence. Together, they strongly suppress the type I
interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immunity of the host cells by degrading or
inhibiting multiple cellular factors required for either IFN induction or
response pathways, including RIG-I, IRF3, IRF7, TBK1 and STAT2. Here, we provide 
evidence for the existence of a large and heterogeneous degradative complex
assembled by the NS proteins, which we named "NS-degradasome" (NSD). The NSD is
roughly ~300-750 kD in size, and its degradative activity was enhanced by the
addition of purified mitochondria in vitro. Inside the cell, the majority of the 
NS proteins and the substrates of the NSD translocated to the mitochondria upon
RSV infection. Genetic and pharmacological evidence shows that optimal
suppression of innate immunity requires mitochondrial MAVS and mitochondrial
motility. Together, we propose a novel paradigm in which the mitochondria, known 
to be important for the innate immune activation of the host, are also important 
for viral suppression of the innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC3731571
PMID: 23877405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 17;8(7):e68671. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068671. Print 2013.

Intracellular delivery of lipopolysaccharide induces effective Th1-immune
responses independent of IL-12.

Watanabe S(1), Inoue J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science and Graduate School of Science,
Kitasato University, Japan.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) is responsible for many of the inflammatory responses
and pathogenic effects of Gram-negative bacteria, however, it also induces
protective immune responses. LPS induces the production of inflammatory cytokines
such as TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-12 from dendritic cells (DCs) and macrophages. It is 
thought that IL-12 is required for one of the protective immune responses induced
by LPS, the T helper 1 (Th1)-immune response, which include the production of
IFN-<U+03B3> from Th1cells and IgG2c class switching. Here, we clearly demonstrate that 
intracellular delivery of LPS by LPS-formulated liposomes (LPS-liposomes) does
not induce the production of inflammatory cytokines from DCs, but enhances
Th1-immune responses via type-I IFNs, independent of IL-12. Collectively, our
results strongly suggest that LPS-liposomes can effectively induce Th1-immune
responses without inducing unnecessary inflammation, and may be useful as an
immune adjuvant to induce protective immunity.

PMCID: PMC3714268
PMID: 23874715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Hepatology. 2014 Jan;59(1):78-88. doi: 10.1002/hep.26626. Epub 2013 Nov 18.

Cell entry, efficient RNA replication, and production of infectious hepatitis C
virus progeny in mouse liver-derived cells.

Frentzen A(1), Anggakusuma, Gürlevik E, Hueging K, Knocke S, Ginkel C, Brown RJ, 
Heim M, Dill MT, Kröger A, Kalinke U, Kaderali L, Kuehnel F, Pietschmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Virology, TWINCORE, Centre for Experimental and
Clinical Infection Research, a joint venture between the Helmholtz Centre for
Infection Research and the Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Only humans and chimpanzees are susceptible to chronic infection by hepatitis C
virus (HCV). The restricted species tropism of HCV is determined by distinct host
factor requirements at different steps of the viral life cycle. In addition,
effective innate immune targeting precludes efficient propagation of HCV in
nonhuman cells. Species-specificity of HCV host factor usage for cell entry and
virus release has been explored. However, the reason for inefficient HCV RNA
replication efficiency in mouse liver cells remains elusive. To address this, we 
generated novel mouse liver-derived cell lines with specific lesions in
mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS), interferon regulatory factor 3 
(IRF3), or Interferon-a/ß receptor (IFNAR) by in vivo immortalization. Blunted
innate immune responses in these cells modestly increased HCV RNA replication.
However, ectopic expression of liver-specific human microRNA 122 (miR-122)
further boosted RNA replication in all knockout cell lines. Remarkably, MAVS(-/-)
miR-122 cells sustained vigorous HCV RNA replication, attaining levels comparable
to the highly permissive human hepatoma cell line Huh-7.5. RNA replication was
dependent on mouse cyclophilin and phosphatidylinositol-4 kinase III alpha
(PI4KIIIa) and was also observed after transfection of full-length viral RNA.
Additionally, ectopic expression of either human or mouse apolipoprotein E (ApoE)
was sufficient to permit release of infectious particles. Finally, expression of 
human entry cofactors rendered these cells permissive to HCV infection, thus
confirming that all steps of the HCV replication cycle can be reconstituted in
mouse liver-derived cells.CONCLUSION: Blunted innate immunity, abundant miR-122, 
and HCV entry factor expression permits propagation of HCV in mouse liver-derived
cell lines.

© 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23873628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Immunol. 2013 Aug 15;191(4):1808-17. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301261. Epub 2013
Jul 17.

Differential regulation of TLR-dependent MyD88 and TRIF signaling pathways by
free zinc ions.

Brieger A(1), Rink L, Haase H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Medical Faculty, RWTH Aachen University, 52074
Aachen, Germany.

Zinc signals are utilized by several immune cell receptors. One is TLR4, which
causes an increase of free zinc ions (Zn(2+)) that is required for the
MyD88-dependent expression of inflammatory cytokines. This study investigates the
role of Zn(2+) on Toll/IL-1R domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-ß
(TRIF)-dependent signals, the other major intracellular pathway activated by
TLR4. Chelation of Zn(2+) with the membrane-permeable chelator
N,N,N',N'-Tetrakis(2-pyridylmethyl)ethylenediamine augmented TLR4-mediated
production of IFN-ß and subsequent synthesis of inducible NO synthase and
production of NO. The effect is based on Zn(2+) acting as a negative regulator of
the TRIF pathway via reducing IFN regulatory factor 3 activation. This was also
observed with TLR3, the only TLR that signals exclusively via TRIF, but not
MyD88, and does not trigger a zinc signal. In contrast, IFN-<U+03B3>-induced NO
production was unaffected by N,N,N',N'-Tetrakis(2-pyridylmethyl)ethylenediamine. 
Taken together, Zn(2+) is specifically involved in TLR signaling, where it
differentially regulates MyD88 and TRIF signaling via a zinc signal or via basal 
Zn(2+) levels, respectively.

PMID: 23863901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24600-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.473397. Epub 2013
Jul 15.

Zinc finger protein 64 promotes Toll-like receptor-triggered proinflammatory and 
type I interferon production in macrophages by enhancing p65 subunit activation.

Wang C(1), Liu X, Liu Y, Zhang Q, Yao Z, Huang B, Zhang P, Li N, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology and Department of
Immunology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

The molecular mechanisms that fine-tune the Toll-like receptor (TLR)-triggered
innate immune response need further investigation. As an important transcription 
factor, zinc finger proteins (ZFPs) play important roles in many cell functions, 
including development, differentiation, tumorigenesis, and functions of the
immune system. However, the role of ZFP members in the innate immune responses
remains unclear. Here we showed that the expression of C2H2-type ZFP, ZFP64, was 
significantly up-regulated in macrophages upon stimulation with TLR ligands,
including LPS, CpG oligodeoxynucleotides, or poly(I:C). ZFP64 overexpression
promoted TLR-triggered TNF-a, IL-6, and IFN-ß production in macrophages.
Coincidently, knockdown of ZFP64 expression significantly inhibited the
production of the above cytokines. However, activation of MAPK and IRF3 was not
responsible for the ZFP64-mediated promotion of cytokine production.
Interestingly, ZFP64 significantly up-regulated TLR-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation.
ZFP64 could bind to the promoter of the TNF-a, IL-6, and IFN-ß genes in
macrophages only after TLR ligation. Furthermore, ZFP64 associated with the NF-<U+03BA>B
p65 subunit upon LPS stimulation, and TLR-ligated macrophages showed a lower
level of p65 recruitment to the TNF-a, IL-6, and IFN-ß gene promoter in the
absence of ZFP64. The data identify ZFP64 as a downstream positive regulator of
TLR-initiated innate immune responses by associating with the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit, 
enhancing p65 recruitment to the target gene promoters and increasing p65
activation and, thus, leading to the promotion of TLR-triggered proinflammatory
cytokine and type I interferon production. Our findings add mechanistic insight
into the efficient activation of the TLR innate response against invading
pathogens.

PMCID: PMC3750158
PMID: 23857586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24569-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479550. Epub
2013 Jul 11.

DEAF1 is a Pellino1-interacting protein required for interferon production by
Sendai virus and double-stranded RNA.

Ordureau A(1), Enesa K, Nanda S, Le Francois B, Peggie M, Prescott A, Albert PR, 
Cohen P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, Sir James Black Centre,
University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Double-stranded (ds) RNA of viral origin, a ligand for Melanoma
Differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) and Toll-Like Receptor 3 (TLR3), induces
the TANK-Binding Kinase 1 (TBK1)-dependent phosphorylation and activation of
Interferon Regulatory Factor 3 (IRF3) and the E3 ubiquitin ligase Pellino1, which
are required for interferon ß (IFNß) gene transcription. Here, we report that
Pellino1 interacts with the transcription factor Deformed Epidermal
Autoregulatory Factor 1 (DEAF1). The interaction is independent of the E3 ligase 
activity of Pellino1, but weakened by the phosphorylation of Pellino1. We show
that DEAF1 binds to the IFNß promoter and to IRF3 and IRF7, that it is required
for the transcription of the IFNß gene and IFNß secretion in MEFs infected with
Sendai virus or transfected with poly(I:C). DEAF1 is also needed for
TLR3-dependent IFNß production. Taken together, our results identify DEAF1 as a
novel component of the signal transduction network by which dsRNA of viral origin
stimulates IFNß production.

PMCID: PMC3750155
PMID: 23846693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(18):10037-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01073-13. Epub 2013 Jul 10.

Negative regulation of RIG-I-mediated innate antiviral signaling by SEC14L1.

Li MT(1), Di W, Xu H, Yang YK, Chen HW, Zhang FX, Zhai ZH, Chen DY.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry
of Education, College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) is a key sensor for recognizing nucleic
acids derived from RNA viruses and triggers beta interferon (IFN-ß) production.
Because of its important role in antiviral innate immunity, the activity of RIG-I
must be tightly controlled. Here, we used yeast two-hybrid screening to identify 
a SEC14 family member, SEC14L1, as a RIG-I-associated negative regulator.
Transfected SEC14L1 interacted with RIG-I, and endogenous SEC14L1 associated with
RIG-I in a viral infection-inducible manner. Overexpression of SEC14L1 inhibited 
transcriptional activity of the IFN-ß promoter induced by RIG-I but not
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Knockdown
of endogenous SEC14L1 in both HEK293T cells and HT1080 cells potentiated RIG-I
and Sendai virus-triggered IFN-ß production as well as attenuated the replication
of Newcastle disease virus. SEC14L1 interacted with the N-terminal domain of
RIG-I (RIG-I caspase activation and recruitment domain [RIG-I-CARD]) and competed
with VISA/MAVS/IPS-1/Cardif for RIG-I-CARD binding. Domain mapping further
indicated that the PRELI-MSF1 and CRAL-TRIO domains but not the GOLD domain of
SEC14L1 are required for interaction and inhibitory function. These findings
suggest that SEC14L1 functions as a novel negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated
antiviral signaling by preventing RIG-I interaction with the downstream effector.

PMCID: PMC3754010
PMID: 23843640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2013 Sep;57(9):4417-26. doi: 10.1128/AAC.00399-13.
Epub 2013 Jul 8.

Restoration of the activated Rig-I pathway in hepatitis C virus (HCV) replicon
cells by HCV protease, polymerase, and NS5A inhibitors in vitro at clinically
relevant concentrations.

Kalkeri G(1), Lin C, Gopilan J, Sloan K, Rijnbrand R, Kwong AD.

Author information: 
(1)Vertex Pharmaceuticals Incorporated, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
gururaj_kalkeri@vrtx.com

Development of persistent hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection may be mediated by
HCV NS3 · 4A protease-dependent inhibition of host innate immunity. When
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is detected in virus-infected cells, host innate
immunity mounts an antiviral response by upregulating production of type I
interferons (a/ß interferon [IFN-a/ß]); HCV counters by cleaving the IFN-ß
stimulator 1 (IPS-1) adaptor protein, decreasing synthesis of IFN-a/ß. We
evaluated HCV protease (telaprevir, boceprevir, and TMC435350), polymerase
(HCV-796 and VX-222), and NS5A (BMS-790052) inhibitors for the ability to restore
IPS-1-mediated Rig-I signaling by measuring Sendai virus-induced IFN-ß promoter
activation in HCV replicon cells after various exposure durations. All
direct-acting HCV antivirals tested restored mitochondrial localization of IPS-1 
and rescued Sendai virus-induced IRF3 signaling after 7 days by inhibiting HCV
replication, thereby reducing the abundance of HCV NS3 · 4A protease. With 4-day 
treatment, HCV protease inhibitors, but not polymerase inhibitors, restored
mitochondrial localization of IPS-1 and rescued IFN-ß promoter activation in the 
presence of equivalent levels of NS3 protein in protease or polymerase
inhibitor-treated cells. The concentrations of HCV protease and polymerase
inhibitors needed to rescue IRF3-mediated signaling in vitro were in the range of
those observed in vivo in the plasma of treated HCV patients. These findings
suggest that (i) HCV protease, polymerase, and NS5A inhibitors can restore
virus-induced IRF3 signaling by inhibiting viral replication, thereby reducing
NS3 protease levels, and (ii) HCV protease inhibitors can restore innate immunity
by directly inhibiting NS3 protease-mediated cleavage of IPS-1 at clinically
achievable concentrations.

PMCID: PMC3754339
PMID: 23836176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Oct;19:113-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.06.025. Epub
2013 Jul 5.

Understanding the molecular mechanism(s) of hepatitis C virus (HCV) induced
interferon resistance.

Qashqari H(1), Al-Mars A, Chaudhary A, Abuzenadah A, Damanhouri G, Alqahtani M,
Mahmoud M, El Sayed Zaki M, Fatima K, Qadri I.

Author information: 
(1)King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, P.O. Box 80216, 
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is one of the foremost causes of chronic liver disease
affecting over 300 million globally. HCV contains a positive-stranded RNA of
~9600 nt and is surrounded by the 5' and 3'untranslated regions (UTR). The only
successful treatment regimen includes interferon (IFN) and ribavirin. Like many
other viruses, HCV has also evolved various mechanisms to circumvent the IFN
response by blocking (1) downstream signaling actions via STAT1, STAT2, IRF9 and 
JAK-STAT pathways and (2) repertoire of IFN Stimulatory Genes (ISGs). Several
studies have identified complex host demographic and genetic factors as well as
viral genetic heterogeneity associated with outcomes of IFN therapy. The genetic 
predispositions of over 2000 ISGS may render the patients to become resistant,
thus identification of such parameters within a subset of population are
necessary for management corollary. The ability of various HCV genotypes to
diminish IFN antiviral responses plays critical role in the establishment of
chronic infection at the acute stage of infection, thus highlighting importance
of the resistance in HCV treated groups. The recently defined role of viral
protein such as C, E2, NS3/NS4 and NS5A proteins in inducing the IFN resistance
are discussed in this article. How the viral and host genetic composition and
epistatic connectivity among polymorphic genomic sites synchronizes the
evolutionary IFN resistance trend remains under investigation. However, these
signals may have the potential to be employed for accurate prediction of
therapeutic outcomes. In this review article, we accentuate the significance of
host and viral components in IFN resistance with the aim to determine the
successful outcome in patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 27;8(6):e66894. Print 2013.

Improving Adaptive and Memory Immune Responses of an HIV/AIDS Vaccine Candidate
MVA-B by Deletion of Vaccinia Virus Genes (C6L and K7R) Blocking Interferon
Signaling Pathways.

García-Arriaza J(1), Arnáez P, Gómez CE, Sorzano CO, Esteban M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Madrid,
Spain.

Poxvirus vector Modified Vaccinia Virus Ankara (MVA) expressing HIV-1 Env, Gag,
Pol and Nef antigens from clade B (termed MVA-B) is a promising HIV/AIDS vaccine 
candidate, as confirmed from results obtained in a prophylactic phase I clinical 
trial in humans. To improve the immunogenicity elicited by MVA-B, we have
generated and characterized the innate immune sensing and the in vivo
immunogenicity profile of a vector with a double deletion in two vaccinia virus
(VACV) genes (C6L and K7R) coding for inhibitors of interferon (IFN) signaling
pathways. The innate immune signals elicited by MVA-B deletion mutants (MVA-B
<U+0394>C6L and MVA-B <U+0394>C6L/K7R) in human macrophages and monocyte-derived dendritic
cells (moDCs) showed an up-regulation of the expression of IFN-ß,
IFN-a/ß-inducible genes, TNF-a, and other cytokines and chemokines. A DNA
prime/MVA boost immunization protocol in mice revealed that these MVA-B deletion 
mutants were able to improve the magnitude and quality of HIV-1-specific CD4(+)
and CD8(+) T cell adaptive and memory immune responses, which were mostly
mediated by CD8(+) T cells of an effector phenotype, with MVA-B <U+0394>C6L/K7R being
the most immunogenic virus recombinant. CD4(+) T cell responses were mainly
directed against Env, while GPN-specific CD8(+) T cell responses were induced
preferentially by the MVA-B deletion mutants. Furthermore, antibody levels to Env
in the memory phase were slightly enhanced by the MVA-B deletion mutants compared
to the parental MVA-B. These findings revealed that double deletion of VACV genes
that act blocking intracellularly the IFN signaling pathway confers an
immunological benefit, inducing innate immune responses and increases in the
magnitude, quality and durability of the HIV-1-specific T cell immune responses. 
Our observations highlighted the immunomodulatory role of the VACV genes C6L and 
K7R, and that targeting common pathways, like IRF3/IFN-ß signaling, could be a
general strategy to improve the immunogenicity of poxvirus-based vaccine
candidates.

PMCID: PMC3694958
PMID: 23826170  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


491. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(17):9813-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01146-13. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Rotavirus NSP1 mediates degradation of interferon regulatory factors through
targeting of the dimerization domain.

Arnold MM(1), Barro M, Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Rotavirus Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP1 can inhibit expression of interferon (IFN)
and IFN-stimulated gene products by inducing proteasome-mediated degradation of
IFN-regulatory factors (IRFs), including IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7. All IRF proteins
share an N-terminal DNA-binding domain (DBD), and IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 contain a 
similar C-proximal IRF association domain (IAD) that mediates IRF dimerization.
An autoinhibitory domain (ID) at the extreme C terminus interacts with the IAD,
burying residues necessary for IRF dimerization. Phosphorylation of
serine/threonine residues in the ID induces charge repulsions that unmask the
IAD, enabling IRF dimerization and subsequent nuclear translocation. To define
the region of IRF proteins targeted for degradation by NSP1, we generated IRF3
and IRF7 truncation mutants and transiently expressed each with simian SA11-4F
NSP1. These assays indicated that the IAD represented a necessary and sufficient 
target for degradation. Because NSP1 did not mediate degradation of truncated
forms of the IAD, NSP1 likely requires a structurally intact IAD for recognition 
and targeting of IRF proteins. IRF9, which contains an IAD-like region that
directs interactions with signal inducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins, was also targeted for degradation by NSP1, while IRF1, which lacks an
IAD, was not. Analysis of mutant forms of IRF3 unable to undergo dimerization or 
that were constitutively dimeric showed that both were targeted for degradation
by NSP1. These results indicate that SA11-4F NSP1 can induce degradation of
inactive and activated forms of IAD-containing IRF proteins (IRF3 to IRF9),
allowing a multipronged attack on IFN-based pathways that promote antiviral
innate and adaptive immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3754143
PMID: 23824805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(17):9788-801. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01440-13. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Herpes simplex virus 1-encoded tegument protein VP16 abrogates the production of 
beta interferon (IFN) by inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B activation and blocking IFN regulatory 
factor 3 to recruit its coactivator CBP.

Xing J(1), Ni L, Wang S, Wang K, Lin R, Zheng C.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, China.

Host cells activate innate immune signaling pathways to defend against invading
pathogens. To survive within an infected host, viruses have evolved intricate
strategies to counteract host immune responses. Herpesviruses, including herpes
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), have large genomes and therefore have the capacity 
to encode numerous proteins that modulate host innate immune responses. Here we
define the contribution of HSV-1 tegument protein VP16 in the inhibition of beta 
interferon (IFN-ß) production. VP16 was demonstrated to significantly inhibit
Sendai virus (SeV)-induced IFN-ß production, and its transcriptional activation
domain was not responsible for this inhibition activity. Additionally, VP16
blocked the activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B promoter induced by SeV or tumor necrosis
factor alpha treatment and expression of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent genes through
interaction with p65. Coexpression analysis revealed that VP16 selectively
blocked IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3)-mediated but not IRF-7-mediated
transactivation. VP16 was able to bind to IRF-3 but not IRF-7 in vivo, based on
coimmunoprecipitation analysis, but it did not affect IRF-3 dimerization, nuclear
translocation, or DNA binding activity. Rather, VP16 interacted with the CREB
binding protein (CBP) coactivator and efficiently inhibited the formation of the 
transcriptional complexes IRF-3-CBP in the context of HSV-1 infection. These
results illustrate that VP16 is able to block the production of IFN-ß by
inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B activation and interfering with IRF-3 to recruit its coactivator
CBP, which may be important to the early events leading to HSV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC3754106
PMID: 23824799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Sep;27(9):1455-67. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1075. Epub 2013 Jul 
2.

RIG-I-like receptors mediate innate antiviral response in mouse testis.

Zhu W(1), Chen Q, Yan K, Liu Z, Li N, Zhang X, Yu L, Chen Y, Han D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College, Institute of Basic
Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005 China.

The testis is an immune privileged organ in which the tissue-specific cells have 
adopted effective innate immune functions against microbial pathogens. Toll-like 
receptors (TLRs) mediate innate immune response in the testis. The current study 
demonstrates that melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 (MDA5) and
retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) initiate the testicular innate antiviral
response. Both MDA5 and RIG-I are expressed in Leydig cells, and MDA5 is also
expressed in spermatids. Polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid [poly(I:C)], a common
agonist of MDA5 and RIG-I, significantly induces the expression of type I
interferons (IFN-a/ß) and antiviral proteins, including IFN-stimulated gene 15,
2'5'-oligoadenylate synthetase 1, and Mx GTPase 1, in primary TLR3-deficient
(TLR3(-/-)) Leydig and germ cells. Moreover, major proinflammatory cytokines,
including TNF-a and IL-6, are significantly up-regulated by poly(I:C) in these
testicular cells. The poly(I:C)-induced innate antiviral response in the
testicular cells is significantly reduced by knockdown of individual MDA5 and
RIG-I using specific small interfering RNA. We also provide evidence that local
injection of poly(I:C) induces antiviral response in the testis of TLR3(-/-)
mice. These data provide novel insights into the mechanisms underlying testicular
antiviral response.

PMID: 23820901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 20;8(6):e66859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066859. Print 2013.

Lineage-specific expansion of IFIT gene family: an insight into coevolution with 
IFN gene family.

Liu Y(1), Zhang YB, Liu TK, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

In mammals, IFIT (Interferon [IFN]-induced proteins with Tetratricopeptide Repeat
[TPR] motifs) family genes are involved in many cellular and viral processes,
which are tightly related to mammalian IFN response. However, little is known
about non-mammalian IFIT genes. In the present study, IFIT genes are identified
in the genome databases from the jawed vertebrates including the cartilaginous
elephant shark but not from non-vertebrates such as lancelet, sea squirt and
acorn worm, suggesting that IFIT gene family originates from a vertebrate
ancestor about 450 million years ago. IFIT family genes show conserved gene
structure and gene arrangements. Phylogenetic analyses reveal that this gene
family has expanded through lineage-specific and species-specific gene
duplication. Interestingly, IFN gene family seem to share a common ancestor and a
similar evolutionary mechanism; the function link of IFIT genes to IFN response
is present early since the origin of both gene families, as evidenced by the
finding that zebrafish IFIT genes are upregulated by fish IFNs, poly(I:C) and two
transcription factors IRF3/IRF7, likely via the IFN-stimulated response elements 
(ISRE) within the promoters of vertebrate IFIT family genes. These coevolution
features creates functional association of both family genes to fulfill a common 
biological process, which is likely selected by viral infection during evolution 
of vertebrates. Our results are helpful for understanding of evolution of
vertebrate IFN system.

PMCID: PMC3688568
PMID: 23818968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Innate Immun. 2014 Apr;20(3):312-9. doi: 10.1177/1753425913492180. Epub 2013 Jun 
26.

Inflammatory response to Porphyromonas gingivalis partially requires interferon
regulatory factor (IRF) 3.

Shaik-Dasthagirisaheb YB(1), Huang N, Gibson FC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

Innate immune activation with expression of pro-inflammatory molecules such as
TNF-a is a hallmark of the chronic inflammation associated with periodontal
disease (PD). Porphyromonas gingivalis, a bacterium associated with PD, engages
TLRs and activates MyD88-dependent and TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing
IFN-ß (TRIF)-dependent signaling pathways. IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 is
activated in a TRIF-dependent manner and participates in production of cytokines 
such as TNF-a; however, little is known regarding IRF3 and the host response to
PD pathogens. We speculated that IRF3 participates in the host inflammatory
response to P. gingivalis. Our results show that bone marrow macrophages (MØ)
from WT mice respond to P. gingivalis with activation and nuclear translocation
of IRF3. Compared with WT, MØ from IRF3(-/-), TRIF(-/-), and TLR4(-/-) mice
responded with reduced levels of TNF-a on P. gingivalis challenge. In addition,
full expression of IL-6 and RANTES by MØ to P. gingivalis was dependent on IRF3. 
Lastly, employing MØ from IRF3(-/-) and IRF7(-/-) mice we observed a significant 
role for IRF3 and a modest role for IRF7 in the P. gingivalis-elicited TNF-a
response. These studies identify a role for IRF3 in the inflammatory response by 
MØ to the periodontal pathogen P. gingivalis.

PMCID: PMC3867555
PMID: 23803413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Cytokine. 2013 Sep;63(3):219-24. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2013.06.001. Epub 2013 Jun
22.

Novel paradigms of innate immune sensing of viral infections.

Hare D(1), Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster Immunology Research
Center, Michael G. DeGroote Institute of Infectious Disease Research, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario L8S 4K1, Canada.

According to the existing paradigm, cellular recognition of viral infection is
mediated by molecular patterns within the virus particle or produced during virus
replication. However, there are various physical cellular changes indicative of
infection that could also trigger innate antiviral responses. The type-I
interferon response is rapidly engaged to limit viral infection and a number of
studies have shown that the interferon response, or components of it, are induced
by general perturbations to cellular processes. Virus entry requires membrane and
cytoskeletal perturbation, and both membrane fusion or actin depolymerising
agents alone are able to activate antiviral genes. Viruses cause cellular stress 
and change the cellular environment, and oxidative stress or endoplasmic
reticulum stress will amplify antiviral signaling. Many of these responses
converge on interferon regulatory factor 3, suggesting that it plays a crucial
role in determining the degree to which the cell responds. This review highlights
novel paradigms of viral recognition and speculates that viral infection is
sensed as a danger signal.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23800788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Sep;135(1):81-90. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft140. Epub 2013 Jun 23.

Suppression of acute graft-versus-host response by TCDD is independent of the
CTLA-4-IFN-<U+03B3>-IDO pathway.

Rohlman D(1), Punj S, Pennington J, Bradford S, Kerkvliet NI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) by its prototypic ligand,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), induces potent suppression of an
acute graft-versus-host (GVH) response and prevents GVH disease (GVHD).
Suppression is associated with development of a regulatory population of donor
CD4(+) CD25(+)T-cells that express high levels of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 
4 (CTLA-4). However, a direct link between these AhR-induced Tregs (AhR-Tregs)
and suppression of GVHD remains to be shown. CTLA-4 is a negative regulator of
T-cell responses and is associated with the induction of tolerogenic dendritic
cells (DCs) that produce indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). We hypothesized that 
AhR-Tregs mediate suppression via their enhanced expression of CTLA-4, which, in 
turn, induces IFN-<U+03B3> and IDO in host DCs. Subsequent depletion of tryptophan by
IDO leads to termination of the donor T-cell response prior to development of
effector CTL. Here, we show that despite increased expression of Ifng, Irf3,
Irf7, Ido1, and Ido2 in the lymph nodes of TCDD-treated host mice, inhibition of 
IDO enzyme activity by 1-methyl-tryptophan was unable to relieve TCDD-mediated
suppression of the GVH response. Furthermore, treatment with an anti-CTLA-4
antibody that blocks CTLA-4 signaling was also unable to alleviate TCDD-mediated 
suppression. Alternatively, we investigated the possibility that donor-derived
AhR-Tregs produce IFN-<U+03B3> to suppress effector CTL development. However,
suppression of GVHD by TCDD was not affected by the use of Ifng-deficient donor
cells. Together, these results indicate that neither overexpression of CTLA-4 nor
production of IFN-<U+03B3> by AhR-Tregs plays a major role in the manifestation of their
immunosuppressive function in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3748765
PMID: 23798565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Jan;29(1):90-102. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2026.

TBK1 mediates critical effects of measles virus nucleocapsid protein (MVNP) on
pagetic osteoclast formation.

Sun Q(1), Sammut B, Wang FM, Kurihara N, Windle JJ, Roodman GD, Galson DL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Hematology-Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Cancer
Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Paget's disease of bone (PDB) is characterized by abnormal osteoclasts with
unique characteristics that include increased sensitivity of osteoclast
progenitors to 1,25(OH)2 D3 , receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL), and
TNF-a; increased osteoclast numbers; and increased expression of IL-6 and several
transcription factors. We recently reported that measles virus nucleocapsid
protein (MVNP) plays a key role in the development of these abnormal osteoclasts.
MVNP can induce the pagetic osteoclast phenotype in vitro and in vivo in
TRAP-MVNP transgenic mice. However, the molecular mechanisms by which MVNP
generates pagetic osteoclasts have not been determined. TANK-binding kinase 1
(TBK1) and I<U+03BA>B kinase-<U+03F5> (IKK<U+03F5>) are IKK family members that complex with MVNP and 
activate both IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways. MVNP increases the amount of TBK1 protein 
in bone marrow monocytes (BMM). Interestingly, we found that RANKL increased TBK1
and IKK<U+03F5> early in osteoclast differentiation, suggesting a possible role in
normal osteoclastogenesis. However, only TBK1 is further increased in osteoclasts
formed by TRAP-MVNP BMM owing to increased TBK1 protein stability. TBK1
overexpression induced IL6 promoter reporter activity, and elevated endogenous
IL6 mRNA and p65 NF-<U+03BA>B, TAF12, and ATF7 proteins in several cell lines.
Overexpression of TBK1 was insufficient to induce pagetic osteoclasts from WT BMM
but synergized with MVNP to increase pagetic osteoclast formation from TRAP-MVNP 
BMM. BX795 inhibition of TBK1 impaired MVNP-induced IL-6 expression in both
NIH3T3 cells and BMM, and shRNA knockdown of Tbk1 in NIH3T3 cells impaired IL-6
secretion induced by MVNP and decreased TAF12 and ATF7, factors involved in
1,25(OH)2 D3 hypersensitivity of pagetic osteoclasts. Similarly, Tbk1 knockdown
in BMM from TRAP-MVNP and WT mice specifically impaired development of the
MVNP-induced osteoclast pagetic phenotype. These results demonstrate that TBK1
plays a critical role in mediating the effects of MVNP on osteoclast
differentiation and on the expression of IL-6, a key contributor to the pagetic
osteoclast phenotype.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3870038
PMID: 23794264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Antiviral Res. 2013 Sep;99(3):197-206. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2013.06.004. Epub
2013 Jun 19.

Poly(I:C) inhibits porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus
replication in MARC-145 cells via activation of IFIT3.

Zhang L(1), Liu J, Bai J, Du Y, Wang X, Liu X, Jiang P.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Diseases Diagnostic and Immunology, Ministry of
Agriculture, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Nanjing 210095, China.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is a major cause of
heavy economic losses in many swine-producing regions. Current vaccination
strategies and antiviral drugs provide only limited protection. Interferon
(IFN)-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 3 (IFIT3) has been
characterized as the product of a novel antiviral gene and as an important
modulator in innate immunity. However, the role of IFIT3 in PRRSV infection is
scarcely understood. In this study, polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C))
inhibited PRRSV replication in MARC-145 cells, following the appearance of
increased IFIT3. Overexpression of porcine IFIT3 resulted in a decrease of PRRSV.
Knockdown of IFIT3 in MARC-145 cells increased PRRSV replication and impaired the
antiviral activity mediated by poly(I:C). Moreover, in the presence or absence of
IFIT3, poly(I:C)-induced IFN-ß promoter activity was significantly boosted or
crippled, respectively. IFIT3, TBK1 and phosphorylation of IRF3 were activated in
poly(I:C)-transfected MARC-145 cells. It demonstrated that IFIT3 plays an
important role in IFN-ß induction in MARC-145 cells, and, when activated, it can 
inhibit PRRSV replication.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23791982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Virology. 2013 Sep;444(1-2):71-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.05.034. Epub 2013 Jun
16.

Synergistic control of herpes simplex virus pathogenesis by IRF-3, and IRF-7
revealed through non-invasive bioluminescence imaging.

Murphy AA(1), Rosato PC, Parker ZM, Khalenkov A, Leib DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, One Medical Center Drive, HB 7556, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 are central to the establishment of
the innate antiviral response. This study examines HSV-1 pathogenesis in
IRF-3(-/-), IRF-7(-/-) and double-deleted IRF3/7(-/-) (DKO) mice. Bioluminescence
imaging of infection revealed that DKO mice developed visceral infection
following corneal inoculation, along with increased viral burdens in all tissues 
relative to single knockout mice. While all DKO mice synchronously reached
endpoint criteria 5 days post infection, the IRF-7(-/-) mice survived longer,
indicating that although IRF-7 is dominant, IRF-3 also plays a role in
controlling disease. Higher levels of systemic pro-inflammatory cytokines were
found in IRF7(-/-) and DKO mice relative to wild-type and IRF-3(-/-) mice, and
IL-6 and G-CSF, indicative of sepsis, were increased in the DKO mice relative to 
wild-type or single-knockout mice. In addition to controlling viral replication, 
IRF-3 and -7 therefore play coordinating roles in modulation of inflammation
during HSV infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3755050
PMID: 23777662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



61. Biochemistry. 2013 Mar 12;52(10):1686-93. doi: 10.1021/bi4001062. Epub 2013 Mar
1.

A folded excited state of ligand-free nuclear coactivator binding domain (NCBD)
underlies plasticity in ligand recognition.

Kjaergaard M(1), Andersen L, Nielsen LD, Teilum K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen , Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200
Copenhagen N, Denmark.

Intrinsically disordered proteins are renowned for their structural plasticity
when they undergo coupled folding and binding to partner proteins. The nuclear
coactivator binding domain of CBP is a remarkable example of this adaptability as
it folds into two different conformations depending on the binding partner. To
understand the role of the conformational ensemble for plasticity in ligand
recognition, we investigated the millisecond dynamics of this domain using
relaxation dispersion NMR spectroscopy. All NMR signals originating from the
domain are broadened, demonstrating that the whole domain experience
conformational exchange. The dispersion data can be described by a global
two-state exchange process between a ground state and an excited state populated 
to 8%. The three helices are still folded in the excited state but have a
different packing from the ground state; the contact between helices 2 and 3
found in the ground state is broken in the excited state, and a new one is formed
between helices 1 and 3. This suggests that while NCBD in the ground state has a 
structure similar to the complex with the ligand ACTR, the conformation of NCBD
in the excited state has some similarity with that of NCBD in complex with the
ligand IRF-3. The energy landscape of this domain is thus proposed to resemble
the fold-switching proteins that have two coexisting native states, which may
serve as a starting point for binding via conformational selection.

PMID: 23373423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cytotherapy. 2013 Apr;15(4):423-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2012.12.001. Epub 2013
Jan 23.

Expression and role of Toll-like receptors on human umbilical cord mesenchymal
stromal cells.

Chen D(1), Ma F, Xu S, Yang S, Chen F, Rong L, Chi Y, Zhao Q, Lu S, Han Z, Pang
A, Han Z.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Experimental Hematology, Institute of Hematology
and Hospital of Blood Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Tianjin,
China.

BACKGROUND AIMS: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in innate and 
adaptive immunity by recognizing pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs).
METHODS: In the present study, we investigated the expression and role of TLRs on
human umbilical cord mesenchymal stromal cells (UC-MSCs). The proliferation,
differentiation and immunoregulatory activity of UC-MSCs primed with or without
TLR ligands were determined.
RESULTS: At the RNA level, the expression of TLR2, 4, 6 and 9 was relatively
higher than that of other TLRs. However, TLR3 and TLR4 expression were relatively
higher at the protein level. UC-MSCs expressed functional TLRs by nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B activation and cytokine expression assay. Poly-inosinic acid:cytidylic 
acid [Poly(I:C)] stimulation inhibited the proliferation of UC-MSCs, but the
ligand of other TLRs had no significant effect. Poly(I:C) stimulation enhanced
the adipogenic differentiation capability of UC-MSCs, but lipopolysaccharide
inhibited the adipogenic differentiation. Poly(I:C) and CpG-oligonucleotide
promoted the immunosuppressive potentiality of UC-MSCs, accompanied with the
phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and increased expression
of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase and interferon ß, whereas activation of other TLR 
ligands (synthetic analog fibroblast-stimulating lipopeptide-1 and
lipopolysaccharide) failed to affect the immunoregulatory activity of UC-MSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data demonstrated that TLR activation influenced
the function of UC-MSCs, which might have important implications in future
efforts to explore the clinical potentials of UC-MSCs.

Copyright © 2013 International Society for Cellular Therapy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23352460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54406. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054406. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Toll-like receptor ligands induce expression of the costimulatory molecule CD155 
on antigen-presenting cells.

Kamran N(1), Takai Y, Miyoshi J, Biswas SK, Wong JS, Gasser S.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Programme, Department of Microbiology, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Genotoxic stress and RAS induce the expression of CD155, a ligand for the immune 
receptors DNAM-1, CD96 and TIGIT. Here we show that antigen-presenting cells
upregulate CD155 expression in response to Toll-like receptor activation.
Induction of CD155 by Toll-like receptors depended on MYD88, TRIF and NF-<U+03BA>B. In
addition, IRF3, but not IRF7, modulated CD155 upregulation in response to TLR3
signals. Immunization of CD155-deficient mice with OVA and the TLR9 agonist CpG
resulted in increased OVA-specific IgG2a/c titers when compared to wild type
mice. Splenocytes of immunized CD155-deficient mice secreted lower levels of IL-4
and fewer IL-4 and GATA-3 expressing CD4(+) T cells were present in the spleen of
Cd155(-/-) mice. Our data suggest that CD155 regulates T(h)2 differentiation.
Targeting of CD155 in immunization protocols using peptides may represent a
promising new approach to boost protective humoral immunity in viral vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3547938
PMID: 23349877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Apr 1;85(7):873-80. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2013.01.007. Epub 
2013 Jan 17.

I<U+03BA>B kinase e (IKKe): a therapeutic target in inflammation and cancer.

Verhelst K(1), Verstrepen L, Carpentier I, Beyaert R.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, Unit of Molecular Signal
Transduction in Inflammation, VIB, Zwijnaarde (Ghent), Belgium.

The innate immune system forms our first line of defense against invading
pathogens and relies for a major part on the activation of two transcription
factors, NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3. Signaling pathways that activate these transcription
factors are intertwined at the level of the canonical I<U+03BA>B kinases (IKKa, IKKß)
and non-canonical IKK-related kinases (IKKe, TBK1). Recently, significant
progress has been made in understanding the function and mechanism of action of
IKKe in immune signaling. In addition, IKKe impacts on cell proliferation and
transformation, and is thereby also classified as an oncogene. Studies with IKKe 
knockout mice have illustrated a key role for IKKe in inflammatory and metabolic 
diseases. In this review we will highlight the mechanisms by which IKKe impacts
on signaling pathways involved in disease development and discuss its potential
as a novel therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e52909. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052909. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

Japanese encephalitis virus activates autophagy as a viral immune evasion
strategy.

Jin R(1), Zhu W, Cao S, Chen R, Jin H, Liu Y, Wang S, Wang W, Xiao G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(5). doi:10.1371/annotation/f7dcec2f-ed82-4a31-96c6-2953b421fd92.

In addition to manipulating cellular homeostasis and survivability, autophagy
also plays a crucial role in numerous viral infections. In this study, we
discover that Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) infection results in the
accumulation of microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3-II (LC3-II)
protein and GFP-LC3 puncta in vitro and an increase in
autophagosomes/autolysosomes in vivo. The fusion between autophagosomes and
lysosomes is essential for virus replication. Knockdown of autophagy-related
genes reduced JEV replication in vitro, as indicated by viral RNA and protein
levels. We also note that JEV infection in autophagy-impaired cells displayed
active caspases cleavage and cell death. Moreover, we find that JEV induces
higher type I interferon (IFN) activation in cells deficient in autophagy-related
genes as the cells exhibited increased phosphorylation and dimerization of
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and mitochondrial antiviral signaling
protein (MAVS) aggregation. Finally, we find that autophagy is indispensable for 
efficient JEV replication even in an IFN-defective background. Overall, our
studies provide the first description of the mechanism of the autophagic innate
immune signaling pathway during JEV infection.

PMCID: PMC3540057
PMID: 23320079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053578. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Functional characterization of domains of IPS-1 using an inducible
oligomerization system.

Takamatsu S(1), Onoguchi K, Onomoto K, Narita R, Takahasi K, Ishidate F, Fujiwara
TK, Yoneyama M, Kato H, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

The innate immune system recognizes viral nucleic acids and stimulates cellular
antiviral responses. Intracellular detection of viral RNA is mediated by the
Retinoic acid inducible gene (RIG)-I Like Receptor (RLR), leading to production
of type I interferon (IFN) and pro-inflammatory cytokines. Once cells are
infected with a virus, RIG-I and MDA5 bind to viral RNA and undergo
conformational change to transmit a signal through direct interaction with
downstream CARD-containing adaptor protein, IFN-ß promoter stimulator-1 (IPS-1,
also referred as MAVS/VISA/Cardif). IPS-1 is composed of N-terminal Caspase
Activation and Recruitment Domain (CARD), proline-rich domain, intermediate
domain, and C-terminal transmembrane (TM) domain. The TM domain of IPS-1 anchors 
it to the mitochondrial outer membrane. It has been hypothesized that activated
RLR triggers the accumulation of IPS-1, which forms oligomer as a scaffold for
downstream signal proteins. However, the exact mechanisms of IPS-1-mediated
signaling remain controversial. In this study, to reveal the details of IPS-1
signaling, we used an artificial oligomerization system to induce oligomerization
of IPS-1 in cells. Artificial oligomerization of IPS-1 activated antiviral
signaling without a viral infection. Using this system, we investigated the
domain-requirement of IPS-1 for its signaling. We discovered that artificial
oligomerization of IPS-1 could overcome the requirement of CARD and the TM
domain. Moreover, from deletion- and point-mutant analyses, the C-terminal Tumor 
necrosis factor Receptor-Associated Factor (TRAF) binding motif of IPS-1 (aa.
453-460) present in the intermediate domain is critical for downstream signal
transduction. Our results suggest that IPS-1 oligomerization is essential for the
formation of a multiprotein signaling complex and enables downstream activation
of transcription factors, Interferon Regulatory Factor 3 (IRF3) and Nuclear
Factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), leading to type I IFN and pro-inflammatory cytokine
production.

PMCID: PMC3538592
PMID: 23308256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Basic Res Cardiol. 2013 Mar;108(2):326. doi: 10.1007/s00395-012-0326-9. Epub 2013
Jan 11.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 is a negative regulator of pathological cardiac
hypertrophy.

Lu J(1), Bian ZY, Zhang R, Zhang Y, Liu C, Yan L, Zhang SM, Jiang DS, Wei X, Zhu 
XH, Chen M, Wang AB, Chen Y, Yang Q, Liu PP, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital, Cardiovascular Research Institute, 
Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3, a member of the highly conserved IRF family
transcription factors, plays a pivotal role in innate immune response, apoptosis,
and oncogenesis. Recent studies have implicated IRF3 in a wide range of host
defense. However, whether IRF3 induces defensive responses to hypertrophic
stresses such as biomechanical stress and neurohumoral factors remains unclear.
Herein, we employed an IRF3-deficient mouse model, cardiac-specific
IRF3-overexpression mouse model and isolated cardiomyocytes to investigate the
role of IRF3 in cardiac hypertrophy induced by aortic banding (AB) or
isoproterenol (ISO). The extent of cardiac hypertrophy was quantitated by
echocardiography as well as by pathological and molecular analysis. Our results
demonstrate that IRF3 deficiency profoundly exacerbated cardiac hypertrophy,
whereas overexpression of IRF3 in the heart significantly blunted pathological
cardiac remodeling induced by pressure overload. Similar results were also
observed in cultured cardiomyocytes upon the treatment with ISO. Mechanistically,
we discovered that IRF3 interacted with ERK2 and thereby inhibited the ERK1/2
signaling. Furthermore, inactivation of ERK1/2 by U0126 offset the
IRF3-deficient-mediated hypertrophic response induced by aortic banding.
Altogether, these data demonstrate that IRF3 plays a protective role in
AB-induced hypertrophic response by inactivating ERK1/2 in the heart. Therefore, 
IRF3 could be a new target for the prevention and therapy of cardiac hypertrophy 
and failure.

PMID: 23307144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Feb 1;41(4):2239-54. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks1452. Epub 2013 
Jan 8.

A Myc-microRNA network promotes exit from quiescence by suppressing the
interferon response and cell-cycle arrest genes.

Polioudakis D(1), Bhinge AA, Killion PJ, Lee BK, Abell NS, Iyer VR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Center for Systems and Synthetic
Biology, and Section of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Texas 
at Austin, 1 University Station A4800, Austin, Texas 78712-0159, USA.

The transition of mammalian cells from quiescence to proliferation is accompanied
by the differential expression of several microRNAs (miRNAs) and transcription
factors. However, the interplay between transcription factors and miRNAs in
modulating gene regulatory networks involved in human cell proliferation is
largely unknown. Here we show that the miRNA miR-22 promotes proliferation in
primary human cells, and through a combination of Argonaute-2 immunoprecipitation
and reporter assays, we identified multiple novel targets of miR-22, including
several cell-cycle arrest genes that mediate the effects of the tumor-suppressor 
p53. In addition, we found that miR-22 suppresses interferon gene expression by
directly targeting high mobility group box-1 and interferon regulatory factor
(IRF)-5, preventing activation of IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B, which are activators of
interferon genes. The expression of interferon genes is elevated in quiescent
cells and their expression is inhibitory for cell proliferation. In addition, we 
find that miR-22 is activated by the transcription factor Myc when quiescent
cells enter proliferation and that miR-22 inhibits the Myc transcriptional
repressor MXD4, mediating a feed-forward loop to elevate Myc expression levels.
Our results implicate miR-22 in downregulating the anti-proliferative p53 and
interferon pathways and reveal a new transcription factor-miRNA network that
regulates the transition of primary human cells from quiescence to proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3575845
PMID: 23303785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 15;190(4):1695-701. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202443. Epub 2013 
Jan 9.

Chlamydia pneumoniae impairs the innate immune response in infected epithelial
cells by targeting TRAF3.

Wolf K(1), Fields KA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA. kwolf@med.miami.edu

Type I IFNs are induced during microbial infections and have well-characterized
antiviral activities. TRAF3 is a signaling molecule crucial for type I IFN
production and, therefore, represents a potential target for disarming immune
responses. Chlamydia pneumoniae is a human pathogen that primarily infects
respiratory epithelial cells; the onset of symptoms takes several weeks, and the 
course of infection is protracted. C. pneumoniae has also been associated with a 
variety of chronic inflammatory conditions. Thus, typical C. pneumoniae
infections of humans are consistent with an impairment in inflammatory responses 
to the microorganism. We demonstrate that infection of epithelial cells with C.
pneumoniae does not lead to IFN-ß production. Instead, infected cells are
prevented from activating IFN regulatory factor 3. This effect is mediated by C. 
pneumoniae-dependent degradation of TRAF3, which is independent of a functional
proteasome. Hence, it is likely that C. pneumoniae expresses a unique protease
targeting TRAF3-dependent immune effector mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3563728
PMID: 23303668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Jan;9(1):e1003118. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003118. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

IRF-3, IRF-5, and IRF-7 coordinately regulate the type I IFN response in myeloid 
dendritic cells downstream of MAVS signaling.

Lazear HM(1), Lancaster A, Wilkins C, Suthar MS, Huang A, Vick SC, Clepper L,
Thackray L, Brassil MM, Virgin HW, Nikolich-Zugich J, Moses AV, Gale M Jr, Früh
K, Diamond MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2013 May;9(5).
:10.1371/annotation/4de7ddfd-52df-4f87-8ca4-d48afe646ca8.

Although the transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 are considered master
regulators of type I interferon (IFN) induction and IFN stimulated gene (ISG)
expression, Irf3(-/-)×Irf7(-/-) double knockout (DKO) myeloid dendritic cells
(mDC) produce relatively normal levels of IFN-ß after viral infection. We
generated Irf3(-/-)×Irf5(-/-)×Irf7(-/-) triple knockout (TKO) mice to test
whether IRF-5 was the source of the residual induction of IFN-ß and ISGs in mDCs.
In pathogenesis studies with two unrelated positive-sense RNA viruses (West Nile 
virus (WNV) and murine norovirus), TKO mice succumbed at rates greater than DKO
mice and equal to or approaching those of mice lacking the type I IFN receptor
(Ifnar(-/-)). In ex vivo studies, after WNV infection or exposure to Toll-like
receptor agonists, TKO mDCs failed to produce IFN-ß or express ISGs. In contrast,
this response was sustained in TKO macrophages following WNV infection. To define
IRF-regulated gene signatures, we performed microarray analysis on WNV-infected
mDC from wild type (WT), DKO, TKO, or Ifnar(-/-) mice, as well as from mice
lacking the RIG-I like receptor adaptor protein MAVS. Whereas the gene induction 
pattern in DKO mDC was similar to WT cells, remarkably, almost no ISG induction
was detected in TKO or Mavs(-/-) mDC. The relative equivalence of TKO and
Mavs(-/-) responses suggested that MAVS dominantly regulates ISG induction in
mDC. Moreover, we showed that MAVS-dependent induction of ISGs can occur through 
an IRF-5-dependent yet IRF-3 and IRF-7-independent pathway. Our results establish
IRF-3, -5, and -7 as the key transcription factors responsible for mediating the 
type I IFN and ISG response in mDC during WNV infection and suggest a novel
signaling link between MAVS and IRF-5.

PMCID: PMC3536698
PMID: 23300459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Hepatology. 2013 May;57(5):1869-81. doi: 10.1002/hep.26234. Epub 2013 Apr 5.

Toll-like receptor 4 activity protects against hepatocellular tumorigenesis and
progression by regulating expression of DNA repair protein Ku70 in mice.

Wang Z(1), Yan J, Lin H, Hua F, Wang X, Liu H, Lv X, Yu J, Mi S, Wang J, Hu ZW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology and Pharmacology Group, State Key Laboratory of Bioactive
Substance and Function of Natural Medicines, Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a devastating consequence of chronic
inflammatory liver diseases. The goal of this study was to investigate whether
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) activity contributes to HCC initiation and
progression in mice. A mouse model of diethylnitrosamine (DEN)-induced HCC was
generated with wild-type and TLR4 mutant mice, and the development and
progression of HCC and senescent responses were assessed using morphologic,
immunological, and biochemical criteria. We found that genetic or pharmacologic
blocking of TLR4 increased susceptibility to DEN-induced HCC carcinogenesis and
progression, which was indicated by increases in number of tumor nodules, tumor
volume, and animal death. The enhanced HCC was associated with a broad-spectrum
reduction of immune response to DEN liver injury, as indicated by decreases in
the liver-infiltrating F4/80+ macrophages, the apoptosis signal-regulating kinase
1/p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase/NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 signaling activities, and
the expression of inflammatory cytokines. Suppressed immune networks resulted in 
a halt of cellular senescence induction in TLR4 mutant liver tissue, which
promoted proliferation and suppressed programmed cell death. Moreover, TLR4
mutation resulted in a suppressed capacity of DNA repair due to a decrease in
TLR4-medicated expression of DNA repair proteins Ku70/80 in liver tissue and
cells. Isotopic expression of Ku70 in TLR4 mutant mice restored senescence and
interrupted the positive feedback loop of DNA damage and oxidative stress, which 
reversed TLR4 mutation-deteriorated HCC carcinogenesis and
progression.CONCLUSION: TLR4 plays an integrated defense role against HCC
carcinogenesis by enhancing the expression and function of DNA repair protein
Ku70. Our studies provide novel insight into TLR4 activity in the regulation of
HCC tumorigenesis, which may be useful for the prevention of HCC development.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23299825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Innate Immun. 2013;5(3):231-41. doi: 10.1159/000345255. Epub 2012 Dec 22.

Antiviral innate immunity disturbs podocyte cell function.

Yamashita M(1), Millward CA, Inoshita H, Saikia P, Chattopadhyay S, Sen GC,
Emancipator SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. mxy53@cwru.edu

Immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) is the most common form of glomerulonephritis
throughout the world. A majority (approx. 60%) of patients with IgAN experience
disease exacerbations associated with an acute respiratory or gastrointestinal
illness that appears to represent a viral infection. However, the exact mechanism
of the disease exacerbation by viral infection is not understood, especially at
the cellular and molecular levels. Here we report that glomerular podocytes
express the major sensors for double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), a common byproduct of 
viral replication. In addition to these receptors, Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3)
and retinoic acid-inducible gene 1 (RIG-I)-like helicases (RLHs), podocytes
express the collateral proteins required to support intracellular signaling. The 
pathways that mediate responses to dsRNA are fully functional in podocytes. The
transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor
kappa B (NF-<U+0138>B) are phosphorylated and translocate to the nucleus, and dsRNA
increases synthesis of proteins driven by IRF3 (P54, P56 and P60) or NF-<U+0138>B
(interleukin 8 and A20). Furthermore, dsRNA suppresses podocyte cell migration,
alters the expression of a panel of podocyte essential proteins (nephrin, podocin
and CD2-associated protein or CD2AP) and changes transepithelial albumin flux.
These effects are dsRNA sensor-specific: TLR3-/- podocytes do not respond to
extracellular dsRNA, while intracellular dsRNA has no effect on podocytes bearing
a dominant negative form of the major active RLH. These results demonstrate that 
innate responses to viruses can disturb podocyte cell function in vitro.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3724426
PMID: 23296190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Org Biomol Chem. 2013 Feb 14;11(6):1049-58. doi: 10.1039/c2ob26946e. Epub 2013
Jan 4.

Design of synthetic oligoribonucleotide-based agonists of Toll-like receptor 3
and their immune response profiles in vitro and in vivo.

Lan T(1), Wang D, Bhagat L, Philbin VJ, Yu D, Tang JX, Putta MR, Sullivan T, La
Monica N, Kandimalla ER, Agrawal S.

Author information: 
(1)Idera Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 167 Sidney Street, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Double-stranded RNA of viral origin and enzymatically synthesized poly I:C act as
agonists of TLR3 and induce immune responses. We have designed and synthesized
double-stranded synthetic oligoribonucleotides (dsORNs) which act as agonists of 
TLR3. Each strand of dsORN contains two distinct segments, namely an alignment
segment composed of a heteronucleotide sequence and an oligo inosine (I) or an
oligo cytidine (C) segment. We report here the results of studies of dsORNs
containing varying lengths and compositions of alignment and oligo I/oligo C
segments. dsORNs of 50-mer length with a 15-mer alignment segment and a 35-mer
oligo I/oligo C segment form stable duplexes under physiological conditions and
induce TLR3-mediated immune responses. dsORNs activated the IRF3 signaling
pathway in J774 cells, induced production of cytokines, including IFN-ß, IFN-a,
IP-10, IL-12 and IL-6, in murine and human cell-based assays and also induced
multiple cytokines following systemic administration in mice and non-human
primates.

PMID: 23292214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52863. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052863. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Yohimbine enhances protection of berberine against LPS-induced mouse lethality
through multiple mechanisms.

Li H(1), Wang Y, Zhang H, Jia B, Wang D, Li H, Lu D, Qi R, Yan Y, Wang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Guangzhou Overseas Chinese Hospital, School of
Medicine, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

Sepsis remains a major cause of mortality in intensive care units, better
therapies are urgently needed. Gram-negative bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
is an important trigger of sepsis. We have demonstrated that berberine (Ber)
protects against lethality induced by LPS, which is enhanced by yohimbine (Y)
pretreatment, and Ber combined with Y also improves survival in septic mice.
However, the precise mechanisms by which Y enhances protection of Ber against
LPS-induced lethality remain unclear. The present study confirmed that
simultaneously administered Y also enhanced protection of Ber against LPS-induced
lethality. Ber or/and Y attenuated liver injury, but not renal injury in
LPS-challenged mice. Ber or/and Y all inhibited LPS-stimulated I<U+03BA>Ba, JNK and ERK 
phosphorylation, NF-<U+03BA>B activation as well as TNF-a production. Ber also increased
IL-10 production in LPS-challenged mice, which was enhanced by Y. Furthermore,
Ber or/and Y all suppressed LPS-induced IRF3, TyK2 and STAT1 phosphorylation, as 
well as IFN-ß and IP-10 mRNA expression in spleen of mice at 1 h after LPS
challenge. Especially, Y enhanced the inhibitory effect of Ber on LPS-induced
IP-10 mRNA expression. In vitro experiments further demonstrated that Y
significantly enhanced the inhibitory effect of Ber on TNF-a production in
LPS-treated peritoneal macrophages, Ber combined with Y promoted LPS-induced
IL-10 production and LPS-stimulated I<U+03BA>Ba, JNK, ERK and IRF3 phosphorylation and
NF-<U+03BA>B activation were also suppressed by Ber or/and Y pretreatment in peritoneal 
macrophages. Taken together, these results demonstrate that Y enhances the
protection of Ber against LPS-induced lethality in mice via attenuating liver
injury, upregulating IL-10 production and suppressing I<U+03BA>Ba, JNK, ERK and IRF3
phosphorylation. Ber combined with Y may be an effective immunomodulator agent
for the prevention of sepsis.

PMCID: PMC3532439
PMID: 23285207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Virol. 2013 Mar;87(6):3076-86. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02860-12. Epub 2013 Jan 2.

DNA sensing-independent inhibition of herpes simplex virus 1 replication by
DAI/ZBP1.

Pham TH(1), Kwon KM, Kim YE, Kim KK, Ahn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea.

DNA-dependent activator of interferon regulatory factor (DAI) acts as a cytosolic
B-form DNA sensor that induces type I interferons. However, DAI is not required
for DNA sensing in certain cell types due to redundancy of the DNA sensing
system. Here, we investigated the effect of DAI on herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1)
infection in HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells. DAI transcription was induced 
after gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) treatment or HSV-1 infection. HSV-1 replication
was enhanced by DAI knockdown, and ectopic DAI expression repressed viral
replication in a manner requiring the Zß and D3 domains, but not the Za domain.
This activity of DAI was more prominent at low multiplicity of infection (MOI)
and correlated with the reduced expression of viral immediate-early genes.
Consistently, DAI repressed the activation of ICP0 promoter in reporter gene
assays. DAI knockdown did not affect the B-DNA-mediated IFN-ß transcription and
IRF3 activation, and overexpression of DAI and RIP1 did not enhance NF-<U+03BA>B
activation by B-DNA treatment, demonstrating that DAI is not essential for the
B-DNA-mediated IFN production in HepG2 cells. DAI colocalized with ICP0 in a
subset of nuclear and cytoplasmic foci in infected cells and interacted with ICP0
in coimmunoprecipitation assays. The anti-HSV-1 effect of DAI was not observed in
ICP0-deleted mutant virus infection at a high MOI in HepG2 cells and mouse
embryonic fibroblasts. Degradation of IFI16 and PML by ICP0 was enhanced in
infection of DAI-knockdown cells. Collectively, these results demonstrate that
DAI can suppress HSV-1 growth independent of DNA sensing through mechanisms
involving suppression of viral genomes and regulation of ICP0.

PMCID: PMC3592125
PMID: 23283962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Photodermatol Photoimmunol Photomed. 2013 Feb;29(1):41-8. doi:
10.1111/phpp.12011.

Protein extract of ultraviolet-irradiated human skin keratinocytes promote the
expression of mitogen-activated protein kinases, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and interferon
regulatory factor-3 in Langerhans cells via Toll-like receptor 2 and 4.

Wang XY(1), Tao CJ, Wu QY, Yuan CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hangzhou Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, 
Hangzhou, China. wangxiaoyong1974@163.com

AIM: In this study, we investigated whether the protein extract of
ultraviolet-irradiated human skin keratinocytes can activate Toll-like receptor 2
and Toll-like receptor 4 of Langerhans cells and induce the downstream gene
expression of mitogen-activated protein kinases, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and interferon
regulatory factor-3.
METHODS: The protein expression of mitogen-activated protein kinases, nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B and interferon regulatory factor-3 in Langerhans cells and the protein 
expression of HSP60, HSP70 and ß-defensin 2 in keratinocytes were examined using 
Western blot analysis. Langerhans cells were pretreated with or without Toll-like
receptor 2 and Toll-like receptor 4 siRNA.
RESULTS: We found that the protein extract of ultraviolet-irradiated
keratinocytes upregulated the expression of mitogen-activated protein kinases,
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and interferon regulatory factor-3 in Langerhans cells via
Toll-like receptor 2 and Toll-like receptor 4. We also found that ultraviolet
radiation upregulated the expression HSP60, HSP70 and ß-defensin 2 in
keratinocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our previous study demonstrated that ultraviolet radiation
upregulated Toll-like receptor 2 and Toll-like receptor 4 expression in
Langerhans cells. Ultraviolet radiation also upregulated mitogen-activated
protein kinases and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B/p65 expression via Toll-like receptor 2 and
Toll-like receptor 4, and upregulated interferon regulatory factor-3 expression
partially via Toll-like receptor 4. So we conclude that ultraviolet radiation can
directly or indirectly activate keratinocytes to induce endogenous ligands which 
stimulate Toll-like receptor 2- or Toll-like receptor 4-dependent signaling
cascade in Langerhans cells, sequentially influence innate and adaptive immune
responses.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23281696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Immunol. 2013 Feb 1;190(3):1285-96. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202208. Epub 2012
Dec 28.

TLR4 activation under lipotoxic conditions leads to synergistic macrophage cell
death through a TRIF-dependent pathway.

Schilling JD(1), Machkovech HM, He L, Diwan A, Schaffer JE.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetic Cardiovascular Disease Center, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Macrophage dysfunction in obesity and diabetes may predispose to the development 
of diabetic complications, such as infection and impaired healing after tissue
damage. Saturated fatty acids, such as palmitate, are present at elevated
concentrations in the plasma of patients with metabolic disease and may
contribute to the pathogenesis of diabetes and its sequelae. To examine the
effect of lipid excess on macrophage inflammatory function, we determined the
influence of palmitate on LPS-mediated responses in peritoneal macrophages.
Palmitate and LPS led to a profound synergistic cell death response in both
primary and RAW 264.7 macrophages. The cell death had features of apoptosis and
necrosis and was not dependent on endoplasmic reticulum stress, ceramide
generation, or reactive oxygen species production. Instead, we uncovered a
macrophage death pathway that required TLR4 signaling via TRIF but was
independent of NF-<U+03BA>B, MAPKs, and IRF3. A significant decrease in macrophage
lysosomal content was observed early in the death pathway, with evidence of
lysosomal membrane damage occurring later in the death response. Overexpression
of the transcription factor TFEB, which induces a lysosomal biogenic program,
rescued the lysosomal phenotype and improved viability in palmitate- and
LPS-treated cells. Our findings provide new evidence for cross-talk between lipid
metabolism and the innate immune response that converges on the lysosome.

PMCID: PMC3552058
PMID: 23275600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Science. 2013 Feb 15;339(6121):786-91. doi: 10.1126/science.1232458. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

Cyclic GMP-AMP synthase is a cytosolic DNA sensor that activates the type I
interferon pathway.

Sun L(1), Wu J, Du F, Chen X, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Feb 15;339(6121):763-4.

The presence of DNA in the cytoplasm of mammalian cells is a danger signal that
triggers host immune responses such as the production of type I interferons.
Cytosolic DNA induces interferons through the production of cyclic guanosine
monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate (cyclic GMP-AMP, or cGAMP), which binds to 
and activates the adaptor protein STING. Through biochemical fractionation and
quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified a cGAMP synthase (cGAS), which
belongs to the nucleotidyltransferase family. Overexpression of cGAS activated
the transcription factor IRF3 and induced interferon-ß in a STING-dependent
manner. Knockdown of cGAS inhibited IRF3 activation and interferon-ß induction by
DNA transfection or DNA virus infection. cGAS bound to DNA in the cytoplasm and
catalyzed cGAMP synthesis. These results indicate that cGAS is a cytosolic DNA
sensor that induces interferons by producing the second messenger cGAMP.

PMCID: PMC3863629
PMID: 23258413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Science. 2013 Feb 15;339(6121):826-30. doi: 10.1126/science.1229963. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

Cyclic GMP-AMP is an endogenous second messenger in innate immune signaling by
cytosolic DNA.

Wu J(1), Sun L, Chen X, Du F, Shi H, Chen C, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Feb 15;339(6121):763-4.

Cytosolic DNA induces type I interferons and other cytokines that are important
for antimicrobial defense but can also result in autoimmunity. This DNA signaling
pathway requires the adaptor protein STING and the transcription factor IRF3, but
the mechanism of DNA sensing is unclear. We found that mammalian cytosolic
extracts synthesized cyclic guanosine monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate
(cyclic GMP-AMP, or cGAMP) in vitro from adenosine triphosphate and guanosine
triphosphate in the presence of DNA but not RNA. DNA transfection or DNA virus
infection of mammalian cells also triggered cGAMP production. cGAMP bound to
STING, leading to the activation of IRF3 and induction of interferon-ß. Thus,
cGAMP functions as an endogenous second messenger in metazoans and triggers
interferon production in response to cytosolic DNA.

PMCID: PMC3855410
PMID: 23258412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Elife. 2012 Dec 18;1:e00047. doi: 10.7554/eLife.00047.

DNA-PK is a DNA sensor for IRF-3-dependent innate immunity.

Ferguson BJ(1), Mansur DS, Peters NE, Ren H, Smith GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology , Imperial College London , London , United Kingdom ;
Department of Pathology , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , United Kingdom.

Innate immunity is the first immunological defence against pathogens. During
virus infection detection of nucleic acids is crucial for the inflammatory
response. Here we identify DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) as a DNA sensor 
that activates innate immunity. We show that DNA-PK acts as a pattern recognition
receptor, binding cytoplasmic DNA and triggering the transcription of type I
interferon (IFN), cytokine and chemokine genes in a manner dependent on IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and stimulator of
interferon genes (STING). Both cells and mice lacking DNA-PKcs show attenuated
cytokine responses to both DNA and DNA viruses but not to RNA or RNA virus
infection. DNA-PK has well-established functions in the DNA repair and V(D)J
recombination, hence loss of DNA-PK leads to severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID). However, we now define a novel anti-microbial function for DNA-PK, a
finding with implications for host defence, vaccine development and
autoimmunity.DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00047.001.

PMCID: PMC3524801
PMID: 23251783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051522. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

LGP2 expression is enhanced by interferon regulatory factor 3 in olive flounder, 
Paralichthys olivaceus.

Hikima J(1), Yi MK, Ohtani M, Jung CY, Kim YK, Mun JY, Kim YR, Takeyama H, Aoki
T, Jung TS.

Author information: 
(1)Aquatic Biotechnology Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Gyeongsang
National University, Jinju, Gyeongnam, South Korea.

In innate immunity, LGP2 (laboratory of genetics and physiology 2) plays a very
important role in the production of type I interferon (IFN) through recognition
of cytosolic viral RNA. Although viral infection or stimulation with
double-strand RNA dramatically induces expression of the LGP2 gene, the
underlying transcriptional mechanism has never been studied. Here, we cloned and 
characterized the 5'-upstream region (-1,337 bp) of the LGP2 gene in olive
flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus). Numerous canonical motifs for IFN-regulatory
factors (IRFs) were found in this region, and reporter assays identified a poly
I:C-responsive promoter region (-506 to -398) that regulated LGP2 transcription. 
Transcriptional activity of the LGP2 promoter was strongly enhanced by IRF3,
which bound to IRF3 motif #3 (-480). The LGP2 promoter was also responsive to
viral infection in vitro. These results suggest that LGP2 transcriptional control
is crucially involved to regulated by IRF3 function after viral infection or
stimulation with poly I:C.

PMCID: PMC3519686
PMID: 23251565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Gene. 2013 Dec 10;532(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.009. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Regulation of the MIR155 host gene in physiological and pathological processes.

Elton TS(1), Selemon H, Elton SM, Parinandi NL.

Author information: 
(1)Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, USA; College of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmacology, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic address:
terry.elton@osumc.edu.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a family of small nonprotein-coding RNAs, play a critical
role in posttranscriptional gene regulation by acting as adaptors for the
miRNA-induced silencing complex to inhibit gene expression by targeting mRNAs for
translational repression and/or cleavage. miR-155-5p and miR-155-3p are processed
from the B-cell Integration Cluster (BIC) gene (now designated, MIR155 host gene 
or MIR155HG). MiR-155-5p is highly expressed in both activated B- and T-cells and
in monocytes/macrophages. MiR-155-5p is one of the best characterized miRNAs and 
recent data indicate that miR-155-5p plays a critical role in various
physiological and pathological processes such as hematopoietic lineage
differentiation, immunity, inflammation, viral infections, cancer, cardiovascular
disease, and Down syndrome. In this review we summarize the mechanisms by which
MIR155HG expression can be regulated. Given that the pathologies mediated by
miR-155-5p result from the over-expression of this miRNA it may be possible to
therapeutically attenuate miR-155-5p levels in the treatment of several
pathological processes.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23246696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Apr;168(8):1933-45. doi: 10.1111/bph.12091.

Suppression of Toll-like receptor 4 activation by caffeic acid phenethyl ester is
mediated by interference of LPS binding to MD2.

Kim SY(1), Koo JE, Seo YJ, Tyagi N, Jeong E, Choi J, Lim KM, Park ZY, Lee JY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju,
Korea.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play a crucial role in
recognizing invading pathogens and endogenous danger signal to induce immune and 
inflammatory responses. Since dysregulation of TLRs enhances the risk of immune
disorders and chronic inflammatory diseases, modulation of TLR activity by
phytochemicals could be useful therapeutically. We investigated the effect of
caffeic acid phenethyl ester (CAPE) on TLR-mediated inflammation and the
underlying regulatory mechanism.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Inhibitory effects of CAPE on TLR4 activation were
assessed with in vivo murine skin inflammation model and in vitro production of
inflammatory mediators in macrophages. In vitro binding assay, cell-based
immunoprecipitation study and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
analysis were performed to determine lipopolysaccharide (LPS) binding to MD2 and 
to identify the direct binding site of CAPE in MD2.
KEY RESULTS: Topical application of CAPE attenuated dermal inflammation and
oedema induced by intradermal injection of LPS (a TLR4 agonist). CAPE suppressed 
production of inflammatory mediators and activation of NF<U+03BA>B and
interferon-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) in macrophages stimulated with LPS. CAPE
interrupted LPS binding to MD2 through formation of adduct specifically with
Cys133 located in hydrophobic pocket of MD2. The inhibitory effect on LPS-induced
IRF3 activation by CAPE was not observed when 293T cells were reconstituted with 
MD2 (C133S) mutant.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our results show a novel mechanism for
anti-inflammatory activity of CAPE to prevent TLR4 activation by interfering with
interaction between ligand (LPS) and receptor complex (TLR4/MD2). These further
provide beneficial information for the development of therapeutic strategies to
prevent chronic inflammatory diseases.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3623063
PMID: 23231684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 18;109(51):21016-21. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1219482110. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Essential contribution of IRF3 to intestinal homeostasis and microbiota-mediated 
Tslp gene induction.

Negishi H(1), Miki S, Sarashina H, Taguchi-Atarashi N, Nakajima A, Matsuki K,
Endo N, Yanai H, Nishio J, Honda K, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Industrial Science,
University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan.

The large intestinal epithelial cells and immune cells are exposed to a variety
of molecules derived from commensal microbiota that can activate innate
receptors, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and retinoic acid-inducible
gene-I-like receptors (RLRs). Although the activation of these receptors is known
to be critical for homeostasis of the large intestine, the underlying gene
regulatory mechanisms are not well understood. Here, we show that IFN regulatory 
factor (IRF)3 is critical for the suppression of dextran sulfate sodium-induced
colitis. IRF3-deficient mice exhibited lethal defects in the inflammatory and
recovery phases of the colitis, accompanied by marked defects in the gene
induction for thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), a cytokine known to be
essential for protection of the large intestine. We further provide evidence that
DNA and RNA of the large intestinal contents are critical for Tslp gene induction
via IRF3 activation by cytosolic nucleic acid receptors. We also demonstrate that
IRF3 indeed activates the gene promoter of Tslp via IRF-binding sequences. This
newly identified intestinal gene regulatory mechanism, wherein IRF3 activated by 
microbiota-derived nucleic acids plays a critical role in intestinal homeostasis,
may have clinical implication in colonic inflammatory disorders.

PMCID: PMC3529020
PMID: 23213237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Immunol. 2013 Jan 1;190(1):115-25. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202136. Epub 2012 Dec
3.

CD11b/CD18 (Mac-1) is a novel surface receptor for extracellular double-stranded 
RNA to mediate cellular inflammatory responses.

Zhou H(1), Liao J, Aloor J, Nie H, Wilson BC, Fessler MB, Gao HM, Hong JS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology and Pharmacology, National Institutes of
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

During viral infection, extracellular dsRNA is a potent signaling molecule that
activates many innate immune cells, including macrophages. TLR3 is a well-known
receptor for extracellular dsRNA, and internalization of extracellular dsRNA is
required for endosomal TLR3 activation. Preserved inflammatory responses of
TLR3-deficient macrophages to extracellular dsRNA strongly support a
TLR3-independent mechanism in dsRNA-mediated immune responses. The present study 
demonstrated that CD11b/CD18 (Mac-1 [macrophage-1 Ag]), a surface integrin
receptor, recognized extracellular dsRNA and induced macrophage immune responses.
CD11b deficiency reduced inflammatory cytokine induction elicited by
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C; a synthetic dsRNA) in mouse sera and
livers, as well as in cultured peritoneal macrophages. dsRNA-binding assay and
confocal immunofluorescence showed that Mac-1, especially the CD11b subunit,
interacted and colocalized with poly I:C on the surface of macrophages. Further
mechanistic studies revealed two distinct signaling events following dsRNA
recognition by Mac-1. First, Mac-1 facilitated poly I:C internalization through
the activation of PI3K signaling and enhanced TLR3-dependent activation of IRF3
in macrophages. Second, poly I:C induced activation of phagocyte NADPH oxidase in
a TLR3-independent, but Mac-1-dependent, manner. Subsequently, phagocyte NADPH
oxidase-derived intracellular reactive oxygen species activated MAPK and NF-<U+03BA>B
pathways. Our results indicate that extracellular dsRNA activates Mac-1 to
enhance TLR3-dependent signaling and to trigger TLR3-independent, but
Mac-1-dependent, inflammatory oxidative signaling, identifying a novel
mechanistic basis for macrophages to recognize extracellular dsRNA to regulate
innate immune responses. This study identifies Mac-1 as a novel surface receptor 
for extracellular dsRNA and implicates it as a potential therapeutic target for
virus-related inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC3529770
PMID: 23209319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cell Signal. 2013 Mar;25(3):660-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.11.019. Epub 2012 
Nov 29.

Function and evolution of ubiquitous bacterial signaling adapter phosphopeptide
recognition domain FHA.

Weiling H(1), Xiaowen Y, Chunmei L, Jianping X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Modern Biopharmaceuticals, State Key Laboratory breeding base of 
Ministry of Education Eco-Environment of the Three Gorges Reservoir Region,
School of Life Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China.

Forkhead-associated domain (FHA) is a phosphopeptide recognition domain embedded 
in some regulatory proteins. With similar fold type to important eukaryotic
signaling molecules such as Smad2 and IRF3, the role of bacterial FHA domain is
intensively pursued. Reported bacterial FHA domain roles include: regulation of
glutamate and lipids production, regulation of cell shape, type III secretion,
ethambutol resistance, sporulation, signal transduction, carbohydrate storage and
transport, and pathogenic and symbiotic host-bacterium interactions. To provide
basis for the studies of other bacterial FHA domain containing proteins, the
status of bacterial FHA functionality and evolution were summarized.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23200850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Uirusu. 2012 Jun;62(1):103-12.

[Analysis of the application of host innate immune response to control and
prevent infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Abe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Yamada-oka, Suita-shi, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
Tabe@med.miami.edu

The baculovirus Autographa californica multiple nuclear polyhedrosis virus
(AcMNPV) has been widely used not only to achieve a high level of foreign gene
expression in insect cells but also for efficient gene transduction into
mammalian cells without any replication. In addition to the efficient gene
delivery, baculovirus has been shown to induce host innate immune responses in
various mammalian cells and in mice. The baculovirus has abundant CpG motifs in
the viral genome and is capable of inducing pro-inflammatory cytokines and
interferons (IFNs) through Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent
signaling pathways in a cell-type-specific manner. The cytoplasmic helicase
proteins RIG-I (retinoic-acid-inducible protein I) and MDA5
(melanoma-differentiation-associated gene 5) have been identified as viral dsRNA 
detectors and the adaptor IPS-1 (IFN-beta promoter stimulator-1) interacts with
RIG-I and MDA5 to facilitate type-I IFN production mediated interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3) and 7 (IRF7). These helicases and IPS-1, however, were not
essential for the type-I IFN and inflammatory cytokine responses to baculovirus. 
The baculovirus also has a strong adjuvant activity, and recombinant
baculoviruses encoding neutralization epitopes elicit protective immunity in
mice. This review deals with the current status of our knowledge of the induction
of host innate immune responses by baculovirus and discusses the future prospects
for baculovirus vectors.

PMID: 23189830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20667-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212188109. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Innate immune response to homologous rotavirus infection in the small intestinal 
villous epithelium at single-cell resolution.

Sen A(1), Rothenberg ME, Mukherjee G, Feng N, Kalisky T, Nair N, Johnstone IM,
Clarke MF, Greenberg HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

"Bulk" measurements of antiviral innate immune responses from pooled cells yield 
averaged signals and do not reveal underlying signaling heterogeneity in infected
and bystander single cells. We examined such heterogeneity in the small intestine
during rotavirus (RV) infection. Murine RV EW robustly activated type I IFNs and 
several antiviral genes (IFN-stimulated genes) in the intestine by bulk analysis,
the source of induced IFNs primarily being hematopoietic cells. Flow cytometry
and microfluidics-based single-cell multiplex RT-PCR allowed dissection of IFN
responses in single RV-infected and bystander intestinal epithelial cells (IECs).
EW replicates in IEC subsets differing in their basal type I IFN transcription
and induces IRF3-dependent and IRF3-augmented transcription, but not
NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent or type I IFN transcripts. Bystander cells did not display
enhanced type I IFN transcription but had elevated levels of certain
IFN-stimulated genes, presumably in response to exogenous IFNs secreted from
immune cells. Comparison of IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B induction in STAT1(-/-) mice revealed 
that murine but not simian RRV mediated accumulation of IkB-a protein and
decreased transcription of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent genes. RRV replication was
significantly rescued in IFN types I and II, as well as STAT1 (IFN types I, II,
and III) deficient mice in contrast to EW, which was only modestly sensitive to
IFNs I and II. Resolution of "averaged" innate immune responses in single IECs
thus revealed unexpected heterogeneity in both the induction and subversion of
early host antiviral immunity, which modulated host range.

PMCID: PMC3528539
PMID: 23188796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Dec 11;109(50):20661-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1213559109. Epub 2012 Nov 26.

Structural basis for Marburg virus VP35-mediated immune evasion mechanisms.

Ramanan P(1), Edwards MR, Shabman RS, Leung DW, Endlich-Frazier AC, Borek DM,
Otwinowski Z, Liu G, Huh J, Basler CF, Amarasinghe GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Filoviruses, marburgvirus (MARV) and ebolavirus (EBOV), are causative agents of
highly lethal hemorrhagic fever in humans. MARV and EBOV share a common genome
organization but show important differences in replication complex formation,
cell entry, host tropism, transcriptional regulation, and immune evasion.
Multifunctional filoviral viral protein (VP) 35 proteins inhibit innate immune
responses. Recent studies suggest double-stranded (ds)RNA sequestration is a
potential mechanism that allows EBOV VP35 to antagonize retinoic-acid inducible
gene-I (RIG-I) like receptors (RLRs) that are activated by viral
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), such as double-strandedness and
dsRNA blunt ends. Here, we show that MARV VP35 can inhibit IFN production at
multiple steps in the signaling pathways downstream of RLRs. The crystal
structure of MARV VP35 IID in complex with 18-bp dsRNA reveals that despite the
similar protein fold as EBOV VP35 IID, MARV VP35 IID interacts with the dsRNA
backbone and not with blunt ends. Functional studies show that MARV VP35 can
inhibit dsRNA-dependent RLR activation and interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) phosphorylation by IFN kinases TRAF family member-associated NFkb
activator (TANK) binding kinase-1 (TBK-1) and IFN kB kinase e (IKKe) in
cell-based studies. We also show that MARV VP35 can only inhibit RIG-I and
melanoma differentiation associated gene 5 (MDA5) activation by double
strandedness of RNA PAMPs (coating backbone) but is unable to inhibit activation 
of RLRs by dsRNA blunt ends (end capping). In contrast, EBOV VP35 can inhibit
activation by both PAMPs. Insights on differential PAMP recognition and
inhibition of IFN induction by a similar filoviral VP35 fold, as shown here,
reveal the structural and functional plasticity of a highly conserved virulence
factor.

PMCID: PMC3528546
PMID: 23185024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. FEBS Lett. 2012 Nov 20. pii: S0014-5793(12)00846-0. doi:
10.1016/j.febslet.2012.10.052. [Epub ahead of print]

WITHDRAWN: Smurf2 negatively regulates IFN-á production through mediating IRF3
ubiquitination and degradation.

Si M(1), Yin H, Yang Z, Li X, Yang Q, Yan J, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong 250012, China.

This article has been withdrawn at the request of the author(s) and/or editor.
The Publisher apologizes for any inconvenience this may cause. The full Elsevier 
Policy on Article Withdrawal can be found at
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/withdrawalpolicy.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23178684  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


91. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Jan 30;145(2):499-508. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.11.019.
Epub 2012 Nov 23.

ERK1- and TBK1-targeted anti-inflammatory activity of an ethanol extract of
Dryopteris crassirhizoma.

Yang Y(1), Lee GJ, Yoon DH, Yu T, Oh J, Jeong D, Lee J, Kim SH, Kim TW, Cho JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 440-746,
Republic of Korea.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Dryopteris crassirhizoma Nakai (Aspiadaceae) has 
been traditionally used as an herbal medicine for treating various inflammatory
and infectious diseases such as tapeworm infestation, colds, and viral diseases. 
However, no systematic studies on the anti-inflammatory actions of Dryopteris
crassirhizoma and its inhibitory mechanisms have been reported. We therefore
aimed at exploring the anti-inflammatory effects of 95% ethanol extracts (Dc-EE) 
of this plant.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The anti-inflammatory effect of Dc-EE on the production of
inflammatory mediators in RAW264.7 cells and HCl/EtOH-induced gastritis was
examined. Inhibitory mechanisms were also evaluated by exploring activation of
transcription factors, their upstream signalling, and target enzyme activities.
Finally, the active components from this extract were also identified using HPLC 
system.
RESULTS: Dc-EE diminished the production of nitric oxide (NO) and prostaglandin
(PG)E(2) in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated RAW264.7 cells in a
dose-dependent manner. Dc-EE also downregulated the levels of mRNA expression of 
pro-inflammatory genes such as inducible NO synthase (iNOS), cyclooxygenase
(COX)-2, and TNF-a by inhibiting the activation of activator protein (AP-1) and
IRF3. Indeed, the extract strongly blocked the activities of their upstream
kinases ERK1 and TBK1. This extract also strongly ameliorated gastritis symptoms 
stimulated by HCl/EtOH in mice. According to HPLC fingerprinting, resveratrol,
quercetin, and kampferol were identified from Dc-EE.
CONCLUSION: Dc-EE displays strong anti-inflammatory activity by suppressing
ERK/AP-1 and TBK1/IRF3 pathways, which contribute to its major
ethno-pharmacological role as an anti-inflammatory and anti-infectious disease
remedy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23178662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(3):1690-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01855-12. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Cleavage of interferon regulatory factor 7 by enterovirus 71 3C suppresses
cellular responses.

Lei X(1), Xiao X, Xue Q, Jin Q, He B, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is a positive-stranded RNA virus which is capable of
inhibiting innate immunity. Among virus-encoded proteins, the 3C protein
compromises the type I interferon (IFN-I) response mediated by retinoid
acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I) or Toll-like receptor 3 that activates interferon
regulatory 3 (IRF3) and IRF7. In the present study, we report that enterovirus 71
downregulates IRF7 through the 3C protein, which inhibits the function of IRF7.
When expressed in mammalian cells, the 3C protein mediates cleavage of IRF7
rather than that of IRF3. This process is insensitive to inhibitors of caspase,
proteasome, lysosome, and autophagy. H40D substitution in the 3C active site
abolishes its activity, whereas R84Q or V154S substitution in the RNA binding
motif has no effect. Furthermore, 3C-mediated cleavage occurs at the Q189-S190
junction within the constitutive activation domain of IRF7, resulting in two
cleaved IRF7 fragments that are incapable of activating IFN expression. Ectopic
expression of wild-type IRF7 limits EV71 replication. On the other hand,
expression of the amino-terminal domain of IRF7 enhances EV71 infection, which
correlates with its ability to interact with and inhibit IRF3. These results
suggest that control of IRF7 by the 3C protein may represent a viral mechanism to
escape cellular responses.

PMCID: PMC3554134
PMID: 23175366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Immunology. 2013 Mar;138(3):190-7. doi: 10.1111/imm.12038.

Recent advances in understanding viral evasion of type I interferon.

Taylor KE(1), Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster Immunology
Research Centre, Michael DeGroote Centre for Learning and Discovery, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

The type I interferon (IFN) system mediates a wide variety of antiviral effects
and represents an important first barrier to virus infection. Consequently,
viruses have developed an impressive diversity of tactics to circumvent IFN
responses. Evasion strategies can involve preventing initial virus detection, via
the disruption of the Toll-like receptors or the retinoic acid inducible gene I
(RIG-I) -like receptors, or by avoiding the initial production of the ligands
recognized by these receptors. An alternative approach is to preclude IFN
production by disarming or degrading the transcription factors involved in the
expression of IFN, such as interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)/IRF7, nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), or ATF-2/c-jun, or by inducing a general block on host cell
transcription. Viruses also oppose IFN signalling, both by disturbing the type I 
IFN receptor and by impeding JAK/STAT signal transduction upon IFN receptor
engagement. In addition, the global expression of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) can
be obstructed via interference with epigenetic signalling, and specific ISGs can 
also be selectively targeted for inhibition. Finally, some viruses disrupt IFN
responses by co-opting negative regulatory systems, whereas others use antiviral 
mechanisms to their own advantage. Here, we review recent developments in this
field.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3573272
PMID: 23173987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Pediatr Res. 2013 Feb;73(2):180-6. doi: 10.1038/pr.2012.165. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Glomerular expression of fractalkine is induced by polyinosinic-polycytidylic
acid in human mesangial cells: possible involvement of fractalkine after viral
infection.

Aizawa-Yashiro T(1), Imaizumi T, Tsuruga K, Watanabe S, Matsumiya T, Hayakari R, 
Yoshida H, Satoh K, Ito E, Tanaka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hirosaki University Hospital, Hirosaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Viral infections often trigger the onset or worsening of glomerular
diseases, but the details of this mechanism are unclear. Fractalkine/CX3CL1 (Fkn)
is a chemokine that induces the chemotaxis and activation of cells expressing its
receptor, CX3CR1. To examine the involvement of glomerular Fkn expression in the 
development of glomerulonephritis after viral infection, we conducted
experimental studies using human mesangial cells (MCs) in culture.
METHODS: We examined the effect of polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly IC), an 
authentic viral double-stranded RNA, on Fkn expression in MCs to investigate the 
involvement of Fkn in the antiviral reaction of MCs. Fkn mRNA and protein were
analyzed using real-time PCR and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Also, an
immunofluorescent study to examine mesangial Fkn expression in biopsy specimens
obtained from patients with glomerulonephritis was conducted.
RESULTS: Poly IC-induced Fkn expression in MCs in both a time- and dose-dependent
manner, and RNA interference (RNAi) against Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) or
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) inhibited poly IC-induced Fkn expression.
Significant glomerular Fkn expression was observed in biopsy specimens from
patients with immunoglobulin A nephropathy and purpura nephritis, with increasing
severity of glomerular inflammation.
CONCLUSION: The TLR3/IRF3/Fkn signaling pathway may, at least in part, mediate
immune and inflammatory responses against viral infection in MCs.

PMID: 23168573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Virus Res. 2013 Apr;173(1):87-100. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.10.013. Epub 2012
Nov 16.

Identification and utility of innate immune system evasion mechanisms of ASFV.

Correia S(1), Ventura S, Parkhouse RM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras 2781-901, Portugal.
scorreia@igc.gulbenkian.pt

The interferon (IFN) system is an early innate anti-virus host defense mechanism 
that takes place shortly after entry of the pathogen and long before the onset of
adaptive immunity. Thus, African swine fever virus (ASFV), as an acute and
persistent virus in pigs, is predicted to have evolved multiple genes for the
manipulation and evasion of interferon. Although, ASFV is known to interfere with
signaling pathways controlling the transcription of cytokines, surprisingly no
individual virus gene manipulating the induction or impact of IFN has been
described. Since an initial bioinformatics search of the ASFV genome failed to
identify potential antagonists of the IFN response, our strategy was to
functionally screen early expressed, "unassigned" ASFV genes without existing
homologies, particularly from MGFs 360 and 530, in luciferase reporter assays for
their inhibition of the induction and impact of IFN. Specifically, we used
reporter plasmids containing the luciferase gene under the control of: (1) the
IFN-ß promoter, to screen for inhibition of induction of type I IFN stimulated by
the addition of Poly(I:C); (2) the ISRE DNA elements, to screen for the
inhibition of the impact of type I IFN; and (3) the GAS DNA elements to screen
for the inhibition of the impact of type II IFN. Our initial experiments revealed
six ASFV genes inhibiting one or more of the three luciferase assays. From these,
we have selected a total of 3 genes for presentation. The ASFV A276R gene from
MGF360 inhibited the induction of IFN-ß via both the TLR3 and the cytosolic
pathways, targeting IRF3, but not IRF7 or NF-<U+03BA>B. The ASFV A528R inhibited the
induction of both NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 branches of the type I IFN induction signaling
pathway and the impact of IFN response via both IFN type I and type II
stimulation. The ASFV I329L gene is a functional viral TLR3 homologue inhibiting 
the induction of IFN at the level of TRIF. Thus, these genes reduce the IFN
response by targeting different intracellular signaling intermediates. Their
deletion from wild type virus may strengthen the host interferon response and so 
provide an attenuated form with more restricted virus spread after the initial
infection, perhaps "buying" sufficient time to allow the development of a
protective adaptive immune response. The demonstration of multiple ASFV genes for
the evasion of IFN responses will demand technology to construct viruses with
multiple gene deletions. An alternative would be a multigene DNA vaccine.
Finally, our work clearly demonstrates that unassigned viral genes may be viewed 
as a repository of host evasion strategies, only identifiable through functional 
assays. These may be considered to be "ready-made tools" for the experimental
manipulation of cell biology and immune responses in health and disease and, as
proof of concept, we have constructed a T-cell restricted transgenic mouse
expressing the ASFV gene A238L, a dual inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B and NFAT activation.
The resulting T cell restricted A238L transgenic mice developed a lymphoma with a
phenotype reminiscent of some acute lymphoblastic lymphomas. In contrast,
transgenic mice similarly expressing a mutant A238L solely inhibiting
transcription mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B were indistinguishable from wild type mice,
suggesting a transgene-NFAT-dependent transformation. Elucidation of the
molecular events associated with the development of this virus host evasion
molecule induced tumor may clarify some mechanisms of tumorigenesis in general,
and in the development of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in particular.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23165138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nat Immunol. 2013 Jan;14(1):61-71. doi: 10.1038/ni.2475. Epub 2012 Nov 18.

Trex1 regulates lysosomal biogenesis and interferon-independent activation of
antiviral genes.

Hasan M(1), Koch J, Rakheja D, Pattnaik AK, Brugarolas J, Dozmorov I, Levine B,
Wakeland EK, Lee-Kirsch MA, Yan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Jan;14(1):10-2.

The sensing of viral nucleic acids by the innate immune system triggers the
production of type I interferons, which activates interferon-stimulated genes
(ISGs) and directs a multifaceted antiviral response. ISGs can also be activated 
through interferon-independent pathways, although the precise mechanisms remain
elusive. Here we found that the cytosolic exonuclease Trex1 regulated the
activation of a subset of ISGs independently of interferon. Both Trex1(-/-) mouse
cells and Trex1-mutant human cells had high expression of genes encoding
antiviral molecules ('antiviral genes') and were refractory to viral infection.
The interferon-independent activation of antiviral genes in Trex1(-/-) cells
required the adaptor STING, the kinase TBK1 and the transcription factors IRF3
and IRF7. We also found that Trex1-deficient cells had an expanded lysosomal
compartment, altered subcellular localization of the transcription factor TFEB
and diminished activity of the regulator mTORC1. Together our data identify Trex1
as a regulator of lysosomal biogenesis and interferon-independent activation of
antiviral genes and show that dysregulation of lysosomes can elicit innate immune
responses.

PMCID: PMC3522772
PMID: 23160154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cell. 2013 Jan 10;49(1):158-71. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.10.013. Epub 2012 
Nov 15.

Insights into negative regulation by the glucocorticoid receptor from genome-wide
profiling of inflammatory cistromes.

Uhlenhaut NH(1), Barish GD, Yu RT, Downes M, Karunasiri M, Liddle C, Schwalie P, 
Hübner N, Evans RM.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

How the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activates some genes while potently
repressing others remains an open question. There are three current models for
suppression: transrepression via GR tethering to AP-1/NF-<U+03BA>B sites, direct GR
association with inhibitory elements (nGREs), and GR recruitment of the
corepressor GRIP1. To gain insights into GR suppression, we used genomic analyses
and genome-wide profiling of GR, p65, and c-Jun in LPS-stimulated macrophages. We
show that GR mediates both activation and repression at tethered sites, GREs, and
GRIP1-bound elements, indicating that motif classification is insufficient to
predict regulatory polarity of GR binding. Interestingly, sites of GR repression 
utilize GRIP1's corepressor function and display reduced histone acetylation.
Together, these findings suggest that while GR occupancy confers hormone
responsiveness, the receptor itself may not participate in the regulatory
effects. Furthermore, transcriptional outcome is not established by sequence but 
is influenced by epigenetic regulators, context, and other unrecognized
regulatory determinants.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3640846
PMID: 23159735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 4;430(1):95-100. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.006. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

Regulation of cooperative function of the Il12b enhancer and promoter by the
interferon regulatory factors 3 and 5.

Koshiba R(1), Yanai H, Matsuda A, Goto A, Nakajima A, Negishi H, Nishio J, Smale 
ST, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, The University of Tokyo, Komaba 4-6-1,
Meguro-Ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan.

The regulation of the Il12b gene, encoding the shared p40 subcomponent for IL-12 
and IL-23, is critical for innate immune responses and subsequent T cell
polarization. This gene is robustly induced upon Toll-like receptor (TLR)
stimulation, wherein an enhancer located 10kb upstream of the transcription start
site is required for promoter activity; however, the underlying mechanisms that
regulate this enhancer in cooperation with the promoter has remained elusive. We 
show here that the Il12b enhancer contains functional ISREs for recognition by
interferon regulatory factors (IRFs), and provide evidence that TLR-activated
IRF5 mediates cooperativity of the enhancer with the promoter which also contains
ISREs. By contrast, IRF3 activated by cytosolic RIG-I-like receptor (RLR)
signaling binds to these ISREs and causes gene suppression. Consistently, IRF5
binding is accompanied with chromatin remodeling of both regulatory regions and
the formation of a productive transcriptional complex containing other
transcription factors, whereas these events are inhibited by IRF3 binding. We
show that the ISREs embedded in the enhancer are indeed critical for its
activation by IRF5. We also adduce evidence that the 5' sequences of the enhancer
and promoter ISREs, all of which deviate from consensus ISREs, critically affect 
the function of IRF3. The dual commitment of these IRFs in the regulation of the 
Il12b enhancer and promoter is unique and may have implications for understanding
the evolution of this gene.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23154183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 27;109(48):19792-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212597109. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

avß3-integrin is a major sensor and activator of innate immunity to herpes
simplex virus-1.

Gianni T(1), Leoni V, Chesnokova LS, Hutt-Fletcher LM, Campadelli-Fiume G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Alma Mater Studiorum-University of
Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy.

Pathogens are sensed by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and a growing number of
non-TLR receptors. Integrins constitute a family of signaling receptors exploited
by viruses and bacteria to access cells. By gain- and loss-of-function approaches
we found that avß3-integrin is a sensor of and plays a crucial role in the innate
defense against herpes simplex virus (HSV). avß3-integrin signaled through two
pathways. One concurred with TLR2, affected activation/induction of interferons
type 1 (IFNs-1), NF-<U+03BA>B (nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B 
cells), and a polarized set of cytokines and receptors. The virion glycoproteins 
gH/gL sufficed to induce IFN1 and NF-<U+03BA>B via this pathway. The other pathway was
TLR2-independent, involved sarcoma (SRC)-spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK)-Caspase
recruitment domain-containing protein 9 (CARD9)-TRIF (TIR-domain-containing
adapter-inducing interferon-ß), and affected interferon regulatory factor 3 and 7
(IRF3-IRF7). The importance of avß3-integrin-mediated defense is reflected in the
observation that HSV evolved the immediate-early infected cellular protein 0
(ICP0) protein to counteract it. We propose that avß3-integrin is considered a
class of non-TLR pattern recognition receptors, a role likely exerted toward
viruses and bacteria that interact with integrins and mount an innate response.

PMCID: PMC3511702
PMID: 23150579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Protein Cell. 2013 Feb;4(2):130-41. doi: 10.1007/s13238-012-2081-y. Epub 2012 Nov
12.

MicroRNA-548 down-regulates host antiviral response via direct targeting of
IFN-<U+03BB>1.

Li Y(1), Xie J, Xu X, Wang J, Ao F, Wan Y, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Virology and College of Life Sciences, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China.

Interferon (IFN)-mediated pathways are a crucial part of the cellular response
against viral infection. Type III IFNs, which include IFN-<U+03BB>1, 2 and 3, mediate
antiviral responses similar to Type I IFNs via a distinct receptor complex.
IFN-<U+03BB>1 is more effective than the other two members. Transcription of IFN-<U+03BB>1
requires activation of IRF3/7 and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B), similar to the 
transcriptional mechanism of Type I IFNs. Using reporter assays, we discovered
that viral infection induced both IFN-<U+03BB>1 promoter activity and that of the
3'-untranslated region (UTR), indicating that IFN-<U+03BB>1 expression is also regulated
at the post-transcriptional level. After analysis with microRNA (miRNA)
prediction programs and 3'UTR targeting site assays, the miRNA-548 family,
including miR-548b-5p, miR-548c-5p, miR-548i, miR-548j, and miR-548n, was
identified to target the 3'UTR of IFN-<U+03BB>1. Further study demonstrated that
miRNA-548 mimics down-regulated the expression of IFN-<U+03BB>1. In contrast, their
inhibitors, the complementary RNAs, enhanced the expression of IFN-<U+03BB>1 and
IFN-stimulated genes. Furthermore, miRNA-548 mimics promoted infection by
enterovirus-71 (EV71) and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), whereas their
inhibitors significantly suppressed the replication of EV71 and VSV. Endogenous
miRNA-548 levels were suppressed during viral infection. In conclusion, our
results suggest that miRNA-548 regulates host antiviral response via direct
targeting of IFN-<U+03BB>1, which may offer a potential candidate for antiviral therapy.

PMID: 23150165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 11;288(2):1365-73. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.434142. Epub 2012 
Nov 12.

High mobility group Box 1 inhibits human pulmonary artery endothelial cell
migration via a Toll-like receptor 4- and interferon response factor 3-dependent 
mechanism(s).

Bauer EM(1), Shapiro R, Billiar TR, Bauer PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

In pulmonary hypertension the loss of precapillary arterioles results from
vascular injury causing endothelial dysfunction. Endothelial cell migration and
proliferation are critical for vascular regeneration. This study focused on the
effect of high mobility group box 1 protein (HMGB1) on these critical processes. 
HMGB1 had no effect on human pulmonary artery endothelial cell (HPAEC)
proliferation. In contrast, treatment of HPAECs with HMGB1 dose-dependently
inhibited VEGF-stimulated HPAEC migration. The effect of HMGB1 on HPAEC migration
was TLR4-dependent because it was reversed by TLR4 siRNA or TLR4-neutralizing
antibody. Exposure of HPAECs to hypoxia caused translocation and release of HMGB1
and inhibition of HPAEC migration. The effect of hypoxia on HPAEC migration was
mediated by HMGB1 because HMGB1-neutralizing antibody but not control IgG
restored HPAEC migration. Likewise, TLR4 siRNA but not control siRNA reversed the
inhibitory effect of hypoxia in HPAECs. The canonical TLR4 signaling pathway
requires the adaptor protein MyD88 and leads to downstream NF<U+03BA>B activation.
Interestingly, HMGB1 failed to stimulate NF<U+03BA>B translocation to the nucleus, but
instead activated an alternative pathway characterized by activation of
interferon response factor 3 (IRF3). This was in contrast to human umbilical vein
endothelial cells in which HMGB1 stimulated nuclear translocation of NF<U+03BA>B but not
IRF3. IRF3 siRNA, but not MyD88 siRNA, reversed the inhibitory effect of HMGB1 on
HPAEC migration. These data demonstrate that HMGB1 inhibits HPAEC migration, a
critical process for vascular regeneration, via TLR4- and IRF3-dependent
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3543019
PMID: 23148224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48418. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048418. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Endobiont viruses sensed by the human host - beyond conventional antiparasitic
therapy.

Fichorova RN(1), Lee Y, Yamamoto HS, Takagi Y, Hayes GR, Goodman RP, Chepa-Lotrea
X, Buck OR, Murray R, Kula T, Beach DH, Singh BN, Nibert ML.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genital Tract Biology, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and 
Reproductive Biology, Harvard Medical School and Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. rfichorova@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Wide-spread protozoan parasites carry endosymbiotic dsRNA viruses with uncharted 
implications to the human host. Among them, Trichomonas vaginalis, a parasite
adapted to the human genitourinary tract, infects globally ~250 million each year
rendering them more susceptible to devastating pregnancy complications
(especially preterm birth), HIV infection and HPV-related cancer. While
first-line antibiotic treatment (metronidazole) commonly kills the protozoan
pathogen, it fails to improve reproductive outcome. We show that endosymbiotic
Trichomonasvirus, highly prevalent in T. vaginalis clinical isolates, is sensed
by the human epithelial cells via Toll-like receptor 3, triggering Interferon
Regulating Factor -3, interferon type I and proinflammatory cascades previously
implicated in preterm birth and HIV-1 susceptibility. Metronidazole treatment
amplified these proinflammatory responses. Thus, a new paradigm targeting the
protozoan viruses along with the protozoan host may prevent
trichomoniasis-attributable inflammatory sequelae.

PMCID: PMC3492353
PMID: 23144878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nat Immunol. 2012 Dec;13(12):1155-61. doi: 10.1038/ni.2460. Epub 2012 Nov 11.

The helicase DDX41 recognizes the bacterial secondary messengers cyclic di-GMP
and cyclic di-AMP to activate a type I interferon immune response.

Parvatiyar K(1), Zhang Z, Teles RM, Ouyang S, Jiang Y, Iyer SS, Zaver SA, Schenk 
M, Zeng S, Zhong W, Liu ZJ, Modlin RL, Liu YJ, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2012 Dec;13(12):1137-9.

The induction of type I interferons by the bacterial secondary messengers cyclic 
di-GMP (c-di-GMP) or cyclic di-AMP (c-di-AMP) is dependent on a signaling axis
that involves the adaptor STING, the kinase TBK1 and the transcription factor
IRF3. Here we identified the heliase DDX41 as a pattern-recognition receptor
(PRR) that sensed both c-di-GMP and c-di-AMP. DDX41 specifically and directly
interacted with c-di-GMP. Knockdown of DDX41 via short hairpin RNA in mouse or
human cells inhibited the induction of genes encoding molecules involved in the
innate immune response and resulted in defective activation of STING, TBK1 and
IRF3 in response to c-di-GMP or c-di-AMP. Our results suggest a mechanism whereby
c-di-GMP and c-di-AMP are detected by DDX41, which forms a complex with STING to 
signal to TBK1-IRF3 and activate the interferon response.

PMCID: PMC3501571
PMID: 23142775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Cytokine. 2013 Jan;61(1):304-14. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2012.10.013. Epub 2012 Nov
8.

Interleukin-10 activates Toll-like receptor 4 and requires MyD88 for
cardiomyocyte survival.

Bagchi AK(1), Sharma A, Dhingra S, Lehenbauer Ludke AR, Al-Shudiefat AA, Singal
PK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Sciences, Department of Physiology, St. Boniface
Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine, University of Manitoba, 351 Tache Avenue,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada R2H 2A6.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are important in a variety of inflammatory diseases
including acute cardiac disorders. TLR4 innate signaling regulates the synthesis 
of anti-inflammatory cytokine, interleukin-10 (IL-10) upon TLR4 agonists'
re-stimulation. Anti-apoptotic action of IL-10 in cardiac dysfunction is
generally accepted but its protective mechanism through TLR4 is not yet
understood. We studied the effect of IL-10 in the activation of TLR4 downstream
signals leading to cardiomyocytes survival. IL-10 caused a significant increase
in the expression of CD14, MyD88 and TLR4. TLR4 activation led to the
translocation of the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) into the nucleus.
Phosphorylation of IRF3 enhanced mRNA synthesis for IL-1ß but not TNF-a and was
elevated even after removal of IL-10 stimulation. Furthermore, degradation of
inhibitory kappa B (I<U+03BA>B) kinase (Ikk) suggested that I<U+03BA>Bß was the main activating
kinase for IRF3-regulated NF-<U+03BA>B activation and phosphorylation of p65.
Phosphorylated NF-<U+03BA>B p65 was translocated into the nucleus. Concomitantly, an
increase in Bcl-xL activity inhibited Bax and the proteolytic activity of caspase
3 as well as a decrease in PARP cleavage. An inhibition of MyD88, modulated the
above listed responses to IL-10 as there was a decrease in TLR4 and IRF3 and an
increase in TNF-a mRNA. This was associated with a decrease in NF-<U+03BA>B p65, Bcl-xL 
mRNA and protein levels as well as there was an activation of Bax and PARP
cleavage independent of caspase 3 activation. These data in cardiomyocytes
suggest that IL-10 induced anti-apoptotic signaling involves upregulation of TLR4
through MyD88 activation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23141143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Nov 30;428(4):494-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.10.079. Epub 2012 Oct 30.

Impairment of interferon regulatory factor-3 activation by hepatitis C virus core
protein basic amino acid region 1.

Inoue K(1), Tsukiyama-Kohara K, Matsuda C, Yoneyama M, Fujita T, Kuge S, Yoshiba 
M, Kohara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute 
of Medical Science, 2-1-6 Kamikitazawa, Tokyo 156-0057, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3), a key transcriptional factor in the type 
I interferon system, is frequently impaired by hepatitis C virus (HCV), in order 
to establish persistent infection. However, the exact mechanism by which the
virus establishes persistent infection has not been fully understood yet. The
present study aimed to investigate the effects of various HCV proteins on IRF-3
activation, and elucidate the underlying mechanisms. To achieve this, full-length
HCV and HCV subgenomic constructs corresponding to structural and each of the
nonstructural proteins were transiently transfected into HepG2 cells. IFN-ß
induction, plaque formation, and IRF-3 dimerization were elicited by Newcastle
disease virus (NDV) infection. The expressions of IRF-3 homodimer and its
monomer, Ser386-phosphorylated IRF-3, and HCV core protein were detected by
immunofluorescence and western blotting. IFN-ß mRNA expression was quantified by 
real-time PCR (RT-PCR), and IRF-3 activity was measured by the levels of IRF-3
dimerization and phosphorylation, induced by NDV infection or
polyriboinosinic:polyribocytidylic acid [poly(I:C)]. Switching of the expression 
of the complete HCV genome as well as the core proteins, E1, E2, and NS2,
suppressed IFN-ß mRNA levels and IRF-3 dimerization, induced by NDV infection.
Our study revealed a crucial region of the HCV core protein, basic amino acid
region 1 (BR1), to inhibit IRF-3 dimerization as well as its phosphorylation
induced by NDV infection and poly (I:C), thus interfering with IRF-3 activation. 
Therefore, our study suggests that rescue of the IRF-3 pathway impairment may be 
an effective treatment for HCV infection.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23122814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Gen Virol. 2013 Feb;94(Pt 2):308-13. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.047076-0. Epub 2012 Oct
31.

West Nile virus NS2A protein facilitates virus-induced apoptosis independently of
interferon response.

Melian EB(1), Edmonds JH, Nagasaki TK, Hinzman E, Floden N, Khromykh AA.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, School of Chemistry and
Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.

The flavivirus NS2A protein is a small, multifunctional protein, involved in
replication, virion formation and regulation of the innate immune response. Using
the Kunjin strain of West Nile virus (WNV(KUN)) we previously demonstrated that a
single amino acid change from alanine to proline at position 30 of the NS2A
protein (A30P) reduced viral cytopathicity in cells and virulence in mice. To
further investigate functions of the NS2A protein we have substituted alanine at 
position 30 with different amino acids (A30 mutants) in a WNV(KUN) infectious
clone. The virulence of mutant viruses in wild-type (WT) and IRF3/IRF7
double-knockout mice was influenced by the amino acid change and ranged from high
to low in the order of WT>A30L>A30E>A30P/A30G. Moreover, infection of beta
interferon (IFN-ß)-deficient Vero cells with A30P virus showed less pronounced
chromosomal DNA degradation and lower percentage of cells with positive TUNEL
labelling than in WT virus infection, indicating a role for the WT NS2A protein
in IFN-independent apoptotic cell death.

PMCID: PMC3709616
PMID: 23114626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47952. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047952. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

Recombination activating gene-2 regulates CpG-mediated interferon-a production in
mouse bone marrow-derived plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Luo XM(1), Lei MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland Regional
College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, Virginia, United States of America. xinluo@vt.edu

Using mice that lack recombination activating gene-2 (Rag2), we have found that
bone marrow-derived plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) as main producers of
interferon-a (IFNa) require Rag2 for normal development. This is a novel function
for Rag2, whose classical role is to initiate B and T cell development. Here we
showed that a population of common progenitor cells in the mouse bone marrow
possessed the potential to become either B cells or pDCs upon appropriate
stimulations, and the lack of Rag2 hindered the development of both types of
progeny cells. A closer look at pDCs revealed that Rag2<U+207B>/<U+207B> pDCs expressed a high 
level of Ly6C and were defective at producing IFNa in response to CpG, a ligand
for toll-like receptor 9. This phenotype was not shared by Rag1<U+207B>/<U+207B> pDCs. The
induction of CCR7, CD40 and CD86 with CpG, however, was normal in Rag2<U+207B>/<U+207B> pDCs.
In addition, Rag2<U+207B>/<U+207B> pDCs retained the function to promote antibody class
switching and plasma cell formation through producing IL-6. Further analysis
showed that interferon regulatory factor-8, a transcription factor important for 
both IFNa induction and pDC development, was dysregulated in pDCs lacking Rag2.
These results indicate that the generation of interferon response in pDCs
requires Rag2 and suggest the lymphoid origin of bone marrow-derived pDCs.

PMCID: PMC3480463
PMID: 23110142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cancer Sci. 2013 Feb;104(2):165-70. doi: 10.1111/cas.12053. Epub 2012 Dec 13.

Arsenic trioxide prevents nitric oxide production in lipopolysaccharide
-stimulated RAW 264.7 by inhibiting a TRIF-dependent pathway.

Takahashi M(1), Ota A, Karnan S, Hossain E, Konishi Y, Damdindorj L, Konishi H,
Yokochi T, Nitta M, Hosokawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, 
Japan.

Arsenic trioxide (ATO) is one of the most potent drugs in cancer chemotherapy,
and is highly effective in treating both newly diagnosed and relapse patients
with acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL). Despite a number of reports regarding
the molecular mechanisms by which ATO promotes anti-tumor or pro-apoptotic
activity in hematological and other solid malignancies, the effects of ATO on
immune responses remain poorly understood. To further understand and clarify the 
effects of ATO on immune responses, we sought to examine whether ATO affects the 
production of nitric oxide (NO) in a lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated mouse
macrophage cell line, RAW 264.7. Arsenic trioxide was found to prevent NO
production in a dose-dependent manner. Arsenic trioxide significantly inhibited
the increase in inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) at both the mRNA and
protein levels. Furthermore, our analyses revealed that the inhibitory effect of 
ATO on iNOS expression was ascribed to the prevention of IRF3 phosphorylation,
interferon (IFN)-ß expression, and STAT1 phosphorylation, but not the prevention 
of the MyD88-dependent pathway. Taken together, our results indicate that ATO
prevents NO production by inhibiting the TIR-domain-containing adaptor protein
inducing IFN-ß (TRIF)-dependent pathway, thus highlighting an anti-inflammatory
property of ATO in innate immunity.

© 2012 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 23106696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Struct Biol. 2013 Jan;181(1):82-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jsb.2012.10.006. Epub 2012
Oct 23.

Crystal structure of the dimeric coiled-coil domain of the cytosolic nucleic acid
sensor LRRFIP1.

Nguyen JB(1), Modis Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biophysics & Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven,
CT 06520, USA.

LRRFIP1 binds cytoplasmic double-stranded DNA and RNA and interacts with FLI, the
mammalian homolog of Drosophila flightless I, through a highly conserved 87-amino
acid domain. Upon binding nucleic acid ligands, LRRFIP1 recruits and activates
ß-catenin, leading to the IRF3-dependent production of type I interferon.
However, the molecular mechanism of LRRFIP1 signaling is not well understood.
Here we show that the FLI-interacting domain of LRRFIP1 forms a classic parallel,
homodimeric coiled coil with 10 heptad repeats and 22 helical turns. The coiled
coil domain is also a dimer in solution. However, a longer LRRFIP1 construct
spanning the coiled coil and DNA binding domains assembles into higher order
oligomers in solution. The structure of LRRFIP1-CC constitutes a valuable tool
for probing the mechanism of LRRFIP1 signaling and for structural studies of
larger LRRFIP1 constructs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3525766
PMID: 23099021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Med Virol. 2013 Jan;85(1):71-82. doi: 10.1002/jmv.23442. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Hepatitis C virus NS2 protease inhibits host cell antiviral response by
inhibiting IKKe and TBK1 functions.

Kaukinen P(1), Sillanpää M, Nousiainen L, Melén K, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Unit, Department of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control,
National Institute for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki, Finland.
pasi.kaukinen@helsinki.fi

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) encodes for several proteins that can interfere with host
cell signaling and antiviral response. Previously, serine protease NS3/4A was
shown to block host cell interferon (IFN) production by proteolytic cleavage of
MAVS and TRIF, the adaptor molecules of the RIG-I and TLR3 signaling pathways,
respectively. This study shows that another HCV protease, NS2 can interfere
efficiently with cytokine gene expression. NS2 and its proteolytically inactive
mutant forms were able to inhibit type I and type III IFN, CCL5 and CXCL10 gene
promoters activated by Sendai virus infection. However, the CXCL8 gene promoter
was not inhibited by NS2. In addition, constitutively active RIG-I (<U+0394>RIG-I),
MAVS, TRIF, IKKe, and TBK1-induced activation of IFN-ß promoter was inhibited by 
NS2. Cotransfection experiments with IKKe or TBK1 together with interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and HCV expression constructs revealed that NS2 in a
dose-dependent manner inhibited IKKe and especially TBK1-induced IRF3
phosphorylation. GST pull-down experiments with GST-NS2 and in vitro-translated
and cell-expressed IKKe and TBK1 demonstrated direct physical interactions of the
kinases with NS2. Further evidence that the IKKe/TBK1 kinase complex is the
target for NS2 was obtained from the observation that the constitutively active
form of IRF3 (IRF3-5D) activated readily IFN-ß promoter in the presence of NS2.
The present study identified HCV NS2 as a potent interferon antagonist, and
describes an explanation of how NS2 downregulates the major signaling pathways
involved in the development of host innate antiviral responses.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23096996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Prion. 2012 Nov-Dec;6(5):443-6. doi: 10.4161/pri.22579. Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Protective role of MyD88-independent innate immune responses against prion
infection.

Ishibashi D(1), Atarashi R, Nishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. dishi@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Despite recent progress in the understanding of prion diseases, little is known
about the host-defense mechanisms against prion. Although it has long been
thought that type I interferon (IFN-I) has no protective effect on prion
infection, certain key molecules in innate immunity such as toll-like receptor
(TLR) 4 seemed to be involved in the host response. For this reason we decided to
focus on TLRs and investigate the role of a transcription factor, interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), because the absence of MyD88, a major adaptor
signaling molecule of TLRs, has no effect on the survival of prion infected mice.
Intriguingly, survival periods of prion inoculated IRF3-knockout mice became
significantly shorter than those of wild-type mice. In addition, IRF3 stimulation
inhibited PrP (Sc) replication in prion persistently-infected cells, and a de
novo prion infection assay revealed that IRF3-overexpression could make host
cells resistant to prion infection. Our work suggests that IRF3 may play a key
role in innate immune responses against invasion of prion pathogens. Activated
IRF3 could upregulate several anti-pathogen factors, including IFN-I, and induce 
sequential responses. Although the mechanism for the anti-prion effects mediated 
by IRF3 has yet to be clarified, certain interferon responsive genes might be
involved in the anti-prion host-defense mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3510862
PMID: 23093799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Sci Signal. 2012 Oct 23;5(247):pe47. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003511.

PKR-dependent inflammatory signals.

Kang R(1), Tang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) is implicated in inflammation 
and immune dysfunction through its regulation of mitogen-activated protein
kinases, interferon regulatory factor 3, nuclear factor <U+03BA>B, apoptosis, and
autophagy pathways. A study shows that PKR is also required for the activation of
inflammasomes and the subsequent release of high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1)
protein, a proinflammatory cytokine. Thus, the cell stress kinase PKR has
multifaceted roles in the regulation of inflammatory immune responses, and PKR
and HMGB1 are attractive targets for inflammasome-associated diseases.

PMCID: PMC3656404
PMID: 23092889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Dig Dis. 2012;30 Suppl 1:55-60. doi: 10.1159/000341126. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Innate immunity and alcoholic liver disease.

Szabo G(1), Petrasek J, Bala S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA 01605, USA. Gyongyi.Szabo @ umassmed.edu

Innate immunity provides the primary response to danger signals from pathogens or
injured host cells and tissues. The cells of the innate immune system include
monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, neutrophils, NK cells and NKT cells that
orchestrate innate immune and initiate adaptive immune responses via cell
interactions, cytokines, chemokines and other mediators. The most robust and
common response of the innate immune system to danger signals is inflammation. In
the multifactorial pathophysiology of alcoholic liver disease (ALD), activation
of innate immune cells and the inflammatory cascade play a central role. Recent
studies have demonstrated that Toll-like receptors (TLRs), the sensors of
microbial and endogenous danger signals, are expressed and activated in innate
immune cells as well as in parenchymal cells in the liver, and thereby contribute
to ALD. The importance of gut-derived endotoxin and its recognition by TLR4
expressed on innate immune cells and liver parenchymal cells and the specificity 
of TLR4-induced downstream signaling via the interferon regulator factor 3 (IRF3)
has recently been investigated. We have shown that mice deficient in IRF3 or TLR4
expression are protected from alcohol-induced liver steatosis, inflammation and
hepatocyte injury. In addition to pathogen-derived danger molecules, the
inflammatory cascade can also be activated by endogenous danger signals released 
from damaged cells. The inflammasome, a multiprotein complex, senses endogenous
danger molecules to result in caspase-1-mediated cleavage of IL-1ß. Our recent
results suggest that inflammasome and caspase-1 activation occur in ALD and that 
IL-1 significantly contributes to both steatosis and inflammation in the liver in
ALD.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23075869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47737. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047737. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Both STING and MAVS fish orthologs contribute to the induction of interferon
mediated by RIG-I.

Biacchesi S(1), Mérour E, Lamoureux A, Bernard J, Brémont M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie et d'Immunologie Moléculaires, INRA, CRJ, Jouy-en-Josas,
France. stephane.biacchesi@jouy.inra.fr

Viral infections are detected in most cases by the host innate immune system
through pattern-recognition receptors (PRR), the sensors for pathogen-associated 
molecular patterns (PAMPs), which induce the production of cytokines, such as
type I interferons (IFN). Recent identification in mammalian and teleost fish of 
cytoplasmic viral RNA sensors, RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), and their
mitochondrial adaptor: the mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) protein, also
called IPS-1, highlight their important role in the induction of IFN at the early
stage of a virus infection. More recently, an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) adaptor:
the stimulator of interferon genes (STING) protein, also called MITA, ERIS and
MPYS, has been shown to play a pivotal role in response to both
non-self-cytosolic RNA and dsDNA. In this study, we cloned STING cDNAs from
zebrafish and showed that it was an ortholog to mammalian STING. We demonstrated 
that overexpression of this ER protein in fish cells led to a constitutive
induction of IFN and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). STING-overexpressing
cells were almost fully protected against RNA virus infection with a strong
inhibition of both DNA and RNA virus replication. In addition, we found that
together with MAVS, STING was an important player in the RIG-I IFN-inducing
pathway. This report provides the demonstration that teleost fish possess a
functional RLR pathway in which MAVS and STING are downstream signaling molecules
of RIG-I. The Sequences presented in this article have been submitted to GenBank 
under accession numbers: Zebrafish STING (HE856619); EPC STING (HE856620); EPC
IRF3 (HE856621); EPC IFN promoter (HE856618).

PMCID: PMC3473018
PMID: 23091644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Immune Netw. 2012 Aug;12(4):148-54. doi: 10.4110/in.2012.12.4.148. Epub 2012 Aug 
31.

Calcium/Calmodulin-Dependent Protein Kinase is Involved in the Release of High
Mobility Group Box 1 Via the Interferon-ß Signaling Pathway.

Ma L(1), Kim SJ, Oh KI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hallym University College of Medicine, Chuncheon
200-702, Korea.

Previously, we have reported that high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), a
proinflammatory mediator in sepsis, is released via the IFN-ß-mediated JAK/STAT
pathway. However, detailed mechanisms are still unclear. In this study, we
dissected upstream signaling pathways of HMGB1 release using various molecular
biology methods. Here, we found that calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase 
(CaM kinase, CaMK) is involved in HMGB1 release by regulating IFN-ß production.
CaMK inhibitor, STO609, treatment inhibits LPS-induced IFN-ß production, which is
correlated with the phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3).
Additionally, we show that CaMK-I plays a major role in IFN-ß production although
other CaMK members also seem to contribute to this event. Furthermore, the CaMK
inhibitor treatment reduced IFN-ß production in a murine endotoxemia. Our results
suggest CaMKs contribute to HMGB1 release by enhancing IFN-ß production in
sepsis.

PMCID: PMC3467413
PMID: 23091438  [PubMed]


116. Molecules. 2012 Oct 22;17(10):12365-77. doi: 10.3390/molecules171012365.

Phenylmethimazole blocks dsRNA-induced IRF3 nuclear translocation and
homodimerization.

Courreges MC(1), Kantake N, Goetz DJ, Schwartz FL, McCall KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Specialty Medicine, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA.

Previous studies revealed that phenylmethimazole (C10) inhibits IRF3 signaling,
preventing dsRNA-induction of type 1 interferon gene expression, production, and 
downstream signaling. In the present study, we investigated the molecular basis
for C10 inhibition of dsRNA-stimulated IRF3 signaling. IRF-3 Trans-AM assays were
used to measure C10 effects on dsRNA induction of IRF3 DNA binding. Green
fluorescent protein-labeled IRF3 was used to measure C10 effects on dsRNA-induced
IRF3 nuclear translocation. Native PAGE, SDS PAGE, and western blotting were used
to identify effects of C10 on IRF3 homodimer formation and phosphorylation,
respectively. There was a significant impairment of dsRNA-induced IRF3 DNA
binding activity in human embryonic kidney and pancreatic cancer cells with C10
treatment. C10 also blocked dsRNA-induced IRF3 nuclear translocation and
homodimer formation without blocking serine 396 phosphorylation of IRF3.
Together, these results indicate that C10 interferes with IRF3 signaling by
blocking dsRNA-induced IRF3 homodimer formation, a prerequisite for nuclear
translocation and DNA binding activities.

PMID: 23090018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Hepatology. 2013 Mar;57(3):1203-14. doi: 10.1002/hep.26100. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

ß-catenin regulates innate and adaptive immunity in mouse liver
ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Ke B(1), Shen XD, Kamo N, Ji H, Yue S, Gao F, Busuttil RW, Kupiec-Weglinski JW.

Author information: 
(1)Dumont-UCLA Transplant Center, Department of Surgery, Division of Liver and
Pancreas Transplantation, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
CA 90095, USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are critical mediators of immune responses that integrate
signals from the innate immune system to orchestrate adaptive host immunity. This
study was designed to investigate the role and molecular mechanisms of
STAT3-induced ß-catenin in the regulation of DC function and inflammatory
responses in vitro and in vivo. STAT3 induction in lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-stimulated mouse bone marrow-derived DCs (BMDCs) triggered ß-catenin
activation by way of GSK-3ß phosphorylation. The activation of ß-catenin
inhibited phosphatase and tensin homolog delete on chromosome 10 (PTEN) and
promoted the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway, which in turn
down-regulated DC maturation and function. In contrast, knockdown of ß-catenin
increased PTEN/TLR4 (Toll-like receptor 4), interferon regulatory factor-3
(IRF3), nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activity, and proinflammatory cytokine
programs in response to LPS stimulation. In a mouse model of warm liver ischemia 
and reperfusion injury (IRI), disruption of ß-catenin signaling increased the
hepatocellular damage, enhanced hepatic DC maturation/function, and PTEN/TLR4
local inflammation in vivo.CONCLUSION: These findings underscore the role of
ß-catenin to modulate DC maturation and function at the innate-adaptive
interface. Activation of ß-catenin triggered PI3K/Akt, which in turn inhibited
TLR4-driven inflammatory response in a negative feedback regulatory mechanism. By
identifying the molecular pathways by which ß-catenin regulates DC function, our 
findings provide the rationale for novel therapeutic approaches to manage local
inflammation and injury in IR-stressed liver.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3594407
PMID: 23081841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Virol. 2013 Jan;87(1):16-24. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01853-12. Epub 2012 Oct 17.

Role of interferon regulatory factor 3-mediated apoptosis in the establishment
and maintenance of persistent infection by Sendai virus.

Chattopadhyay S(1), Fensterl V, Zhang Y, Veleeparambil M, Yamashita M, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Infection of cultured cells by paramyxoviruses causes cell death, mediated by a
newly discovered apoptotic pathway activated by virus infection. The key
proapoptotic protein in this pathway is interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3),
which upon activation by virus infection binds BAX, translocates it to
mitochondria, and triggers apoptosis. When IRF-3-knockdown cells were infected
with Sendai virus (SeV), persistent infection (PI) was established. The PI cells 
produced infectious SeV continuously and constitutively expressed many innate
immune genes. Interferon signaling was blocked in these cells. The elevated
levels of IRF-3-driven genes in the PI cells indicated that the amount of
residual IRF-3 activated by endogenous SeV was high enough to drive the
transcriptional effects of IRF-3 but too low to trigger its apoptotic activity.
We confirmed this IRF-3 threshold idea by generating a tetracycline
(Tet)-inducible cell line for IRF-3 expression, which enabled us to express
various levels of IRF-3. PI could be established in the Tet-off cell line, and as
expected, when doxycycline was withdrawn, the cells underwent apoptosis. Finally,
we tested for PI establishment in 12 mouse embryo fibroblasts by natural
selection. Eleven lines became persistently infected; although seven out of them 
had low IRF-3 levels, four did not. When one of the latter four was further
analyzed, we observed that it expressed a very low level of caspase 3, the final 
executor protease of the apoptotic pathway. These results demonstrated that SeV
PI can arise from infection of normal wild-type cells, but only if they can find 
a way to impair the IRF-3-dependent apoptotic pathway.

PMCID: PMC3536409
PMID: 23077293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 15;189(10):4852-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200428. Epub 2012
Oct 12.

IL-17 receptor adaptor protein Act1/CIKS plays an evolutionarily conserved role
in antiviral signaling.

Ryzhakov G(1), Blazek K, Lai CC, Udalova IA.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal
Sciences, Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, London W6 8LH,
United Kingdom. grigory.ryzhakov@kennedy.ox.ac.uk

Double-stranded RNA-induced antiviral gene expression in mammalian cells requires
activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). In this study, we show that the
IL-17R adaptor protein Act1/CIKS is involved in this process. Small interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown of Act1 in primary human skin fibroblasts specifically
attenuates expression of IFN-ß and IFN-stimulated antiviral genes induced by a
synthetic viral mimic, polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid. Ectopic expression of
Act1 potentiates the IRF3-driven expression of a synthetic reporter construct as 
well as the induction of antiviral genes. We demonstrate that this effect is
dependent on the ability of Act1 to functionally and physically interact with I<U+03BA>B
kinase e (IKKe), a known IRF3 kinase, and IRF3: 1) Act1 binds IKKe and IRF3; 2)
Act1-induced IRF3 activation can be blocked specifically by coexpression of a
catalytically inactive mutant of IKKe; and 3) mutants of IRF3, either lacking the
C terminus or mutated at the key phosphorylation sites, important for its
activation by IKKe, do not support Act1-dependent IRF3 activation. We also show
that a zebrafish Act1 protein is able to trigger antiviral gene expression in
human cells, which suggests an evolutionarily conserved function of vertebrate
Act1 in the host defense against viruses. On the whole, our study demonstrates
that Act1 is a component of antiviral signaling.

PMID: 23066157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Arch Virol. 2013 Feb;158(2):325-39. doi: 10.1007/s00705-012-1491-8. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

Pathway analysis in blood cells of pigs infected with classical swine fever
virus: comparison of pigs that develop a chronic form of infection or recover.

Hulst M(1), Loeffen W, Weesendorp E.

Author information: 
(1)Livestock Research of Wageningen University and Research Centre, P.O. Box 65, 
8200 AB, Lelystad, The Netherlands. marcel.hulst@wur.nl

Infection of pigs with CSFV can lead to either acute disease, resulting in death 
or recovery, or chronic disease. The mechanisms by which CSFV manipulates the
pig's first line of defence to establish a chronic infection are poorly
understood. Therefore, pigs were infected with moderately virulent CSFV, and
whole blood was collected on a regular basis during a period of 18 days. Using
whole-genome microarrays, time-dependent changes in gene expression were recorded
in blood cells of chronically diseased pigs and pigs that recovered.
Bioinformatics analysis of regulated genes indicated that different immunological
pathways were regulated in chronically diseased pigs compared to recovered pigs. 
In recovered pigs, antiviral defence mechanisms were rapidly activated, whereas
in chronically diseased pigs, several genes with the potential to inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B- 
and IRF3/7-mediated transcription of type I interferons were up-regulated.
Compared to recovered pigs, chronically diseased pigs failed to activate NK or
cytotoxic T-cell pathways, and they showed decreased gene activity in
antigen-presenting monocytes/macrophages. Remarkably, in chronically diseased
pigs, genes related to the human autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) were up-regulated during the whole period of 18 days. CSFV pathology in
kidney and skin resembles that of SLE. Furthermore, enzymes involved in the
degradation of 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 and of tryptophan to kynurenines were
expressed at different levels in chronically diseased and recovered pigs. Both of
these chemical processes may affect the functions of T helper/regulatory cells
that are crucial for tempering the inflammatory response after a viral infection.

PMID: 23053521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Dec;92(6):1261-8. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0312138. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

IRF3 contributes to sepsis pathogenesis in the mouse cecal ligation and puncture 
model.

Walker WE(1), Bozzi AT, Goldstein DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. 
wendy.walker@yale.edu

Much remains to be learned regarding which components of the innate immune
response are protective versus detrimental during sepsis. Prior reports
demonstrated that TLR9 and MyD88 play key roles in the CLP mouse model of sepsis;
however, the role of additional PRRs and their signaling intermediates remains to
be explored. In a prior report, we demonstrated that the signal adaptor IRF3
contributes to the systemic inflammatory response to liposome:DNA. We
hypothesized that IRF3 might likewise promote sepsis in the CLP model. Here, we
present results demonstrating that IRF3-KO mice have reduced disease score,
mortality, hypothermia, and bacterial load following CLP versus WT counterparts. 
This is paired with reduced levels of systemic inflammatory mediators in IRF3-KO 
mice that undergo CLP. We demonstrate that peritoneal cells from WT CLP mice
produce more cytokines than IRF3-KO counterparts on a per-cell basis; however,
there are more cells in the peritoneum of IRF3-KO CLP mice. Finally, we show that
IRF3 is activated in macrophages cultured with live or sonicated commensal
bacteria. These results demonstrate that IRF3 plays a detrimental role in this
mouse model of sepsis.

PMCID: PMC3501894
PMID: 23048204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(24):13515-23. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01824-12. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Critical role for interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and IRF-7 in type I
interferon-mediated control of murine norovirus replication.

Thackray LB(1), Duan E, Lazear HM, Kambal A, Schreiber RD, Diamond MS, Virgin HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Human noroviruses (HuNoV) are the major cause of epidemic, nonbacterial
gastroenteritis in the world. The short course of HuNoV-induced symptoms has
implicated innate immunity in control of norovirus (NoV) infection. Studies using
murine norovirus (MNV) confirm the importance of innate immune responses during
NoV infection. Type I alpha and beta interferons (IFN-a/ß) limit HuNoV replicon
function, restrict MNV replication in cultured cells, and control MNV replication
in vivo. Therefore, the cell types and transcription factors involved in
antiviral immune responses and IFN-a/ß-mediated control of NoV infection are
important to define. We used mice with floxed alleles of the IFNAR1 chain of the 
IFN-a/ß receptor to identify cells expressing lysozyme M or CD11c as cells that
respond to IFN-a/ß to restrict MNV replication in vivo. Furthermore, we show that
the transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 work in concert to initiate unique and 
overlapping antiviral responses to restrict MNV replication in vivo. IRF-3 and
IRF-7 restrict MNV replication in both cultured macrophages and dendritic cells, 
are required for induction of IFN-a/ß in macrophages but not dendritic cells, and
are dispensable for the antiviral effects of IFN-a/ß that block MNV replication. 
These studies suggest that expression of the IFN-a/ß receptor on
macrophages/neutrophils and dendritic cells, as well as of IRF-3 and IRF-7, is
critical for innate immune responses to NoV infection.

PMCID: PMC3503103
PMID: 23035219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45136. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045136. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Foreign RNA induces the degradation of mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein 
(MAVS): the role of intracellular antiviral factors.

Xing F(1), Matsumiya T, Onomoto K, Hayakari R, Imaizumi T, Yoshida H, Yoneyama M,
Fujita T, Satoh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Institute of Brain Science, Hirosaki
University Graduate School of Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan.

Mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) is an essential adaptor molecule
that is responsible for antiviral signaling triggered by retinoic acid-inducible 
gene-I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), leading to the induction of type I
interferon in innate immunity. Previous studies have shown that certain viruses
evade the innate immune response by cleaving the MAVS protein. However, little is
known about how MAVS is regulated in response to foreign RNA, including both
single-stranded (ss) and double-stranded (ds) RNA, because most previous reports 
have shown that the cleavage of MAVS is executed by proteases that are induced or
activated by the invading RNA viruses. Here, we report that MAVS mRNA is degraded
in response to polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (polyI:C), a synthetic dsRNA, in
A549 cells. RNA interference (RNAi) experiments revealed that both ssRNA- and
dsRNA-associated pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) were not involved in the
degradation of MAVS mRNA. Foreign RNA also induced the transient degradation of
the MAVS protein. In the resting state, the MAVS protein was protected from
degradation by interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3); moreover, the dimerization 
of IRF3 appeared to be correlated with the rescue of protein degradation in
response to polyI:C. The overexpression of MAVS enhanced interferon-ß (IFN-ß)
expression in response to polyI:C, suggesting that the degradation of MAVS
contributes to the suppression of the hyper-immune reaction in late-phase
antiviral signaling. Taken together, these results suggest that the comprehensive
regulation of MAVS in response to foreign RNA may be essential to antiviral host 
defenses.

PMCID: PMC3444469
PMID: 23028806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Immunol. 2012 Nov 1;189(9):4630-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102737. Epub 2012 Oct
1.

Endoplasmic reticulum stress regulates the innate immunity critical transcription
factor IRF3.

Liu YP(1), Zeng L, Tian A, Bomkamp A, Rivera D, Gutman D, Barber GN, Olson JK,
Smith JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine and Public Health, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53792, USA.

IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) regulates early type I IFNs and other genes
involved in innate immunity. We have previously shown that cells undergoing an
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress response called the unfolded protein response
produce synergistically augmented IFN-ß when stimulated with pattern recognition 
receptor agonists such as LPS. Concomitant ER stress and LPS stimulation resulted
in greater recruitment of the IRF3 transcription factor to ifnb1 gene regulatory 
elements. In this study, we used murine cells to demonstrate that both
oxygen-glucose deprivation and pharmacologic unfolded protein response inducers
trigger phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF3, even in the absence of
exogenous LPS. Different ER stressors used distinct mechanisms to activate IRF3: 
IRF3 phosphorylation due to calcium-mobilizing ER stress (thapsigargin treatment,
oxygen-glucose deprivation) critically depended upon stimulator of IFN gene, an
ER-resident nucleic acid-responsive molecule. However, calcium mobilization alone
by ionomycin was insufficient for IRF3 phosphorylation. In contrast, other forms 
of ER stress (e.g., tunicamycin treatment) promote IRF3 phosphorylation
independently of stimulator of IFN gene and TANK-binding kinase 1. Rather, IRF3
activation by tunicamycin and 2-deoxyglucose was inhibited by
4-(2-aminoethyl)-benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride, a serine protease
inhibitor that blocks activating transcription factor 6 processing. Interfering
with ER stress-induced IRF3 activation abrogated IFN-ß synergy. Together, these
data suggest ER stress primes cells to respond to innate immune stimuli by
activating the IRF3 transcription factor. Our results also suggest certain types 
of ER stress accomplish IRF3 phosphorylation by co-opting existing innate immune 
pathogen response pathways. These data have implications for diseases involving
ER stress and type I IFN.

PMCID: PMC3478468
PMID: 23028052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(24):13303-12. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02296-12. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Cell-specific regulation of nucleic acid sensor cascades: a controlling interest 
in the antiviral response.

Stein SC(1), Lam E, Falck-Pedersen E.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Molecular Biology Graduate Program, New York, New York, USA.

In this study, we examined the capacities of non-antigen-presenting cell types to
propagate antiviral signals following infection with recombinant adenovirus or by
direct nucleic acid transfection. Three murine cell lines (RAW264.7 macrophages
as a positive control, FL83B hepatocytes, and MS1 endothelial cells) were
assessed following exposure to adenovirus, DNA, or RNA ligands. Based on primary 
(interferon response factor 3 [IRF3] phosphorylation) and secondary (STAT1/2
phosphorylation) response markers, we found each cell line presented a unique
response profile: RAW cells were highly responsive, MS1 cells were modified in
their response, and FL83B cells were essentially nonresponsive. Comparative
reverse transcription-quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) of nucleic acid sensing
components revealed major differences between the three cell types. A prominent
difference was at the level of adaptor molecules; TRIF, MyD88, MAVS, and STING.
TRIF was absent in MS1 and FL83B cells, whereas MyD88 levels were diminished in
FL83B hepatocytes. These differences resulted in compromised TLR-mediated
activation. While the cytosolic adaptor MAVS was well represented in all cell
lines, the DNA adaptor STING was deficient in FL83B hepatocytes (down by nearly 3
log units). The absence of STING provides an explanation for the lack of DNA
responsiveness in these cells. This hypothesis was confirmed by acquisition of
IRF3 activation in Flag-STING FL83B cells following DNA transfection. To
consolidate the central role of adaptors in MS1 endothelial cells, short hairpin 
RNA (shRNA) knockdown of STING and MAVS resulted in a ligand-specific loss of
IRF3 responsiveness. In contrast to the requirement for specific adaptor
proteins, a requirement for a specific DNA sensor (AIM2, DDx41, or p204) in the
IRF3 activation response was not detected by shRNA knockdown in MS1 cells. The
data reveal that cell-specific regulation of nucleic acid sensing cascade
components influences antiviral recognition responses, that controlling levels of
adaptor molecules is a recurring strategy in regulating antiviral recognition
response functions, and that comparative RT-qPCR has predictive value for
antiviral/innate response functions in these cells.

PMCID: PMC3503059
PMID: 23015711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nature. 2012 Nov 1;491(7422):125-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11433. Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Codon-usage-based inhibition of HIV protein synthesis by human schlafen 11.

Li M(1), Kao E, Gao X, Sandig H, Limmer K, Pavon-Eternod M, Jones TE, Landry S,
Pan T, Weitzman MD, David M.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2012 Nov;9(11):605.
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012 Nov;10(11):732.

In mammals, one of the most pronounced consequences of viral infection is the
induction of type I interferons, cytokines with potent antiviral activity.
Schlafen (Slfn) genes are a subset of interferon-stimulated early response genes 
(ISGs) that are also induced directly by pathogens via the interferon regulatory 
factor 3 (IRF3) pathway. However, many ISGs are of unknown or incompletely
understood function. Here we show that human SLFN11 potently and specifically
abrogates the production of retroviruses such as human immunodeficiency virus 1
(HIV-1). Our study revealed that SLFN11 has no effect on the early steps of the
retroviral infection cycle, including reverse transcription, integration and
transcription. Rather, SLFN11 acts at the late stage of virus production by
selectively inhibiting the expression of viral proteins in a
codon-usage-dependent manner. We further find that SLFN11 binds transfer RNA, and
counteracts changes in the tRNA pool elicited by the presence of HIV. Our studies
identified a novel antiviral mechanism within the innate immune response, in
which SLFN11 selectively inhibits viral protein synthesis in HIV-infected cells
by means of codon-bias discrimination.

PMCID: PMC3705913
PMID: 23000900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Protein Cell. 2013 Jan;4(1):27-39. doi: 10.1007/s13238-012-2063-0. Epub 2012 Sep 
21.

The essential adaptors of innate immune signaling.

Chen H(1), Jiang Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Microbial components and the endogenous molecules released from damaged cells can
stimulate germ-line-encoded pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) to transduce
signals to the hub of the innate immune signaling network-the adaptor proteins
MyD88/TRIF/MAVS/STING/Caspase-1, where integrated signals relay to the relevant
transcription factors IRF3/IRF7/NF-<U+03BA>B/ AP-1 and the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) to trigger the expression of type I
interferons and inflammatory cytokines or the assembly of inflammasomes. Most
pleiotropic cytokines are secreted and bind to specific receptors, activating the
signaling pathways including JAK-STAT for the proliferation, differentiation and 
functional capacity of immune cells. This review focuses on several critical
adaptors in innate immune signaling cascades and recent progress in their
molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 22996173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013 Jan;91(1):52-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2012.45. Epub 2012 Sep
18.

Toll-like receptor 3 activation differentially regulates phagocytosis of bacteria
and apoptotic neutrophils by mouse peritoneal macrophages.

Deng T(1), Feng X, Liu P, Yan K, Chen Y, Han D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation by microbial pathogens triggers inflammatory 
responses against microbes. The phagocytic clearance of invading microbes and
apoptotic immune cells is essential to resolve inflammation. However, the
relationship between TLR activation and phagocytosis is poorly understood. We
found that TLR3 activation promotes bacterial uptake through the activation of
interferon-regulating factor 3 (IRF3) and inhibits phagocytosis of apoptotic
neutrophils through the activation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) by mouse
peritoneal macrophages. The TLR signals that regulate the phagocytic ability of
macrophages were also induced by TLR4 and TLR5 activation. Further, we
demonstrated that TLR-induced tumor necrosis factor-a and interferon-ß
contributed to the differential phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils and
bacteria by macrophages. Moreover, activation of IRF3 upregulated the expression 
of some receptors involved in bacterial uptake, whereas activation of NF-<U+03BA>B
downregulated the expression of molecules that facilitate the phagocytosis of
apoptotic cells. These results describe an effect of TLR-triggered innate
immunity on the phagocytic activity of macrophages.

PMID: 22986631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Immunol. 2012 Oct 15;189(8):4088-103. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200777. Epub 2012 
Sep 12.

IFN-a and lipopolysaccharide upregulate APOBEC3 mRNA through different signaling 
pathways.

Mehta HV(1), Jones PH, Weiss JP, Okeoma CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

APOBEC3 (A3) proteins are virus-restriction factors that provide intrinsic
immunity against infections by viruses like HIV-1 and mouse mammary tumor virus. 
A3 proteins are inducible by inflammatory stimuli, such as LPS and IFN-a, via
mechanisms that are not fully defined. Using genetic and pharmacological studies 
on C57BL/6 mice and cells, we show that IFN-a and LPS induce A3 via different
pathways, independently of each other. IFN-a positively regulates mouse APOBEC3
(mA3) mRNA expression through IFN-aR/PKC/STAT1 and negatively regulates mA3 mRNA 
expression via IFN-aR/MAPKs-signaling pathways. Interestingly, LPS shows some
variation in its regulatory behavior. Although LPS-mediated positive regulation
of mA3 mRNA occurs through TLR4/TRIF/IRF3/PKC, it negatively modulates mA3 mRNA
via TLR4/MyD88/MAPK-signaling pathways. Additional studies on human peripheral
blood mononuclear cells reveal that PKC differentially regulates IFN-a and LPS
induction of human A3A, A3F, and A3G mRNA expression. In summary, we identified
important signaling targets downstream of IFN-aR and TLR4 that mediate A3 mRNA
induction by both LPS and IFN-a. Our results provide new insights into the
signaling targets that could be manipulated to enhance the intracellular store of
A3 and potentially enhance A3 antiviral function in the host.

PMCID: PMC3531240
PMID: 22972924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Cell. 2012 Oct 26;48(2):313-21. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2012.07.032. Epub 2012 
Sep 6.

Hepatic expression of HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase triggers innate immune
signaling and cytokine production.

Yu GY(1), He G, Li CY, Tang M, Grivennikov S, Tsai WT, Wu MS, Hsu CW, Tsai Y,
Wang LH, Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Departments of
Pharmacology and Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0723, USA. guannyiy@nhri.org.tw

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2013 Mar;57(3):1275-7.

Innate immunity controls pathogen replication and spread. Yet, certain pathogens,
such as Hepatitis C Virus (HCV), escape immune elimination and establish
persistent infections that promote chronic inflammation and related diseases.
Whereas HCV regulatory proteins that attenuate antiviral responses are known,
those that promote inflammation and liver injury remain to be identified. Here,
we show that transient expression of HCV RNA-dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp),
NS5B, in mouse liver and human hepatocytes results in production of small RNA
species that activate innate immune signaling via TBK1-IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B and induce 
cytokine production, including type I interferons (IFN) and IL-6. NS5B-expression
also results in liver damage.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3483424
PMID: 22959272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 19;287(43):36404-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.397075. Epub
2012 Sep 4.

TRIM56 is an essential component of the TLR3 antiviral signaling pathway.

Shen Y(1), Li NL, Wang J, Liu B, Lester S, Li K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Biochemistry, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA.

Members of the tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins are being recognized as important
regulators of host innate immunity. However, specific TRIMs that contribute to
TLR3-mediated antiviral defense have not been identified. We show here that
TRIM56 is a positive regulator of TLR3 signaling. Overexpression of TRIM56
substantially potentiated extracellular dsRNA-induced expression of interferon
(IFN)-ß and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), while knockdown of TRIM56 greatly
impaired activation of IRF3, induction of IFN-ß and ISGs, and establishment of an
antiviral state by TLR3 ligand and severely compromised TLR3-mediated chemokine
induction following infection by hepatitis C virus. The ability to promote TLR3
signaling was independent of the E3 ubiquitin ligase activity of TRIM56. Rather, 
it correlated with a physical interaction between TRIM56 and TRIF. Deletion of
the C-terminal portion of TRIM56 abrogated the TRIM56-TRIF interaction as well as
the augmentation of TLR3-mediated IFN response. Together, our data demonstrate
TRIM56 is an essential component of the TLR3 antiviral signaling pathway and
reveal a novel role for TRIM56 in innate antiviral immunity.

PMCID: PMC3476306
PMID: 22948160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Exp Med. 2012 Sep 24;209(10):1703-11. Epub 2012 Sep 3.

TRAF-interacting protein (TRIP) negatively regulates IFN-ß production and
antiviral response by promoting proteasomal degradation of TANK-binding kinase 1.

Zhang M(1), Wang L, Zhao X, Zhao K, Meng H, Zhao W, Gao C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Experimental Teratology of the Ministry of Education and
Department of Immunology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Shandong
250012, China.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) plays an essential role in Toll-like receptor (TLR)-
and retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-mediated induction of type I
interferon (IFN; IFN-a/ß) and host antiviral responses. How TBK1 activity is
negatively regulated remains largely unknown. We report that TNF
receptor-associated factor (TRAF)-interacting protein (TRIP) promotes proteasomal
degradation of TBK1 and inhibits TLR3/4- and RIG-I-induced IFN-ß signaling. TRIP 
knockdown resulted in augmented activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and 
enhanced expression of IFN-ß in TLR3/4- and RIG-I-activated primary peritoneal
macrophages, whereas overexpression of TRIP had opposite effects. Consistently,
TRIP impaired Sendai virus (SeV) infection-induced IRF3 activation and IFN-ß
production and promoted vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) replication. As an E3
ubiquitin ligase, TRIP negatively regulated the cellular levels of TBK1 by
directly binding to and promoting K48-linked polyubiquitination of TBK1.
Therefore, we identified TRIP as a negative regulator in TLR3/4- and
RIG-I-triggered antiviral responses and suggested TRIP as a potential target for 
the intervention of diseases with uncontrolled IFN-ß production.

PMCID: PMC3457734
PMID: 22945920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Immunity. 2012 Sep 21;37(3):549-62. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.05.029. Epub 2012 
Aug 30.

Inflammatory monocytes activate memory CD8(+) T and innate NK lymphocytes
independent of cognate antigen during microbial pathogen invasion.

Soudja SM(1), Ruiz AL, Marie JC, Lauvau G.

Author information: 
(1)Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Sep 21;37(3):445-6.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Oct;12(10):684-5.

Memory CD8(+) T cells induced upon immunization exhibit improved functional
features that contribute to protection of immunized hosts. Although both cognate 
antigen recognition and inflammation are important for memory CD8(+) T cell
reactivation, the relative contribution of these factors and the cell types
providing these signals in vivo are poorly defined. Here, we show that
Ly6C(+)CCR2(+) inflammatory monocytes, a subset of monocytes, largely orchestrate
memory CD8(+) T and NK lymphocytes activation by differentiating into
interleukin-18 (IL-18)- and IL-15-producing cells in an inflammasome and type I
interferon-IRF3-dependent manner. Memory CD8(+) T cells became potent effector
cells by sensing inflammation from monocytes independently of their cognate
antigen. Like NK cells, they underwent rapid mobilization, upregulated intense
and sustained effector functions during bacterial, viral, and parasitic
infections, and contributed to innate responses and protection in vivo. Thus,
inflammatory monocyte-derived IL-18 and IL-15 are critical to initiate memory
CD8(+) T and NK lymphocytes differentiation into antimicrobial effector cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3456987
PMID: 22940097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp). 2012 Sep;2(3):239-48. doi:
10.1556/EuJMI.2.2012.3.10. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Murine adult neural progenitor cells alter their proliferative behavior and gene 
expression after the activation of Toll-like-receptor 3.

Melnik A, Tauber S, Dumrese C, Ullrich O, Wolf SA.

Viral infections during pregnancy significantly increase the risk for
psychological pathologies like schizophrenia in the offspring. One of the main
morphological hallmarks of schizophrenia is a reduced size of the hippocampus.
Since new neurons are produced in this particular brain compartment throughout
life, it might be possible that low neurogenesis levels triggered by a maternal
viral infection contribute to developmental deficits of the hippocampus. We
injected polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C) in pregnant C57Bl/6 mice to
stimulate an anti-viral response through TLR3 and examined gene expressions in
the neuronal progenitor cells (NPCs) of the offspring at different ages.
Additionally, we treated adult NPC lines with Poly I:C to investigate its direct 
effect. We could show for the first time that TLR3 and its downstream effector
molecule IRF3 are expressed in adult NPCs. Poly I:C treatment in vitro and in
vivo led to the regulation of proliferation and genes involved in antiviral
response, migration, and survival. These findings indicate that NPCs of the fetus
are able to react towards an in utero immune response, and thus, changes in the
neuronal stem cell pool can contribute to the development of neurological
diseases like schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC3962760
PMID: 24688771  [PubMed]


135. Adv Virol. 2012;2012:524024. doi: 10.1155/2012/524024. Epub 2012 Aug 8.

Hantavirus regulation of type I interferon responses.

Matthys V(1), Mackow ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, Stony Brook University, Stony
Brook, NY 11794-5222, USA.

Hantaviruses primarily infect human endothelial cells (ECs) and cause two highly 
lethal human diseases. Early addition of Type I interferon (IFN) to ECs blocks
hantavirus replication and thus for hantaviruses to be pathogenic they need to
prevent early interferon induction. PHV replication is blocked in human ECs, but 
not inhibited in IFN deficient VeroE6 cells and consistent with this, infecting
ECs with PHV results in the early induction of IFNß and an array of interferon
stimulated genes (ISGs). In contrast, ANDV, HTNV, NY-1V and TULV hantaviruses,
inhibit early ISG induction and successfully replicate within human ECs.
Hantavirus inhibition of IFN responses has been attributed to several viral
proteins including regulation by the Gn proteins cytoplasmic tail (Gn-T). The
Gn-T interferes with the formation of STING-TBK1-TRAF3 complexes required for
IRF3 activation and IFN induction, while the PHV Gn-T fails to alter this complex
or regulate IFN induction. These findings indicate that interfering with early
IFN induction is necessary for hantaviruses to replicate in human ECs, and
suggest that additional determinants are required for hantaviruses to be
pathogenic. The mechanism by which Gn-Ts disrupt IFN signaling is likely to
reveal potential therapeutic interventions and suggest protein targets for
attenuating hantaviruses.

PMCID: PMC3423653
PMID: 22924041  [PubMed]


136. Nat Biotechnol. 2012 Sep;30(9):883-8.

Polyethyleneimine is a potent mucosal adjuvant for viral glycoprotein antigens.

Wegmann F(1), Gartlan KH, Harandi AM, Brinckmann SA, Coccia M, Hillson WR, Kok
WL, Cole S, Ho LP, Lambe T, Puthia M, Svanborg C, Scherer EM, Krashias G,
Williams A, Blattman JN, Greenberg PD, Flavell RA, Moghaddam AE, Sheppard NC,
Sattentau QJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Protection against mucosally transmitted infections probably requires immunity at
the site of pathogen entry, yet there are no mucosal adjuvant formulations
licensed for human use. Polyethyleneimine (PEI) represents a family of organic
polycations used as nucleic acid transfection reagents in vitro and DNA vaccine
delivery vehicles in vivo. Here we show that diverse PEI forms have potent
mucosal adjuvant activity for viral subunit glycoprotein antigens. A single
intranasal administration of influenza hemagglutinin or herpes simplex virus
type-2 (HSV-2) glycoprotein D with PEI elicited robust antibody-mediated
protection from an otherwise lethal infection, and was superior to existing
experimental mucosal adjuvants. PEI formed nanoscale complexes with antigen,
which were taken up by antigen-presenting cells in vitro and in vivo, promoted
dendritic cell trafficking to draining lymph nodes and induced
non-proinflammatory cytokine responses. PEI adjuvanticity required release of
host double-stranded DNA that triggered Irf3-dependent signaling. PEI therefore
merits further investigation as a mucosal adjuvant for human use.

PMCID: PMC3496939
PMID: 22922673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041251. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Regulation of interferon-ß by MAGI-1 and its interaction with influenza A virus
NS1 protein with ESEV PBM.

Kumar M(1), Liu H, Rice AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

The NS1 protein from avian influenza A viruses contains a PDZ binding motif (PBM)
at its carboxyl terminus with the consensus sequence ESEV. The ESEV PBM confers
binding to several cellular PDZ proteins, including Dlg1, MAGI-1 and Scribble.
The interaction between NS1 and Scribble protects infected cells from apoptosis, 
while the interaction between NS1 and both Dlg1 and Scribble disrupts tight
junctions. In this study, we examined the MAGI-1 protein. We made the unexpected 
observation that siRNA depletion of MAGI-1 activates IRF3 and induces the IFN-ß
promoter. We found that the ESEV NS1 protein sequesters MAGI-1 away from the
plasma membrane in infected cells. Using plasmid vectors to express NS1 proteins,
we observed that the ESEV PBM elicits an IFN-ß induction signal as indicated by
activation of IRF3 and a relative deficiency in NS1 inhibition of induction of
the IFN-ß promoter by dsRNA or RIG-I. Taken together, our data suggest that
disruption of MAGI-1 by the ESEV PBM activates an IFN-ß induction signal. During 
viral infection, however, induction of the IFN-ß gene does not occur presumably
because other anti-IFN functions dominate over the IFN-activation activity of the
ESEV PBM. We postulate that the ESEV PBM's broad binding activity for PDZ
proteins may allow NS1 to bind to some PDZ proteins such as MAGI-1 that confer no
benefit or may even be detrimental to viral replication. However, the advantage
of binding to key PDZ proteins such as Dlg1 and Scribble may dominate and
therefore provide an overall benefit for the virus to encode the ESEV PBM.

PMCID: PMC3401146
PMID: 22911767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Hepatology. 2013 Jan;57(1):351-61. doi: 10.1002/hep.26022. Epub 2012 Dec 4.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 deficiency leads to interleukin-17-mediated liver 
ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Loi P(1), Yuan Q, Torres D, Delbauve S, Laute MA, Lalmand MC, Pétein M, Goriely
S, Goldman M, Flamand V.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Immunologie Médicale, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Gosselies,
Belgium.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is an important transcription factor in
Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signaling, a pathway that is known to play a critical
role in liver ischemia-reperfusion injury. In order to decipher the involvement
of IRF3 in this setting, we first compared the intensity of hepatic lesions in
IRF3-deficient versus wildtype mice. We found increased levels of blood
transaminases, enhanced liver necrosis, and more pronounced neutrophil
infiltrates in IRF3-deficient mice. Neutrophil depletion by administration of
anti-Ly6G monoclonal antibody indicated that neutrophils play a dominant role in 
the development of severe liver necrosis in IRF3-deficient mice. Quantification
of cytokine genes expression revealed increased liver expression of interleukin
(IL)-12/IL-23p40, IL-23p19 messenger RNA (mRNA), and IL-17A mRNA in
IRF3-deficient versus wildtype (WT) mice, whereas IL-27p28 mRNA expression was
diminished in the absence of IRF3. The increased IL-17 production in
IRF3-deficient mice was functionally relevant, as IL-17 neutralization prevented 
the enhanced hepatocellular damages and liver inflammation in these animals.
Evidence for enhanced production of IL-23 and decreased accumulation of IL-27
cytokine in M1 type macrophage from IRF3-deficient mice was also observed after
treatment with lipopolysaccharide, a setting in which liver gamma-delta T cells
and invariant natural killer T cells were found to be involved in IL-17A
hyperproduction.CONCLUSION: IRF3-dependent events downstream of TLR4 control the 
IL-23/IL-17 axis in the liver and this regulatory role of IRF3 is relevant to
liver ischemia-reperfusion injury.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22911673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 5;287(41):34626-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.390401. Epub 2012
Aug 20.

Tetraspanin 6 (TSPAN6) negatively regulates retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like
receptor-mediated immune signaling in a ubiquitination-dependent manner.

Wang Y(1), Tong X, Omoregie ES, Liu W, Meng S, Ye X.

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology and Immunology, Institute of
Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

The recognition between retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like receptors (RLRs) and 
viral RNA triggers an intracellular cascade of signaling to induce the expression
of type I IFNs. Both positive and negative regulation of the RLR signaling
pathway are important for the host antiviral immune response. Here, we
demonstrate that the tetraspanin protein TSPAN6 inhibits RLR signaling by
affecting the formation of the adaptor MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral
signaling)-centered signalosome. We found that overexpression of TSPAN6 impaired 
RLR-mediated activation of IFN-stimulated response element, NF-<U+03BA>B, and IFN-ß
promoters, whereas knockdown of TSPAN6 enhanced the RLR-mediated signaling
pathway. Interestingly, as the RLR pathway was activated, TSPAN6 underwent
Lys-63-linked ubiquitination, which promoted its association with MAVS. The
interaction of TSPAN6 and MAVS interfered with the recruitment of RLR downstream 
molecules TRAF3, MITA, and IRF3 to MAVS. Further study revealed that the first
transmembrane domain of TSPAN6 is critical for its ubiquitination and association
with MAVS as well as its inhibitory effect on RLR signaling. We concluded that
TSPAN6 functions as a negative regulator of the RLR pathway by interacting with
MAVS in a ubiquitination-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3464568
PMID: 22908223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Toxicology. 2012 Dec 16;302(2-3):212-20. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2012.08.001. Epub
2012 Aug 13.

Lipopolysaccharide potentiates polychlorinated biphenyl-induced disruption of the
blood-brain barrier via TLR4/IRF-3 signaling.

Choi JJ(1), Choi YJ, Chen L, Zhang B, Eum SY, Abreu MT, Toborek M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Miami School
of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

Exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) is associated with numerous adverse 
health effects. Although the main route of exposure to PCBs is through the
gastrointestinal tract, little is known about the contribution of the gut to the 
health effects of PCBs. We hypothesize that PCBs can disrupt intestinal
integrity, causing lipopolysaccharide (LPS) translocation into the bloodstream
and potentiation of the systemic toxicity of PCBs. C57BL/6 mice were exposed to
individual PCB congeners by oral gavage, followed by the assessment of small
intestine morphology and plasma levels of proinflammatory mediators. In addition,
mice and human brain endothelial cells were exposed to PCB118 in the presence or 
absence of LPS to evaluate the contribution of LPS to PCB-induced toxicity at the
blood-brain barrier (BBB) level. Oral administration of PCB153, PCB118, or PCB126
disrupted intestinal morphology and increased plasma levels of LPS and
proinflammatory cytokines. Direct injection of LPS and PCB118 into the cerebral
microvasculature resulted in synergistic disruption of BBB integrity and
decreased expression of tight junction proteins in brain microvessels. In vitro
experiments confirmed these effects and indicated that stimulation of the
toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) pathway can be responsible for these effects via
activation of interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3). These results indicate that
LPS may be a contributing factor in PCB-induced dysfunction of the brain
endothelium via stimulation of the TLR4/IRF-3 pathway.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3511608
PMID: 22906770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 5;287(41):34825-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.367557. Epub 2012
Aug 17.

Pellino1 is required for interferon production by viral double-stranded RNA.

Enesa K(1), Ordureau A, Smith H, Barford D, Cheung PC, Patterson-Kane J, Arthur
JS, Cohen P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, University of Dundee, DD15EH, United
Kingdom.

Viral double-stranded RNA, a ligand for Toll-like Receptor 3 (TLR3) and the
cytoplasmic RNA receptors RIG1 and MDA5, activate a signaling network in which
the IKK-related protein kinase TBK1 phosphorylates the transcription factor
Interferon Regulatory Factor 3 (IRF3) and the E3 ubiquitin ligase Pellino1. IRF3 
then translocates to the nucleus where it stimulates transcription of the
interferonß (IFNß) gene, but the function of Pellino1 in this pathway is unknown.
Here, we report that myeloid cells and embryonic fibroblasts from knock-in mice
expressing an E3 ligase-deficient mutant of Pellino1 produce reduced levels of
IFNß mRNA and secrete much less IFNß in response to viral double-stranded RNA
because the interaction of IRF3 with the IFNß promoter is impaired. These results
identify Pellino1 as a novel component of the signal transduction network by
which viral double-stranded RNA stimulates IFNß gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC3464584
PMID: 22902624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 May;24(5):920-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2012.06.010. Epub
2012 Aug 15.

Conjugated linoleic acid suppresses IRF3 activation via modulation of CD14.

Dowling JK(1), McCoy CE, Doyle SL, BenLarbi N, Canavan M, O'Neill LA, Loscher CE.

Author information: 
(1)Immunomodulation Group, School of Biotechnology, Dublin City University,
Dublin 9, Ireland.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) can modulate the immune response, however the 
mechanism by which they exert this effect remains unclear. Previous studies have 
clearly demonstrated that the cis-9, trans-11 isomer of conjugated linoleic acid 
(c9,t11-CLA), found predominantly in beef and dairy products, can modulate the
response of immune cells to the toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 ligand,
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). This study aimed to investigate further the mechanism
by which these effects are mediated. Treatment of macrophages with c9,t11-CLA
significantly decreased CD14 expression and partially blocked its association
with lipid rafts following stimulation with LPS. Furthermore the c9,t11-CLA
isomer inhibited both nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and IRF3 activation following
TLR4 ligation while eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) only suppressed NF-<U+03BA>B activation.
Given that the ability of LPS to activate IRF3 downstream of TLR4 depends on
internalisation of the TLR4 complex and involves CD14, we examined TLR4
endocytosis. Indeed the internalisation of TLR4 to early endosomes following
activation with LPS was markedly inhibited in c9,t11-CLA treated cells. These
effects were not seen with the n-3 fatty acid, EPA, which was used as a
comparison. Our data demonstrates that c9,t11-CLA inhibits IRF3 activation via
its effects on CD14 expression and localisation. This results in a decrease in
the endocytosis of TLR4 which is necessary for IRF3 activation, revealing a novel
mechanism by which this PUFA exerts its anti-inflammatory effects.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22901688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 15;189(6):2860-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103491. Epub 2012
Aug 15.

MyD88 drives the IFN-ß response to Lactobacillus acidophilus in dendritic cells
through a mechanism involving IRF1, IRF3, and IRF7.

Weiss G(1), Maaetoft-Udsen K, Stifter SA, Hertzog P, Goriely S, Thomsen AR,
Paludan SR, Frøkiær H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences and Environment, Molecular Immunology, Faculty of
Life Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 1871 Frederiksberg, Denmark.
gudrun.weiss@imperial.ac.uk

Type I IFNs are induced by pathogens to protect the host from infection and boost
the immune response. We have recently demonstrated that this IFN response is not 
restricted to pathogens, as the Gram-positive bacterium Lactobacillus
acidophilus, a natural inhabitant of the intestine, induces high levels of IFN-ß 
in dendritic cells. In the current study, we investigate the intracellular
pathways involved in IFN-ß upon stimulation of dendritic cells with L.
acidophilus and reveal that this IFN-ß induction requires phagosomal uptake and
processing but bypasses the endosomal receptors TLR7 and TLR9. The IFN-ß
production is fully dependent on the TIR adapter molecule MyD88, partly dependent
on IFN regulatory factor (IRF)1, but independent of the TIR domain-containing
adapter inducing IFN-ß MyD88 adapter-like, IRF and IRF7. However, our results
suggest that IRF3 and IRF7 have complementary roles in IFN-ß signaling. The IFN-ß
production is strongly impaired by inhibitors of spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) and
PI3K. Our results indicate that L. acidophilus induces IFN-ß independently of the
receptors typically used by bacteria, as it requires MyD88, Syk, and PI3K
signaling and phagosomal processing to activate IRF1 and IRF3/IRF7 and thereby
the release of IFN-ß.

PMID: 22896628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Jan;168(2):363-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.02131.x.

Selective inhibition by simvastatin of IRF3 phosphorylation and TSLP production
in dsRNA-challenged bronchial epithelial cells from COPD donors.

Brandelius A(1), Mahmutovic Persson I, Calvén J, Bjermer L, Persson CG, Andersson
M, Uller L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Statin treatment may ameliorate viral infection-induced
exacerbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), which exhibit
Th2-type bronchial inflammation. Thymic stromal lymphopoietin (TSLP), a hub
cytokine switching on Th2 inflammation, is overproduced in viral and
dsRNA-stimulated bronchial epithelial cells from COPD donors. Hence, TSLP may be 
causally involved in exacerbations. This study tests the hypothesis that
simvastatin inhibits dsRNA-induced TSLP.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: Epithelial cells, obtained by bronchoscopy from COPD (n = 
7) and smoker control (n = 8) donors, were grown and stimulated with a viral
infection and danger signal surrogate, dsRNA (10<U+2009>µg·mL(-1) ). Cells were treated 
with simvastatin (0.2-5<U+2009>µg·mL(-1) ), with or without mevalonate (13-26<U+2009>µg·mL(-1) 
), or dexamethasone (1<U+2009>µg·mL(-1) ) before dsRNA. Cytokine expression and
production, and transcription factor (IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B) activation were determined.
KEY RESULTS: dsRNA induced TSLP, TNF-a, CXCL8 and IFN-ß. TSLP was overproduced in
dsRNA-exposed COPD cells compared with control. Simvastatin, but not
dexamethasone, concentration-dependently inhibited dsRNA-induced TSLP.
Unexpectedly, simvastatin acted independently of mevalonate and did not affect
dsRNA-induced NF-<U+03BA>B activation nor did it reduce production of TNF-a and CXCL8.
Instead, simvastatin inhibited dsRNA-induced IRF3 phosphorylation and generation 
of IFN-ß.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Independent of mevalonate and NF-<U+03BA>B, previously
acknowledged anti-inflammatory mechanisms of pleiotropic statins, simvastatin
selectively inhibited dsRNA-induced IRF3 activation and production of TSLP and
IFN-ß in COPD epithelium. These data provide novel insight into epithelial
generation of TSLP and suggest paths to be exploited in drug discovery aimed at
inhibiting TSLP-induced pulmonary immunopathology.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3572563
PMID: 22881993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2012 Oct 15;303(8):F1145-50. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00319.2012. Epub 2012 Aug 8.

Hyperglycemia induces Toll like receptor 4 expression and activity in mouse
mesangial cells: relevance to diabetic nephropathy.

Kaur H(1), Chien A, Jialal I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Atherosclerosis and Metabolic Research, Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Universityof California-Sacramento, 4635 Second Ave.,
Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

Diabetes is a proinflammatory state. The pattern recognition receptors, Toll-like
receptors (TLRs), are increased in diabetic patients and have been suggested to
play a role in diabetic nephropathy (DN). Progression of DN involves altered
mesangial cell (MC) function with an expansion of the mesangial matrix. There is 
a paucity of data examining the role of TLR and its expression in MC. We
hypothesize the expression of TLRs in the mesangium might be an important factor 
contributing to mesangium expansion and nephropathy. Thus we evaluated the effect
of high glucose on TLR2 and TLR4 expression in mouse mesangial cells (MMC) in
vitro. Exposure of MMC to 25 mM glucose for 24 h resulted in increased TLR4 mRNA 
and cell surface receptor expression compared with 5.5 mM glucose (P < 0.05).
Interestingly, we were not able to detect expression of TLR2 in MMC. Furthermore,
expression of a TLR4 downstream signaling cascade including myeloid
differentiation factor 88 (MyD88), interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), and
Toll interleukin receptor domain containing adaptor inducing interferon-ß
(TRIF)-related adaptor molecule (TRAM) were significantly increased in cells
exposed to 25 mM glucose (P < 0.05). There was also a significant increase in
NF-<U+03BA>B activation along with increased secretion of inflammatory cytokines IL-6
and monocyte chemotactic protein-1. Levels of transforming growth factor-ß were
also significantly increased in the presence of 25 mM glucose (P < 0.05).
Collectively, these data suggest that hyperglycemia activates TLR4 expression and
activity in MC and could contribute to DN.

PMCID: PMC3469679
PMID: 22874765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2012 Aug 1;68(Pt 8):906-10.
doi: 10.1107/S1744309112024372. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Crystallization studies of the murine c-di-GMP sensor protein STING.

Su YC(1), Tu ZL, Yang CY, Chin KH, Chuah ML, Liang ZX, Chou SH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung 40227,
Taiwan.

The innate immune response is the first defence system against pathogenic
microorganisms, and cytosolic detection of pathogen-derived DNA is believed to be
one of the major mechanisms of interferon production. Recently, the mammalian ER 
membrane protein STING (stimulator of IFN genes; also known as MITA, ERIS, MPYS
and TMEM173) has been found to be the master regulator linking the detection of
cytosolic DNA to TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and its downstream transcription
factor IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). In addition, STING itself was soon
discovered to be a direct sensor of bacterial cyclic dinucleotides such as
c-di-GMP or c-di-AMP. However, structural studies of apo STING and its complexes 
with these cyclic dinucleotides and with other cognate binding proteins are
essential in order to fully understand the roles played by STING in these crucial
signalling pathways. In this manuscript, the successful crystallization of the
C-terminal domain of murine STING (STING-CTD; residues 138-344) is reported.
Native and SeMet-labelled crystals were obtained and diffracted to moderate
resolutions of 2.39 and 2.2 Å, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3412770
PMID: 22869119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Virol. 2012 Oct;86(20):11183-93. Epub 2012 Aug 1.

Incoming influenza A virus evades early host recognition, while influenza B virus
induces interferon expression directly upon entry.

Österlund P(1), Strengell M, Sarin LP, Poranen MM, Fagerlund R, Melén K, Julkunen
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control, Virology Unit,
National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland.

The activation of the interferon (IFN) system, which is triggered largely by the 
recognition of viral nucleic acids, is one of the most important host defense
reactions against viral infections. Although influenza A and B viruses, which
both have segmented negative-strand RNA genomes, share major structural
similarities, they have evolutionarily diverged, with total genetic
incompatibility. Here we compare antiviral-inducing mechanisms during infections 
with type A and B influenza viruses in human dendritic cells. We observed that
IFN responses are induced significantly faster in cells infected with influenza B
virus than in cells infected with type A influenza virus and that the early
induction of antiviral gene expression is mediated by the activation of the
transcription factor IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). We further demonstrate that 
influenza A virus infection activates IFN responses only after viral RNA (vRNA)
synthesis, whereas influenza B virus induces IFN responses even if its
infectivity is destroyed by UV treatment. Thus, initial viral transcription,
replication, and viral protein synthesis are dispensable for influenza B
virus-induced antiviral responses. Moreover, vRNA molecules from both type A and 
B viruses are equally potent activators of IFN induction, but incoming influenza 
B virus structures are recognized directly in the cytosol, while influenza A
virus is able to evade early recognition. Collectively, our data provide new
evidence of a novel antiviral evasion strategy for influenza A virus without a
contribution of the viral NS1 protein, and this opens up new insights into
different influenza virus pathogenicities.

PMCID: PMC3457146
PMID: 22855501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2012 Sep 14;287(38):31833-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.374462. Epub
2012 Jul 27.

Opposite orientations of a transcription factor heterodimer bind DNA
cooperatively with interaction partners but have different effects on
interferon-ß gene transcription.

Burns V(1), Kerppola TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

ATF2-Jun, IRF3, and HMGI recognize a composite regulatory element within the
interferon-ß enhancer (IFNb). Cooperative ATF2-Jun-IRF3 complex formation at IFNb
has been proposed to require a fixed orientation of ATF2-Jun binding. Our results
show that ATF2-Jun heterodimers bound IFNb in both orientations alone and in
association with IRF3 and HMGI. Two sets of symmetrically located amino acid
residues in ATF2 and Jun facilitated the interactions between heterodimers bound 
in opposite orientations and IRF3 at IFNb. IRF3 and HMGI bound IFNb in
association with both orientations of ATF2-Jun heterodimers with the same
cooperativity. ATF2-Jun heterodimers that bound IFNb in opposite orientations in 
vitro had different effects on interferon-ß gene transcription when they were
co-expressed with IRF3 in cultured cells. These heterodimers had different
transcriptional activities at different endogenous genes. Different regions of
ATF2 and Jun mediated their orientation-dependent transcriptional activities at
different genes. These studies revealed that cooperative DNA binding does not
require a unique nucleoprotein complex configuration, and that transcription
factor complexes that bind the same enhancer in different configurations can have
different transcriptional activities.

PMCID: PMC3442517
PMID: 22843696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Virol. 2012 Oct;86(19):10733-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00510-12. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

LGP2 downregulates interferon production during infection with seasonal human
influenza A viruses that activate interferon regulatory factor 3.

Malur M(1), Gale M Jr, Krug RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Institute for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, USA.

LGP2, a member of the RIG-I-like receptor family, lacks the amino-terminal
caspase activation recruitment domains (CARDs) required for initiating the
activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and interferon (IFN)
transcription. The role of LGP2 in virus infection is controversial, and the only
LGP2 experiments previously carried out with mammalian influenza A viruses
employed an attenuated, mouse-adapted H1N1 A/PR/8/34 (PR8) virus that does not
encode the NS1 protein. Here we determine whether LGP2 has a role during
infection with wild-type, nonattenuated influenza A viruses that have circulated 
in the human population, specifically two types of seasonal influenza A viruses: 
(i) H3N2 and H1N1 viruses that activate IRF3 and IFN transcription and (ii)
recent H1N1 viruses that block these two activations. In human cells infected
with an H3N2 virus that activates IRF3, overexpression of LGP2 or its repressor
domain decreased STAT1 activation and IFN-ß transcription approximately 10-fold. 
Overexpression of LGP2 also caused a 10-fold decrease of STAT1 activation during 
infection with other seasonal influenza A viruses that activate IRF3. Using
LGP2(+/+) and LGP2(-/-) mouse cells, we show that endogenous LGP2 decreased IFN
production during H3N2 virus infection 3- to 4-fold. In contrast, in both mouse
and human cells infected with H1N1 viruses that do not activate IRF3, LGP2 had no
detectable role. These results demonstrate that LGP2 downregulates IFN production
during infection by seasonal influenza A viruses that activate IRF3 and IFN
transcription. It is intriguing that LGP2, a host protein induced during
influenza A virus infection, downregulates the host antiviral IFN response.

PMCID: PMC3457329
PMID: 22837208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Lab Invest. 2012 Sep;92(9):1318-29. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.89. Epub 2012 Jul
23.

The suppression of TRIM21 and the accumulation of IFN-a play crucial roles in the
pathogenesis of osteonecrosis of the femoral head.

Tateda K(1), Okazaki S, Nagoya S, Katada R, Mizuo K, Watanabe S, Yamashita T,
Matsumoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine and Molecular Alcohology, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH), the pathogenesis of which remains
unclear, has been observed in autoimmune disease patients treated with
corticosteroids. Recently, it has been shown that anti-tripartite
motif-containing 21 (TRIM21) autoantibodies, which are often present in patients 
with systemic lupus erythematosis and Sjögren's syndrome, inhibit the E3 ligase
activity of TRIM21. TRIM21 negatively regulates nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and
interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 3 and 7, three downstream transcription
factors, via toll-like receptor 4 signaling. The aim of this study was to clarify
the role of TRIM21 in the pathogenesis of ONFH using an animal model. Male Wistar
rats were injected with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) twice and with
methylprednisolone (MPSL) or saline three times. N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) was
administered either concurrently with MPSL or once daily for the 3 days following
the last MPSL injection. The incidence of ONFH in the MPSL group was 23.5%.
Co-treatment of NAC and MPSL increased the incidence of ONFH to 55.6%. MPSL
treatment decreased the activity of NF-<U+03BA>B in the liver and significantly
increased the activity of both IRF3 and IRF7. No significant differences were
observed in the activity of any of these three transcription factors between the 
MPSL and the co-treatment groups. In the femoral head, co-treatment with NAC and 
MPSL significantly decreased the expression of TRIM21 at 3<U+2009>h and significantly
increased the expression of interferon (IFN)-a at 24<U+2009>h when compared with the
MPSL group. IFN-a is known to induce cell death. These findings suggest that the 
suppression of TRIM21 in the femoral head causes an accumulation of IFN-a, which 
in turn leads to the development of ONFH. In conclusion, the suppression of
TRIM21 resulting from altered NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF homeostasis accelerates the ONFH in
rats treated with corticosteroids following LPS administration.

PMID: 22825687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. BMC Genomics. 2012 Jul 23;13:335. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-335.

A microarray analysis of gnotobiotic mice indicating that microbial exposure
during the neonatal period plays an essential role in immune system development.

Yamamoto M(1), Yamaguchi R, Munakata K, Takashima K, Nishiyama M, Hioki K,
Ohnishi Y, Nagasaki M, Imoto S, Miyano S, Ishige A, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Kampo Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinano-machi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 160-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological studies have suggested that the encounter with
commensal microorganisms during the neonatal period is essential for normal
development of the host immune system. Basic research involving gnotobiotic mice 
has demonstrated that colonization at the age of 5<U+2009>weeks is too late to
reconstitute normal immune function. In this study, we examined the transcriptome
profiles of the large intestine (LI), small intestine (SI), liver (LIV), and
spleen (SPL) of 3 bacterial colonization models-specific pathogen-free mice
(SPF), ex-germ-free mice with bacterial reconstitution at the time of delivery
(0WexGF), and ex-germ-free mice with bacterial reconstitution at 5<U+2009>weeks of age
(5WexGF)-and compared them with those of germ-free (GF) mice.
RESULTS: Hundreds of genes were affected in all tissues in each of the colonized 
models; however, a gene set enrichment analysis method, MetaGene Profiler (MGP), 
demonstrated that the specific changes of Gene Ontology (GO) categories occurred 
predominantly in 0WexGF LI, SPF SI, and 5WexGF SPL, respectively. MGP analysis on
signal pathways revealed prominent changes in toll-like receptor (TLR)- and type 
1 interferon (IFN)-signaling in LI of 0WexGF and SPF mice, but not 5WexGF mice,
while 5WexGF mice showed specific changes in chemokine signaling. RT-PCR analysis
of TLR-related genes showed that the expression of interferon regulatory factor 3
(Irf3), a crucial rate-limiting transcription factor in the induction of type 1
IFN, prominently decreased in 0WexGF and SPF mice but not in 5WexGF and GF mice.
CONCLUSION: The present study provides important new information regarding the
molecular mechanisms of the so-called "hygiene hypothesis".

PMCID: PMC3422195
PMID: 22823934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2012 Sep;32(9):393-400. doi: 10.1089/jir.2012.0010.
Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Individual interferon regulatory factor-3 thiol residues are not critical for its
activation following virus infection.

Zucchini N(1), Williams V, Grandvaux N.

Author information: 
(1)CRCHUM-Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec,
Canada.

The interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3 transcription factor plays a central
role in the capacity of the host to mount an efficient innate antiviral immune
defense, mainly through the regulation of type I Interferon genes. A tight
regulation of IRF-3 is crucial for an adapted intensity and duration of the
response. Redox-dependent processes are now well known to regulate signaling
cascades. Recent reports have revealed that signaling molecules upstream of
IRF-3, including the mitochondrial antiviral-signalling protein (MAVS) and the
TNF receptor associated factors (TRAFs) adaptors, are sensitive to redox
regulation. In the present study, we assessed whether redox regulation of thiol
residues contained in IRF-3, which are priviledged redox sensors, play a role in 
its regulation following Sendai virus infection, using a combination of mutation 
of Cysteine (Cys) residues into Alanine and thiols alkylation using N-ethyl
maleimide. Alkylation of IRF-3 on Cys289 appears to destabilize IRF-3 dimer in
vitro. However, a detailed analysis of IRF-3 phosphorylation, dimerization,
nuclear accumulation, and induction of target gene promoter in vivo led us to
conclude that IRF-3 specific, individual Cys residues redox status does not play 
an essential role in its activation in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3438828
PMID: 22817838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(7):e1002747. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002747. Epub 2012 Jul
5.

Proteomic profiling of the TRAF3 interactome network reveals a new role for the
ER-to-Golgi transport compartments in innate immunity.

van Zuylen WJ(1), Doyon P, Clément JF, Khan KA, D'Ambrosio LM, Dô F,
St-Amant-Verret M, Wissanji T, Emery G, Gingras AC, Meloche S, Servant MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Québec Canada.

Tumor Necrosis Factor receptor-associated factor-3 (TRAF3) is a central mediator 
important for inducing type I interferon (IFN) production in response to
intracellular double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). Here, we report the identification of 
Sec16A and p115, two proteins of the ER-to-Golgi vesicular transport system, as
novel components of the TRAF3 interactome network. Notably, in non-infected
cells, TRAF3 was found associated with markers of the ER-Exit-Sites (ERES),
ER-to-Golgi intermediate compartment (ERGIC) and the cis-Golgi apparatus. Upon
dsRNA and dsDNA sensing however, the Golgi apparatus fragmented into cytoplasmic 
punctated structures containing TRAF3 allowing its colocalization and interaction
with Mitochondrial AntiViral Signaling (MAVS), the essential mitochondria-bound
RIG-I-like Helicase (RLH) adaptor. In contrast, retention of TRAF3 at the
ER-to-Golgi vesicular transport system blunted the ability of TRAF3 to interact
with MAVS upon viral infection and consequently decreased type I IFN response.
Moreover, depletion of Sec16A and p115 led to a drastic disorganization of the
Golgi paralleled by the relocalization of TRAF3, which under these conditions was
unable to associate with MAVS. Consequently, upon dsRNA and dsDNA sensing,
ablation of Sec16A and p115 was found to inhibit IRF3 activation and anti-viral
gene expression. Reciprocally, mild overexpression of Sec16A or p115 in Hec1B
cells increased the activation of IFNß, ISG56 and NF-<U+03BA>B -dependent promoters
following viral infection and ectopic expression of MAVS and Tank-binding
kinase-1 (TBK1). In line with these results, TRAF3 was found enriched in
immunocomplexes composed of p115, Sec16A and TBK1 upon infection. Hence, we
propose a model where dsDNA and dsRNA sensing induces the formation of
membrane-bound compartments originating from the Golgi, which mediate the dynamic
association of TRAF3 with MAVS leading to an optimal induction of innate immune
responses.

PMCID: PMC3390413
PMID: 22792062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Virol. 2012 Sep;86(18):10162-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05224-11. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

ORF45 of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus inhibits phosphorylation of
interferon regulatory factor 7 by IKKe and TBK1 as an alternative substrate.

Liang Q(1), Fu B, Wu F, Li X, Yuan Y, Zhu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee,
Florida, USA.

Open reading frame 45 (ORF45) of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)
is an immediate-early and tegument protein that plays critical roles in
antagonizing host antiviral responses. We have previously shown (Zhu et al, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 99:5573-5578, 2002) that ORF45 suppresses activation
of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a crucial regulator of type I
interferon gene expression, by blocking its virus-induced phosphorylation and
nuclear accumulation. We report here further characterization of the mechanisms
by which ORF45 inhibits IRF7 phosphorylation. In most cell types, IRF7 is
phosphorylated and activated by IKKe and TBK1 after viral infection. We found
that phosphorylation of IRF7 on Ser477 and Ser479 by IKKe or TBK1 is inhibited by
ORF45. The inhibition is specific to IRF7 because phosphorylation of its close
relative IRF3 is not affected by ORF45, implying that ORF45 does not inactivate
the kinases directly. In fact, we found that ORF45 is phosphorylated efficiently 
on Ser41 and Ser162 by IKKe and TBK1. We demonstrated that ORF45 competes with
the associated IRF7 and inhibits its phosphorylation by IKKe or TBK1 by acting as
an alternative substrate.

PMCID: PMC3446610
PMID: 22787218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Bing Du Xue Bao. 2012 May;28(3):303-10.

[Signal transduction of innate immunity to virus infection].

[Article in Chinese]

Xie GC(1), Duan ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Genetic Engineering, Institute 
of Viral Disease Control and Prevention, China CDC, Beijing 102206, China.
xieguangcheng123@126.com

The innate immune system is essential for the initial detection of invading
viruses and subsequent activation of adaptive immunity. Three types pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs) in innate immune cells play a pivotal role in the
first line of host defense system. PRRs include Toll-like receptors (TLRs),
RIG-I-like receptors(RLRs) and nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain
(NOD)-like receptors (NLRs). PRRs recognize pathogen-associated molecular
patterns(PAMPs) or danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) to initiate and
regulate innate and adaptive immune responses. Three types PRRs have their own
features in ligand recognition and cellular location. Activated PRRs deliver
signals to adaptor molecules (MyD88, TRIF, IRAK, IPS-1), which act as important
messengers to activate downstream kinases (IKK complex, MAPKs, TBK1, RIP-1) and
transcription factors (NF-kappaB, AP-1, IRF3), which produce effected molecules
including cytokines, chemokines, inflammatory enzymes, and type I interferons.
This review focuses on discussing PRRs signaling pathways and achievements in
this field in order to provide beneficial strategies for human life and immune
diseases prevention.

PMID: 22764536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(6):e1002780. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002780. Epub 2012 Jun
28.

Dengue virus targets the adaptor protein MITA to subvert host innate immunity.

Yu CY(1), Chang TH, Liang JJ, Chiang RL, Lee YL, Liao CL, Lin YL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Dengue is one of the most important arboviral diseases caused by infection of
four serotypes of dengue virus (DEN). We found that activation of interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) triggered by viral infection and by foreign DNA and
RNA stimulation was blocked by DEN-encoded NS2B3 through a protease-dependent
mechanism. The key adaptor protein in type I interferon pathway, human mediator
of IRF3 activation (MITA) but not the murine homologue MPYS, was cleaved in cells
infected with DEN-1 or DEN-2 and with expression of the enzymatically active
protease NS2B3. The cleavage site of MITA was mapped to LRR<U+2193>(96)G and the
function of MITA was suppressed by dengue protease. DEN replication was reduced
with overexpression of MPYS but not with MITA, while DEN replication was enhanced
by MPYS knockdown, indicating an antiviral role of MITA/MPYS against DEN
infection. The involvement of MITA in DEN-triggered innate immune response was
evidenced by reduction of IRF3 activation and IFN induction in cells with MITA
knockdown upon DEN-2 infection. NS2B3 physically interacted with MITA, and the
interaction and cleavage of MITA could be further enhanced by poly(dA:dT)
stimulation. Thus, we identified MITA as a novel host target of DEN protease and 
provide the molecular mechanism of how DEN subverts the host innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC3386177
PMID: 22761576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Virol. 2012 Sep;86(18):9888-98. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00956-12. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Interferon response factors 3 and 7 protect against Chikungunya virus hemorrhagic
fever and shock.

Rudd PA(1), Wilson J, Gardner J, Larcher T, Babarit C, Le TT, Anraku I, Kumagai
Y, Loo YM, Gale M Jr, Akira S, Khromykh AA, Suhrbier A.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infections can produce severe disease and mortality.
Here we show that CHIKV infection of adult mice deficient in interferon response 
factors 3 and 7 (IRF3/7(-/-)) is lethal. Mortality was associated with
undetectable levels of alpha/beta interferon (IFN-a/ß) in serum, ~50- and
~10-fold increases in levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
respectively, increased virus replication, edema, vasculitis, hemorrhage, fever
followed by hypothermia, oliguria, thrombocytopenia, and raised hematocrits.
These features are consistent with hemorrhagic shock and were also evident in
infected IFN-a/ß receptor-deficient mice. In situ hybridization suggested CHIKV
infection of endothelium, fibroblasts, skeletal muscle, mononuclear cells,
chondrocytes, and keratinocytes in IRF3/7(-/-) mice; all but the latter two
stained positive in wild-type mice. Vaccination protected IRF3/7(-/-) mice,
suggesting that defective antibody responses were not responsible for mortality. 
IPS-1- and TRIF-dependent pathways were primarily responsible for IFN-a/ß
induction, with IRF7 being upregulated >100-fold in infected wild-type mice.
These studies suggest that inadequate IFN-a/ß responses following virus infection
can be sufficient to induce hemorrhagic fever and shock, a finding with
implications for understanding severe CHIKV disease and dengue hemorrhagic
fever/dengue shock syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3446587
PMID: 22761364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell Signal. 2012 Nov;24(11):2197-204. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.06.017. Epub
2012 Jun 30.

PPM1B negatively regulates antiviral response via dephosphorylating TBK1.

Zhao Y(1), Liang L, Fan Y, Sun S, An L, Shi Z, Cheng J, Jia W, Sun W,
Mori-Akiyama Y, Zhang H, Fu S, Yang J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150081,
China.

The production of type I interferon must be tightly regulated and aberrant
production of type I interferon is harmful or even fatal to the host. TBK1
phosphorylation at Ser172 plays an essential role in TBK1-mediated antiviral
response. However, how TBK1 activity is negatively regulated remains poorly
understood. Using a functional genomics approach, we have identified PPM1B as a
TBK1 phosphatase. PPM1B dephosphorylates TBK1 in vivo and in vitro. PPM1B
wild-type but not its phosphatase-deficient R179G mutant inhibits TBK1-mediated
antiviral response and facilitates VSV replication in the cells. Viral infection 
induces association of PPM1B with TBK1 in a transient fashion in the cells.
Conversely, suppression of PPM1B expression enhances virus-induced IRF3
phosphorylation and IFNß production. Our study identifies a previously
unrecognized role for PPM1B in the negative regulation of antiviral response by
acting as a TBK1 phosphatase.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3432707
PMID: 22750291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Immunity. 2012 Jul 27;37(1):171-86. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.05.020. Epub 2012 
Jun 28.

Priming of natural killer cells by nonmucosal mononuclear phagocytes requires
instructive signals from commensal microbiota.

Ganal SC(1), Sanos SL, Kallfass C, Oberle K, Johner C, Kirschning C, Lienenklaus 
S, Weiss S, Staeheli P, Aichele P, Diefenbach A.

Author information: 
(1)IMMH, Institute of Medical Microbiology and Hygiene, University of Freiburg,
Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Jul 27;37(1):10-2.

Mononuclear phagocytes are an important component of an innate immune system
perceived as a system ready to react upon encounter of pathogens. Here, we show
that in response to microbial stimulation, mononuclear phagocytes residing in
nonmucosal lymphoid organs of germ-free mice failed to induce expression of a set
of inflammatory response genes, including those encoding the various type I
interferons (IFN-I). Consequently, NK cell priming and antiviral immunity were
severely compromised. Whereas pattern recognition receptor signaling and nuclear 
translocation of the transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 were normal in
mononuclear phagocytes of germ-free mice, binding to their respective cytokine
promoters was impaired, which correlated with the absence of activating histone
marks. Our data reveal a previously unrecognized role for postnatally colonizing 
microbiota in the introduction of chromatin level changes in the mononuclear
phagocyte system, thereby poising expression of central inflammatory genes to
initiate a powerful systemic immune response during viral infection.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22749822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 17;109(29):11770-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1203405109. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

LSm14A is a processing body-associated sensor of viral nucleic acids that
initiates cellular antiviral response in the early phase of viral infection.

Li Y(1), Chen R, Zhou Q, Xu Z, Li C, Wang S, Mao A, Zhang X, He W, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, China.

Recognition of viral nucleic acids by pattern recognition receptors initiates
type I IFN induction and innate antiviral immune response. Here we show that
LSm14A, a member of the LSm family involved in RNA processing in the processing
bodies, binds to synthetic or viral RNA and DNA and mediates IRF3 activation and 
IFN-ß induction. Knockdown of LSm14A inhibits cytosolic RNA- and DNA-trigger type
I IFN production and cellular antiviral response. Moreover, LSm14A is essential
for early-phase induction of IFN-ß after either RNA or DNA virus infection. We
further found that LSm14A-mediated IFN-ß induction requires RIG-I-VISA or MITA
after RNA or DNA virus infection, respectively, and viral infection causes
translocation of LSm14A to peroxisomes, where RIG-I, VISA, and MITA are located. 
These findings suggest that LSm14A is a sensor for both viral RNA and DNA and
plays an important role in initiating IFN-ß induction in the early phase of viral
infection.

PMCID: PMC3406844
PMID: 22745163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 17;287(34):28646-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.362608. Epub
2012 Jun 28.

TRIM32 protein modulates type I interferon induction and cellular antiviral
response by targeting MITA/STING protein for K63-linked ubiquitination.

Zhang J(1), Hu MM, Wang YY, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, China.

Viral infection activates several transcription factors including NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3,
which collaborate to induce type I interferons (IFNs) and innate antiviral
response. MITA (also called STING) is a critical adaptor protein that links
virus-sensing receptors to IRF3 activation upon infection by both RNA and DNA
pathogens. Here we show that the E3 ubiquitin ligase tripartite motif protein 32 
(TRIM32) ubiquitinated MITA and dramatically enhanced MITA-mediated induction of 
IFN-ß. Overexpression of TRIM32 potentiated virus-triggered IFNB1 expression and 
cellular antiviral response. Consistently, knockdown of TRIM32 had opposite
effects. TRIM32 interacted with MITA, and was located at the mitochondria and
endoplasmic reticulum. TRIM32 targeted MITA for K63-linked ubiquitination at
K20/150/224/236 through its E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, which promoted the
interaction of MITA with TBK1. These findings suggest that TRIM32 is an important
regulatory protein for innate immunity against both RNA and DNA viruses by
targeting MITA for K63-linked ubiquitination and downstream activation.

PMCID: PMC3436586
PMID: 22745133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Immunol. 2012 Aug 1;189(3):1500-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102985. Epub 2012 Jun
22.

IFN-ß expression is directly activated in human neutrophils transfected with
plasmid DNA and is further increased via TLR-4-mediated signaling.

Tamassia N(1), Bazzoni F, Le Moigne V, Calzetti F, Masala C, Grisendi G,
Bussmeyer U, Scutera S, De Gironcoli M, Costantini C, Musso T, Cassatella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of General Pathology, Department of Pathology and Diagnostics,
University of Verona, 37134 Verona, Italy.

Upon LPS binding, TLR4 activates a MyD88-dependent pathway leading to the
transcriptional activation of proinflammatory genes, as well as a
MyD88-independent/TRIF-dependent pathway, responsible for the transcriptional
induction of IFN-ß. Previous findings delineated that human neutrophils are
unable to induce the transcription of IFN-ß in response to TLR4 stimulation.
Because neutrophils do not express protein kinase C e, a molecule recently
reported as essential for initiating the MyD88-independent/TRIF-dependent
pathway, we optimized an electroporation method to transfect PKCe into
neutrophils with very high efficiency. By doing so, a significant IFN-ß mRNA
expression was induced, in the absence of LPS stimulation, not only in
PKCe-overexpressing neutrophils but also in cells transfected with a series of
empty DNA plasmids; however, LPS further upregulated the IFN-ß transcript levels 
in plasmid-transfected neutrophils, regardless of PKCe overexpression.
Phosphoimmunoblotting studies, as well as chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
targeting the IFN-ß promoter, revealed that IFN-ß mRNA induction occurred through
the cooperative action of IRF3, activated by transfected DNA, and NF-<U+03BA>B,
activated by LPS. Additional immunoblotting and coimmunoprecipitation studies
revealed that neutrophils constitutively express various cytosolic DNA sensors,
including IFN-inducible protein 16, leucine-rich repeat (in Flightless I)
interacting protein-1, and DDX41, as well as that IFN-inducible protein 16 is the
intracellular receptor recognizing transfected DNA. Consistently, infection of
neutrophils with intracellular pathogens, such as Bartonella henselae, Listeria
monocytogenes, Legionella pneumophila, or adenovirus type 5, promoted a marked
induction of IFN-ß mRNA expression. Taken together, these data raise questions
about the role of PKCe in driving the MyD88-independent/TRIF-dependent response
and indicate that human neutrophils are able to recognize and respond to
microbial cytosolic DNA.

PMID: 22730532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Oct;38(2):193-202. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2012.06.003. Epub
2012 Jun 18.

Molecular regulation of interferon antiviral response in fish.

Zhang YB(1), Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. ybzhang@ihb.ac.cn

Interferon (IFN) response is the first line of host defense against virus
infection. The recent years have witnessed tremendous progress in understanding
of fish IFN antiviral response. Varied number of IFN genes has been identified in
different fish species but obviously, they do not show a one-to-one orthologous
relationship with mammalian IFN homologs. These genes are divided into two groups
with different abilities to induce downstream gene expression through binding to 
different receptor complexes. Consistently, some fish IFN-stimulated genes such
as Mx and PKR have been confirmed for their antiviral effects. In this review, we
focus on how fish cells respond to IFNs and how fish IFNs are triggered through
TLR pathway and RLR pathway. We highlight the roles of IRF3 and IRF7 in
activation of fish IFN response. In addition, the unique mechanisms underlying
IRF3/7-dependent fish IFN response and auto-regulation of fish IFN gene
expression are discussed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22721905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Jun 14;18(22):2850-8. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i22.2850.

DNA-dependent activator of interferon-regulatory factors inhibits hepatitis B
virus replication.

Chen QY(1), Liu YH, Li JH, Wang ZK, Liu JX, Yuan ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Ministry of Education and
Ministry of Health, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, 
China.

AIM: To investigate whether DNA-dependent activator of interferon-regulatory
factors (DAI) inhibits hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication and what the mechanism
is.
METHODS: After the human hepatoma cell line Huh7 was cotransfected with DAI and
HBV expressing plasmid, viral protein (HBV surface antigen and HBV e antigen)
secretion was detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and HBV RNA was
analyzed by real-time polymerase chain reaction and Northern blotting, and viral 
DNA replicative intermediates were examined by Southern blotting. Interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) phosphorylation and nuclear translocation were
analyzed via Western blotting and immunofluorescence staining respectively.
Nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) activity induced by DAI was detected by
immunofluorescence staining of P65 and dual luciferase reporter assay. Transwell 
co-culture experiment was performed in order to investigate whether the antiviral
effects of DAI were dependent on the secreted cytokines.
RESULTS: Viral protein secretion was significantly reduced by 57% (P < 0.05), and
the level of total HBV RNA was reduced by 67% (P < 0.05). The viral core
particle-associated DNA was also dramatically down-regulated in DAI-expressing
Huh7 cells. Analysis of involved signaling pathways revealed that activation of
NF-<U+03BA>B signaling was essential for DAI to elicit antiviral response in Huh7 cells.
When the NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway was blocked by a NF-<U+03BA>B signaling suppressor
(I<U+03BA>Ba-SR), the anti-HBV activity of DAI was remarkably abrogated. The inhibitory 
effect of DAI was independent of IRF3 signaling and secreted cytokines.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that DAI can inhibit HBV replication and the 
inhibitory effect is associated with activation of NF-<U+03BA>B but independent of IRF3 
and secreted cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3374991
PMID: 22719196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Nat Immunol. 2012 Jun 19;13(7):634-5. doi: 10.1038/ni.2346.

IRF3: a molecular switch in pathogen responses.

Takeuchi O.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2012 Jul;13(7):659-66.

PMID: 22713822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jul 13;423(4):805-12. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.044. Epub 2012 Jun 16.

Apolipoprotein E-knockout mice show increased titers of serum anti-nuclear and
anti-dsDNA antibodies.

Wang Y(1), Huang Z, Lu H, Lin H, Wang Z, Chen X, Ouyang Q, Tang M, Hao P, Ni J,
Xu D, Zhang M, Zhang Q, Lin L, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Department, Second Clinical Medical College, Fujian Medical
University, Quanzhou, Fujian 362000, PR China.

Apolipoprotein E-knockout (ApoE(-/-)) mice, atherosclerosis-prone mice, show an
autoimmune response, but the pathogenesis is not fully understood. We
investigated the pathogenesis in female and male ApoE(-/-) mice. The spleens of
all ApoE(-/-) and C57BL/6 (B6) mice were weighed. The serum IgG level and titers 
of anti-nuclear antibody (ANA) and anti-double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibody
were assayed by ELISA. Apoptosis of spleen tissue was evaluated by TUNEL. TLR4
level in spleen tissue was tested by immunohistochemistry and Western blot
analysis. Levels of MyD88, p38, phosphorylated p38 (pp38), interferon regulatory 
factor 3 (IRF3) and Bcl-2-associated X protein (Bax) in spleen tissue were
detected by Western blot analysis. We also survey the changes of serum
autoantibodies, spleen weight, splenocyte apoptosis and the expressions of TLR4, 
MyD88, pp38, IRF3 and Bax in spleen tissue in male ApoE(-/-) mice after 4weeks of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), Toll-like receptor 4 ligand, administration. ApoE(-/-) 
mice showed splenomegaly and significantly increased serum level of IgG and
titers of ANA and anti-dsDNA antibody as compared with B6 mice. Splenocyte
apoptosis and the expression of TLR4, MyD88, pp38, IRF3 and Bax in spleen tissue 
were significantly lower in ApoE(-/-) than B6 mice. The expression of TLR4,
MyD88, IRF3, pp38, and Bax differed by sex in ApoE(-/-) spleen tissue. The
down-regulation of TLR4 signal molecules induced by LPS led to decreased
expression of Bax and increased serum titers of ANA and anti-dsDNA antibody.
Therefore, the TLR4 signal pathway may participate in maintaining the balance of 
splenocyte apoptosis and autoantibody production in ApoE(-/-) mice.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22713470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 Jun 18;9:131. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-131.

HIV-1 Tat C-mediated regulation of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor-3 by microRNA 32 in human microglia.

Mishra R(1), Chhatbar C, Singh SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurovirology and Inflammation Biology, Centre for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology (CCMB), Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR),
Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500007, India.

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 Tat protein is known to be associated with neuroinflammation, a
condition that develops in almost half of patients infected with HIV-1. HIV-1 Tat
can alter glial neuroprotective functions, leading to neurotoxicity within the
CNS. HIV-1 Tat is known to be secreted from productively infected cells and can
affect neighboring uninfected cells by modulating cellular gene expression in a
bystander fashion.
METHODS: We were interested to study whether exogenous exposure to HIV-1 Tat-C
protein perturbs the microRNA (miRNA) expression profile of human microglial
cells, leading to altered protein expression. We used protein expression and
purification, miRNA overexpression, miRNA knockdown, transfection, site-directed 
mutagenesis, real-time PCR, luciferase assay and western blotting techniques to
perform our study.
RESULTS: HIV-1 Tat-C treatment of human microglial cells resulted in a
dose-dependent increase in miR-32 expression. We found that tumor necrosis
factor-receptor-associated factor 3 TRAF3) is a direct target for miR-32, and
overexpression of miR-32 in CHME3 cells decreased TRAF3 both at the mRNA and the 
protein level. Recovery of TRAF3 protein expression after transfection of
anti-miR-32 and the results of the luciferase reporter assay provided direct
evidence of TRAF3 regulation by miR-32. We found that the regulation of
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7 is controlled by cellular levels
of TRAF3 protein in microglial cells, as after overexpression of miR-32 and
application of anti-miR-32, expression levels of IRF3 and IRF7 were inversely
regulated by expression levels of TRAF3. Thus, our results suggest a novel miRNA 
mediated mechanism for regulation of TRAF3 in human microglial cells exposed to
HIV-1 Tat C protein. These results may help to elucidate the detrimental
neuroinflammatory consequences of HIV-1 Tat C protein in bystander fashion.
CONCLUSION: HIV-1 Tat protein can modulate TRAF3 expression through miRNA
mediated pathway and can change the downstream expression of IRF3 and IRF7. This 
study demonstrates a novel mechanism of HIV-1 Tat C protein-mediated perturbation
of miRNA, resulting in dysregulation of cellular TRAF3.

PMCID: PMC3418571
PMID: 22709905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Methods. 2013 Feb;59(2):225-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2012.05.011. Epub 2012 Jun
13.

Two new monoclonal antibodies for biochemical and flow cytometric analyses of
human interferon regulatory factor-3 activation, turnover, and depletion.

Rustagi A(1), Doehle BP, McElrath MJ, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Global Health, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, WA 98195-7650, USA. arustagi@uw.edu

Interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) is a master transcription factor that
drives the host intracellular innate immune response to virus infection. The
importance of IRF-3 in innate immune responses is highlighted by the fact that
pathogenic viruses have developed strategies for antagonism of IRF-3. Several
tools exist for evaluation of viral regulation of IRF-3 activation and function, 
but high-quality monoclonal antibodies that mark the differential activation
states of human IRF-3 are lacking. To study IRF-3 activation, turnover, and
depletion in a high-throughput manner in the context of virus infection, we have 
developed two new monoclonal antibodies to human IRF-3. These antibodies detect
IRF-3 in virus-infected cells in a wide variety of assays and provide a new tool 
to study virus-host interactions and innate immune signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3568209
PMID: 22705311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Immunity. 2012 Jun 29;36(6):959-73. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.03.022. Epub 2012 
Jun 14.

Ubiquitin-induced oligomerization of the RNA sensors RIG-I and MDA5 activates
antiviral innate immune response.

Jiang X(1), Kinch LN, Brautigam CA, Chen X, Du F, Grishin NV, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Jun 29;36(6):897-9.

RIG-I and MDA5 detect viral RNA in the cytoplasm and activate signaling cascades 
leading to the production of type-I interferons. RIG-I is activated through
sequential binding of viral RNA and unanchored lysine-63 (K63) polyubiquitin
chains, but how polyubiquitin activates RIG-I and whether MDA5 is activated
through a similar mechanism remain unresolved. Here, we showed that the CARD
domains of MDA5 bound to K63 polyubiquitin and that this binding was essential
for MDA5 to activate the transcription factor IRF3. Mutations of conserved
residues in MDA5 and RIG-I that disrupt their ubiquitin binding also abrogated
their ability to activate IRF3. Polyubiquitin binding induced the formation of a 
large complex consisting of four RIG-I and four ubiquitin chains. This
hetero-tetrameric complex was highly potent in activating the antiviral signaling
cascades. These results suggest a unified mechanism of RIG-I and MDA5 activation 
and reveal a unique mechanism by which ubiquitin regulates cell signaling and
immune response.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3412146
PMID: 22705106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;890:273-88. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-876-4_16.

Characterization of poxvirus-encoded proteins that regulate innate immune
signaling pathways.

Rus F(1), Morlock K, Silverman N, Pham N, Kotwal GJ, Marshall WL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts School of Medicine, Worcester, MA, USA.

Innate immune recognition of pathogens is critical to the prompt control of
infections, permitting the host to survive to develop long-term immunity via an
adaptive immune response. Poxviruses encode a family of proteins that inhibit
signaling by Toll-like receptors to their downstream signaling components,
severely limiting nuclear translocation of transcription factors such as IRF3 and
NF-<U+03BA>B and thereby decreasing production of host interferons and cytokines. We
describe bioinformatics techniques for identifying candidate poxviral inhibitors 
of the innate immune response based on similarity to the family of proteins that 
includes A52, A46, and N1. Robust luciferase assays can determine whether a given
poxviral gene affects innate immune signaling, and in combination with other
approaches can identify the cellular targets of poxviral innate immune evasion
genes. Because apoptosis is an innate immune response of the cell to viral
infection, assays for identifying poxviral genes that inhibit apoptosis can also 
be employed. Novel poxviral innate immune inhibitors are being identified via
several approaches and these techniques promise to identify further complexities 
in the way that poxviruses interact with the host innate immune system.

PMID: 22688773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38336. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038336. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Recruitment of histone deacetylase 3 to the interferon-A gene promoters
attenuates interferon expression.

Génin P(1), Lin R, Hiscott J, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-FRE3235, Paris Descartes
University, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Induction of Type I Interferon (IFN) genes constitutes an essential
step leading to innate immune responses during virus infection. Sendai virus
(SeV) infection of B lymphoid Namalwa cells transiently induces the
transcriptional expression of multiple IFN-A genes. Although transcriptional
activation of IFN-A genes has been extensively studied, the mechanism responsible
for the attenuation of their expression remains to be determined.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we demonstrate that virus infection of Namalwa
cells induces transient recruitment of HDAC3 (histone deacetylase 3) to IFN-A
promoters. Analysis of chromatin-protein association by Chip-QPCR demonstrated
that recruitment of interferon regulatory factor (IRF)3 and IRF7, as well as TBP 
correlated with enhanced histone H3K9 and H3K14 acetylation, whereas recruitment 
of HDAC3 correlated with inhibition of histone H3K9/K14 acetylation, removal of
IRF7 and TATA-binding protein (TBP) from IFN-A promoters and inhibition of
virus-induced IFN-A gene transcription. Additionally, HDAC3 overexpression
reduced, and HDAC3 depletion by siRNA enhanced IFN-A gene expression.
Furthermore, activation of IRF7 enhanced histone H3K9/K14 acetylation and IFN-A
gene expression, whereas activation of both IRF7 and IRF3 led to recruitment of
HDAC3 to the IFN-A gene promoters, resulting in impaired histone H3K9 acetylation
and attenuation of IFN-A gene transcription.
CONCLUSION: Altogether these data indicate that reversal of histone H3K9/K14
acetylation by HDAC3 is required for attenuation of IFN-A gene transcription
during viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3369917
PMID: 22685561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Sep;42(9):2374-82. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242388.

Hepatitis C virus NS3/4A protease blocks IL-28 production.

Ding Q(1), Huang B, Lu J, Liu YJ, Zhong J.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Viral Hepatitis, Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, 
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Type I interferons (IFNs), including IFN-a, -ß, and -<U+03C9>, play a critical role in
innate immune responses against viral infection. IFN-<U+03BB>, including IL-29, IL-28A, 
and IL-28B, recently identified as a new subfamily of IFN named type III IFN, has
also been demonstrated to suppress virus replication in vitro and in vivo.
However, the molecular mechanisms that regulate the induction of type III IFNs
during viral infection remain elusive. Here, we demonstrate that IL-28 (IFN-<U+03BB>
2/3) IFN production, similar to type I IFN, represents a primary and direct host 
response to HCV genomic RNA transfection. IL-28 (IFN-<U+03BB>2/3) induction by HCV
genomic RNA was dependent upon the activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3. We identified a 
minimal IL-28 promoter region consisting of putative NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3-binding
sites. Furthermore, we showed that HCV infection can inhibit HCV genomic
RNA-induced IL-28 expression, and that the viral NS3/4A protease activity was
responsible for this inhibitory effect. Our results present important evidence
for the control of type III IFN response by HCV, and shed more light on the
molecular mechanisms underlying the persistence of HCV infection.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22685015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Neuroimmune Pharmacol. 2013 Mar;8(1):132-44. doi: 10.1007/s11481-012-9360-5.
Epub 2012 Jun 10.

Anti-viral and anti-inflammatory mechanisms of the innate immune transcription
factor interferon regulatory factor 3: relevance to human CNS diseases.

Tarassishin L(1), Bauman A, Suh HS, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Forchheimer 726, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. leonid.tarassishin@einstein.yu.edu

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is a transcription factor critical in the
induction of antiviral immunity. IRF3 is activated following stimulation of cell 
membrane or cytosolic nucleic acid sensors and is essential in the induction of
the IFNß gene. Most cells constitutively express IRF3 in vitro, but little is
known about the regulation of expression of IRF3 in vivo. Immunohistochemical
analysis of selected human and mouse tissues demonstrated that IRF3 expression is
highly organ- and cell-type specific, showing high expression in certain
epithelial cells. In the CNS, while ependymal cells are strongly positive, brain 
parenchyma has little detectable IRF3 immunoreactivity. The importance of IRF3 in
antiviral immunity has been demonstrated by the requirement for IRF3 in
suppressing viral replication, but also by the demonstration that virus degrades 
IRF3 protein in infected cells. Furthermore, HIV-infected microglia in human CNS 
show abnormal IRF3+ aggregates, indicative of aberrant protein processing in
vivo. In addition to antiviral immunity, IRF3 also plays a critical role in the
modulation of neuroinflammation. A combination of dominant-negative and
over-expression strategies in vitro as well as transgenic expression of IRF3 in
vivo demonstrated that IRF3 plays a major role in modulating glial cytokine
expression, i.e., suppression of proinflammatory cytokines and promotion of
anti-inflammatory or immunoregulatory cytokines. These observations together
suggest that IRF3 is a crucial regulator of immune responses against pathogen-
and damage-associated molecules. We review recent literature on the molecular
pathways of IRF3 activation and function of IRF3 and discuss their implications
for CNS diseases.

PMID: 22684309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2012 Sep;33(3):494-503. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.05.034.
Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Orange-spotted grouper (Epinephelus coioides) toll-like receptor 22: molecular
characterization, expression pattern and pertinent signaling pathways.

Ding X(1), Lu DQ, Hou QH, Li SS, Liu XC, Zhang Y, Lin HR.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, Institute of Aquatic Economic Animals,
College of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen-Zhongshan University, Guangzhou 510275,
People's Republic of China.

The toll-like receptors (TLRs) are an important gene family in host innate
immunologic surveillance. The TLR22 gene is an essential member of the TLRs that 
is only found in aquatic animals and has been detected in some bony fish. Here, a
TLR22 homolog, EcTLR22, was characterized in the orange-spotted grouper
(Epinephelus coioides) via homology cloning. The 3321 bp full-length cDNA
sequence of EcTLR22 was obtained, which included an open reading frame of 2880 bp
encoding a putative peptide of 960 amino acids containing three highly typical
domains with the characteristics of TLR family members. The deduced amino acid
sequence of EcTLR22 showed a relatively high similarity to flounder TLR22.
Phylogenetic analysis showed that the orange-spotted grouper TLR22 sequence was
clustered with those of Perciforme, such as flounder and croaker. Real-time
quantitative PCR analysis revealed broad expression of EcTLR22, with relatively
high expression detected in the head kidney, trunk kidney, spleen, peripheral
blood leukocytes (PBLs) and heart of orange-spotted grouper. After injection with
Vibrio alginolyticus, there was significant up-regulation of the expression of
EcTLR22 in the spleen. In evaluating unstimulated/stimulated head kidney
leukocytes and spleen leukocytes, a significant increase in EcTLR22 mRNA
expression was detected, which implied a sensitive immune response. Furthermore, 
four important molecules for signal transduction, MyD88, TRIF, TNF-a and IRF3,
were chosen to analyze the role of the EcTLR22 signaling pathway in anti-pathogen
responses. Upon LPS or Poly I:C challenge, expression of the four genes was
induced, with an increasing tendency detected in head kidney leukocytes,
suggesting that the four genes might work with EcTLR22 in host defense against
pathogenic microbes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22683817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Blood. 2012 Jul 26;120(4):778-88. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-407395. Epub 2012
Jun 7.

HIV-1 infection of human macrophages directly induces viperin which inhibits
viral production.

Nasr N(1), Maddocks S, Turville SG, Harman AN, Woolger N, Helbig KJ, Wilkinson J,
Bye CR, Wright TK, Rambukwelle D, Donaghy H, Beard MR, Cunningham AL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Virus Research, Westmead Millennium Institute, Westmead and the
University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

Macrophages are key target cells for HIV-1. HIV-1(BaL) induced a subset of
interferon-stimulated genes in monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs), which
differed from that in monocyte-derived dendritic cells and CD4 T cells, without
inducing any interferons. Inhibition of type I interferon induction was mediated 
by HIV-1 inhibition of interferon-regulated factor (IRF3) nuclear translocation. 
In MDMs, viperin was the most up-regulated interferon-stimulated genes, and it
significantly inhibited HIV-1 production. HIV-1 infection disrupted lipid rafts
via viperin induction and redistributed viperin to CD81 compartments, the site of
HIV-1 egress by budding in MDMs. Exogenous farnesol, which enhances membrane
protein prenylation, reversed viperin-mediated inhibition of HIV-1 production.
Mutagenesis analysis in transfected cell lines showed that the internal
S-adenosyl methionine domains of viperin were essential for its antiviral
activity. Thus viperin may contribute to persistent noncytopathic HIV-1 infection
of macrophages and possibly to biologic differences with HIV-1-infected T cells.

PMID: 22677126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. FEBS Lett. 2012 May 21;586(10):1540-6. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.04.018. Epub
2012 Apr 21.

LPS-induced chemokine expression in both MyD88-dependent and -independent manners
is regulated by Cot/Tpl2-ERK axis in macrophages.

Bandow K(1), Kusuyama J, Shamoto M, Kakimoto K, Ohnishi T, Matsuguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biochemistry, Field of Developmental Medicine, Kagoshima
University, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Sakuragaoka,
Kagoshima, Japan.

LPS signaling is mediated through MyD88-dependent and -independent pathways,
activating NF-?B, MAP kinases and IRF3. Cot/Tpl2 is an essential upstream kinase 
in LPS-mediated activation of ERKs. Here we explore the roles of MyD88 and
Cot/Tpl2 in LPS-induced chemokine expression by studying myd88(-/-) and
cot/tpl2(-/-) macrophages. Among the nine LPS-responsive chemokines examined,
mRNA induction of ccl5, cxcl10, and cxcl13 is mediated through the
MyD88-independent pathway. Notably, Cot/Tpl2-ERK signaling axis exerts negative
effects on the expression of these three chemokines. In contrast, LPS-induced
gene expression of ccl2, ccl7, cxcl2, cxcl3, ccl8, and cxcl9 is mediated in the
MyD88-dependent manner. The Cot/Tpl2-ERK axis promotes the expression of the
first four and inhibits the expression of the latter two. Thus, LPS induces
expression of multiple chemokines through various signaling pathways in
macrophages.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22673523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Aug;13(4):403-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2012.05.017.
Epub 2012 Jun 2.

Suppression of TRIF-dependent signaling pathway of toll-like receptors by allyl
isothiocyanate in RAW 264.7 macrophages.

Kim SJ(1), Park HJ, Shin HJ, Shon DH, Kim do H, Youn HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences,
Soonchunhyang University, Asan-Si, Chungnam 336-745, Korea.

Toll-like receptors (TLR) play a significant role in the induction of innate
immune responses that are essential for host defense against invading microbial
pathogens. In general, TLRs have two major downstream signaling pathways: myeloid
differential factor 88 (MyD88)-dependent and toll-interleukin-1 receptor
domain-containing adapter inducing interferon-ß (TRIF)-dependent pathways. Allyl 
isothiocyanate (AITC) found in cruciferous vegetables has an effect on treatment 
of many chronic diseases. However, the exact molecular targets of AITC are still 
unidentified. Here, it was investigated whether AITC can modulate TLR signaling
pathways and what is the molecular target of AITC in TLRs signaling pathways.
AITC suppressed the activation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B by lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
or polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly[I:C]), but not by macrophage-activating 
lipopeptide of 2kDa (MALP-2) or cytosine-phosphate-guanine dinucleotide (CpG
DNA). AITC also suppressed the activation of interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) and the expression of interferon inducible protein-10 (IP-10) induced by
LPS or poly[I:C]. These results suggest that AITC can modulate TRIF-dependent
signaling pathways of TLRs leading to decreased inflammatory gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22668719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 20;287(30):25440-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.371757. Epub
2012 May 31.

The synthetic cannabinoid R(+)WIN55,212-2 augments interferon-ß expression via
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a.

Downer EJ(1), Clifford E, Amu S, Fallon PG, Moynagh PN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, National University of Ireland Maynooth, County
Kildare, Ireland.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 22;291(4):1604.

We have demonstrated that R(+)WIN55,212-2, a synthetic cannabinoid that possesses
cannabimimetic properties, acts as a novel regulator of Toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3) signaling to interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activation and
IFN-ß expression, and this is critical for manifesting its protective effects in 
a murine multiple sclerosis model. Here we investigated the role of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPARa) in mediating the effects of
R(+)WIN55,212-2 on this pathway. Data herein demonstrate that the TLR3 agonist
poly(I:C) promotes IFN-ß expression and R(+)WIN55,212-2 enhances TLR3-induced
IFN-ß expression in a stereoselective manner via PPARa. R(+)WIN55,212-2 promotes 
increased transactivation and expression of PPARa. Using the PPARa antagonist
GW6471, we demonstrate that R(+)WIN55,212-2 acts via PPARa to activate JNK,
activator protein-1, and positive regulatory domain IV to transcriptionally
regulate the IFN-ß promoter. Furthermore, GW6471 ameliorated the protective
effects of R(+)WIN55,212-2 during the initial phase of experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis. Overall, these findings define PPARa as an important mediator 
in manifesting the effects of R(+)WIN55,212-2 on the signaling cascade regulating
IFN-ß expression. The study adds to our molecular appreciation of potential
therapeutic effects of R(+)WIN55,212-2 in multiple sclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3408184
PMID: 22654113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(16):8499-506. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00424-12. Epub 2012 May 30.

Vpu-deficient HIV strains stimulate innate immune signaling responses in target
cells.

Doehle BP(1), Chang K, Fleming L, McNevin J, Hladik F, McElrath MJ, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington School of Medicine, Department of Immunology,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Acute virus infection induces a cell-intrinsic innate immune response comprising 
our first line of immunity to limit virus replication and spread, but viruses
have developed strategies to overcome these defenses. HIV-1 is a major public
health problem; however, the virus-host interactions that regulate innate immune 
defenses against HIV-1 are not fully defined. We have recently identified the
viral protein Vpu to be a key determinant responsible for HIV-1 targeting and
degradation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a central transcription
factor driving host cell innate immunity. IRF3 plays a major role in pathogen
recognition receptor (PRR) signaling of innate immunity to drive the expression
of type I interferon (IFN) and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), including a
variety of HIV restriction factors, that serve to limit viral replication
directly and/or program adaptive immunity. Here we interrogate the cellular
responses to target cell infection with Vpu-deficient HIV-1 strains. Remarkably, 
in the absence of Vpu, HIV-1 triggers a potent intracellular innate immune
response that suppresses infection. Thus, HIV-1 can be recognized by PRRs within 
the host cell to trigger an innate immune response, and this response is unmasked
only in the absence of Vpu. Vpu modulation of IRF3 therefore prevents virus
induction of specific innate defense programs that could otherwise limit
infection. These observations show that HIV-1 can indeed be recognized as a
pathogen in infected cells and provide a novel and effective platform for
defining the native innate immune programs of target cells of HIV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC3421769
PMID: 22647704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 1;189(1):50-60. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003554. Epub 2012 May 
25.

Transcriptional regulation of murine IL-33 by TLR and non-TLR agonists.

Polumuri SK(1), Jayakar GG, Shirey KA, Roberts ZJ, Perkins DJ, Pitha PM, Vogel
SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

IL-33, a member of the IL-1 family of cytokines, is produced by many cell types, 
including macrophages, yet its regulation is largely unknown. Treatment of
primary murine macrophages with a panel of TLR (e.g., TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, and TLR9)
agonists and non-TLR (e.g., MDA5, RIG-I) agonists revealed a pattern of gene and 
protein expression consistent with a role for IFN regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) in 
the expression of IL-33. Accordingly, induction of IL-33 mRNA was attenuated in
IRF-3(-/-) macrophages and TBK-1(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts. Despite the
fact that all IL-33 agonists were IRF-3 dependent, LPS-induced IL-33 mRNA was
fully inducible in IFN-ß(-/-) macrophages, indicating that IL-33 is not dependent
on IFN-ß as an intermediate. Epinephrine and Bordetella pertussis adenylate
cyclase toxin (ACT), cAMP-activating agents, activate CREB and greatly synergize 
with LPS to induce IL-33 mRNA in macrophages. Both LPS-induced and
ACT/LPS-enhanced expression of IL-33 mRNA was partially, but significantly,
inhibited by the protein kinase A inhibitor H-89 but not by tyrosine kinase or
protein kinase C inhibitors. Two IL-33 mRNA species derived from two alternative 
promoters encode full-length IL-33; however, the shorter "A" species is
preferentially induced by all IL-33-inducing agonists except Newcastle disease
virus, a RIG-I agonist that induced expression of both "A" and "B" transcripts.
Together, these studies greatly extend what is currently known about the
regulation of IL-33 induction in macrophages stimulated by bacterial and viral
agonists that engage distinct innate immune signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC3437667
PMID: 22634618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Vaccine. 2012 Jul 6;30(32):4790-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2012.05.027. Epub 2012 
May 23.

Toll-like receptor 3 agonist complexed with cationic liposome augments
vaccine-elicited antitumor immunity by enhancing TLR3-IRF3 signaling and type I
interferons in dendritic cells.

Wang C(1), Zhuang Y, Zhang Y, Luo Z, Gao N, Li P, Pan H, Cai L, Ma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Health Informatics of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen Key
Laboratory of Cancer Nanotechnology, Institute of Biomedical and Health
Engineering, Shenzhen Institutes of Advance Technology, Chinese Academy of
Science, PR China.

Cancer vaccine-based immunotherapy is emerging as a novel therapeutic strategy
for cancer treatment. However, its antitumor effect remains unsatisfied due to
the poor immunogenicity of tumor antigens (Ags). Although polyriboinosinic:
polyribocytidylic acid (PIC), a TLR3 agonist, has been reported as a promising
adjuvant for cancer vaccines, its immunopotency may be limited by insufficient
cellular penetration. In the present study, we incorporated PIC into DOTAP
cationic liposome to generate PIC-DOTAP Liposome Complex (PDLC) nanoparticles.
The results showed that PDLC was more potent than DOTAP or PIC to enhance
vaccine-induced tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) response and IFN-<U+03B3>
production. Moreover, two doses of PDLC vaccines remarkably suppressed tumor
growth in mice, which involved the participance of CD8(+) T cells and depended on
the presence of Ag. The superior antitumor effect of PDLC vaccines could be
attributable to enhanced maturation of mouse bone-marrow dendritic cells (BMDCs) 
and increased production of type I IFNs. More importantly, PDLC strengthened the 
TLR3 signaling in BMDCs by enhancing the interaction of PIC with TLR3 and
augmenting downstream IRF-3 phosphorylation, as well as elevating IRF-3/IRF-7
mRNA transcription. Taking together, the complex of PIC and DOTAP liposomes
enhanced PIC uptake and consequential TLR3 signaling in BMDCs, which in turn
promoted DC maturation and type I IFN production, thereby augmenting the
antitumor effect of cancer vaccines.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22634298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. BMC Biol. 2012 May 24;10:44. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-10-44.

MAVS ubiquitination by the E3 ligase TRIM25 and degradation by the proteasome is 
involved in type I interferon production after activation of the antiviral
RIG-I-like receptors.

Castanier C(1), Zemirli N, Portier A, Garcin D, Bidère N, Vazquez A, Arnoult D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR_S 1014, Hôpital Paul Brousse, Bâtiment Lavoisier, 14 avenue Paul
Vaillant Couturier, 94807 Villejuif cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: During a viral infection, the intracellular RIG-I-like receptors
(RLRs) sense viral RNA and signal through the mitochondrial antiviral signaling
adaptor MAVS (also known as IPS-1, Cardif and VISA) whose activation triggers a
rapid production of type I interferons (IFN) and of pro-inflammatory cytokines
through the transcription factors IRF3/IRF7 and NF-<U+03BA>B, respectively. While MAVS
is essential for this signaling and known to operate through the scaffold protein
NEMO and the protein kinase TBK1 that phosphorylates IRF3, its mechanism of
action and regulation remain unclear.
RESULTS: We report here that RLR activation triggers MAVS ubiquitination on
lysine 7 and 10 by the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM25 and marks it for proteasomal
degradation concomitantly with downstream signaling. Inhibition of this MAVS
degradation with a proteasome inhibitor does not affect NF-<U+03BA>B signaling but it
hampers IRF3 activation, and NEMO and TBK1, two essential mediators in type I IFN
production, are retained at the mitochondria.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that MAVS functions as a recruitment platform 
that assembles a signaling complex involving NEMO and TBK1, and that the
proteasome-mediated MAVS degradation is required to release the signaling complex
into the cytosol, allowing IRF3 phosphorylation by TBK1.

PMCID: PMC3372421
PMID: 22626058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):8185-97. doi: 10.1128/JVI.07240-11. Epub 2012 May 23.

Arenavirus nucleoproteins prevent activation of nuclear factor kappa B.

Rodrigo WW(1), Ortiz-Riaño E, Pythoud C, Kunz S, de la Torre JC, Martínez-Sobrido
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester, Rochester,
New York, USA.

Arenaviruses include several causative agents of hemorrhagic fever (HF) disease
in humans that are associated with high morbidity and significant mortality.
Morbidity and lethality associated with HF arenaviruses are believed to involve
the dysregulation of the host innate immune and inflammatory responses that leads
to impaired development of protective and efficient immunity. The molecular
mechanisms underlying this dysregulation are not completely understood, but it is
suggested that viral infection leads to disruption of early host defenses and
contributes to arenavirus pathogenesis in humans. We demonstrate in the
accompanying paper that the prototype member in the family, lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), disables the host innate defense by interfering
with type I interferon (IFN-I) production through inhibition of the interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activation pathway and that the viral nucleoprotein
(NP) alone is responsible for this inhibitory effect (C. Pythoud, W. W. Rodrigo, 
G. Pasqual, S. Rothenberger, L. Martínez-Sobrido, J. C. de la Torre, and S. Kunz,
J. Virol. 86:7728-7738, 2012). In this report, we show that LCMV-NP, as well as
NPs encoded by representative members of both Old World (OW) and New World (NW)
arenaviruses, also inhibits the nuclear translocation and transcriptional
activity of the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B). Similar to the situation
previously reported for IRF3, Tacaribe virus NP (TCRV-NP) does not inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B 
nuclear translocation and transcriptional activity to levels comparable to those 
seen with other members in the family. Altogether, our findings demonstrate that 
arenavirus infection inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent innate immune and inflammatory
responses, possibly playing a key role in the pathogenesis and virulence of
arenavirus.

PMCID: PMC3421694
PMID: 22623788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):8041-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00808-12. Epub 2012 May 23.

Defective antiviral responses of induced pluripotent stem cells to baculoviral
vector transduction.

Chen GY(1), Hwang SM, Su HJ, Kuo CY, Luo WY, Lo KW, Huang CC, Chen CL, Yu SH, Hu 
YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu,
Taiwan.

Genetic engineering of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) is important for
their clinical applications, and baculovirus (BV) holds promise as a gene
delivery vector. To explore the feasibility of using BV for iPSCs transduction,
in this study we first examined how iPSCs responded to BV. We determined that BV 
transduced iPSCs efficiently, without inducing appreciable negative effects on
cell proliferation, apoptosis, pluripotency, and differentiation. BV transduction
slightly perturbed the transcription of 12 genes involved in the Toll-like
receptor (TLR) signaling pathway, but at the protein level BV elicited no
well-known cytokines (e.g., interleukin-6 [IL-6], tumor necrosis factor alpha
[TNF-a], and beta interferon [IFN-ß]) except for IP-10. Molecular analyses
revealed that iPSCs expressed no TLR1, -6, -8, or -9 and expressed merely low
levels of TLR2, -3, and -4. In spite of evident expression of such RNA/DNA
sensors as RIG-I and AIM2, iPSCs barely expressed MDA5 and DAI (DNA-dependent
activator of IFN regulatory factor [IRF]). Importantly, BV transduction of iPSCs 
stimulated none of the aforementioned sensors or their downstream signaling
mediators (IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B). These data together confirmed that iPSCs responded
poorly to BV due to the impaired sensing and signaling system, thereby justifying
the transduction of iPSCs with the baculoviral vector.

PMCID: PMC3421682
PMID: 22623765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2012 Aug;201(3):371-9. doi: 10.1007/s00430-012-0247-0.
Epub 2012 May 24.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 induces simultaneous activation of Toll-like
receptors 2 and 4 and expression of the endogenous ligand serum amyloid A in
astrocytes.

Villalba M(1), Hott M, Martin C, Aguila B, Valdivia S, Quezada C, Zambrano A,
Concha MI, Otth C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Microbiología Clínica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Austral 
de Chile, P. O. Box 567, Valdivia, Chile.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is the most common pathogenic cause of
sporadic acute encephalitis and it produces latent persistent infection lifelong 
in infected individuals. Brain inflammation is associated with activation of
glial cells, which can detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)
through a variety of pattern-recognition receptors (PRR), including Toll-like
receptors (TLRs). In this study, we evaluated the expression and activation of
TLR2, TLR3, and TLR4 in HSV-1-infected astrocyte and neuronal primary cultures.
Our results showed a clear induction in TLR2 and TLR4 expression in astrocytes as
early as 1 h after HSV-1 infection, whereas no significant change was observed in
neurons. In addition, infected astrocytes showed increased levels of interferon
regulatory factors IRF3 and IRF7, interferon ß (INFß), interleukin 6 (IL6), and
serum amyloid A (SAA3) transcripts, as well as phospho-IRF3 protein. These
effects seemed to be dependent on viral replication since previous treatment of
the cells with acyclovir resulted in low levels of TLRs expression and activation
even after 4 h post-infection. These results suggest that reactivation of HSV-1
at the central nervous system (CNS) would likely induce and activate TLR2 and
TLR4 receptors directly through interaction of astrocytes with the pathogen and
also indirectly by endogenous ligands produced locally, such as serum amyloid
protein, potentiating the neuroinflammatory response.

PMID: 22622619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Protein Cell. 2012 May;3(5):383-91. doi: 10.1007/s13238-012-2929-1. Epub 2012 May
20.

Crystal structure of the ubiquitin-like domain of human TBK1.

Li J(1), Li J, Miyahira A, Sun J, Liu Y, Cheng G, Liang H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) is an important enzyme in the regulation of cellular
antiviral effects. TBK1 regulates the activity of the interferon regulatory
factors IRF3 and IRF7, thereby playing a key role in type I interferon (IFN)
signaling pathways. The structure of TBK1 consists of an N-terminal kinase
domain, a middle ubiquitin-like domain (ULD), and a C-terminal elongated helical 
domain. It has been reported that the ULD of TBK1 regulates kinase activity,
playing an important role in signaling and mediating interactions with other
molecules in the IFN pathway. In this study, we present the crystal structure of 
the ULD of human TBK1 and identify several conserved residues by multiple
sequence alignment. We found that a hydrophobic patch in TBK1, containing
residues Leu316, Ile353, and Val382, corresponding to the "Ile44 hydrophobic
patch" observed in ubiquitin, was conserved in TBK1, I<U+03BA>B kinase epsilon
(IKK<U+025B>/IKKi), I<U+03BA>B kinase alpha (IKKa), and I<U+03BA>B kinase beta (IKKß). In comparison
with the structure of the IKKß ULD domain of Xenopus laevis, we speculate that
the Ile44 hydrophobic patch of TBK1 is present in an intramolecular binding
surface between ULD and the C-terminal elongated helices. The varying surface
charge distributions in the ULD domains of IKK and IKK-related kinases may be
relevant to their specificity for specific partners.

PMCID: PMC4057185
PMID: 22610919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Diabetologia. 2012 Aug;55(8):2256-66. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2578-1. Epub 2012
May 19.

Exacerbation of diabetic nephropathy by hyperlipidaemia is mediated by Toll-like 
receptor 4 in mice.

Kuwabara T(1), Mori K, Mukoyama M, Kasahara M, Yokoi H, Saito Y, Ogawa Y, Imamaki
H, Kawanishi T, Ishii A, Koga K, Mori KP, Kato Y, Sugawara A, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 54 Shogoin Kawaharacho, Sakyoku, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Hyperlipidaemia is an independent risk factor for the
progression of diabetic nephropathy, but its molecular mechanism remains elusive.
We investigated in mice how diabetes and hyperlipidaemia cause renal lesions
separately and in combination, and the involvement of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)
in the process.
METHODS: Diabetes was induced in wild-type (WT) and Tlr4 knockout (KO) mice by
intraperitoneal injection of streptozotocin (STZ). At 2 weeks after STZ
injection, normal diet was substituted with a high-fat diet (HFD). Functional and
histological analyses were carried out 6 weeks later.
RESULTS: Compared with treatment with STZ or HFD alone, treatment of WT mice with
both STZ and HFD markedly aggravated nephropathy, as indicated by an increase in 
albuminuria, mesangial expansion, infiltration of macrophages and upregulation of
pro-inflammatory and extracellular-matrix-associated gene expression in
glomeruli. In Tlr4 KO mice, the addition of an HFD to STZ had almost no effects
on the variables measured. Production of protein S100 calcium binding protein A8 
(calgranulin A; S100A8), a potent ligand for TLR4, was observed in abundance in
macrophages infiltrating STZ-HFD WT glomeruli and in glomeruli of diabetic
nephropathy patients. High-glucose and fatty acid treatment synergistically
upregulated S100a8 gene expression in macrophages from WT mice, but not from KO
mice. As putative downstream targets of TLR4, phosphorylation of interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) was enhanced in kidneys of WT mice co-treated with STZ
and HFD.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Activation of S100A8/TLR4 signalling was elucidated
in an animal model of diabetic glomerular injury accompanied with
hyperlipidaemia, which may provide novel therapeutic targets in progressive
diabetic nephropathy.

PMID: 22610400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Nat Immunol. 2012 May 20;13(7):659-66. doi: 10.1038/ni.2307.

Cross-interference of RLR and TLR signaling pathways modulates antibacterial T
cell responses.

Negishi H(1), Yanai H, Nakajima A, Koshiba R, Atarashi K, Matsuda A, Matsuki K,
Miki S, Doi T, Aderem A, Nishio J, Smale ST, Honda K, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Industrial Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012 Jul;10(7):441.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Jul;12(7):474.
    Nat Immunol. 2012 Jul;13(7):634-5.

Although the mechanisms by which innate pathogen-recognition receptors enhance
adaptive immune responses are increasingly well understood, whether signaling
events from distinct classes of receptors affect each other in modulating
adaptive immunity remains unclear. We found here that the activation of cytosolic
RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) resulted in the selective suppression of
transcription of the gene encoding the p40 subunit of interleukin 12 (Il12b) that
was effectively induced by the activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs). The
RLR-activated transcription factor IRF3 bound dominantly, relative to IRF5, to
the Il12b promoter, where it interfered with the TLR-induced assembly of a
productive transcription-factor complex. The activation of RLRs in mice
attenuated TLR-induced responses of the T helper type 1 cell (T(H)1 cell) and
interleukin 17-producing helper T cell (T(H)17 cell) subset types and,
consequently, viral infection of mice caused death at sublethal doses of
bacterial infection. The innate immune receptor cross-interference we describe
may have implications for infection-associated clinical episodes.

PMID: 22610141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cell Host Microbe. 2012 May 17;11(5):469-80. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2012.03.007.

Mycobacterium tuberculosis activates the DNA-dependent cytosolic surveillance
pathway within macrophages.

Manzanillo PS(1), Shiloh MU, Portnoy DA, Cox JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012 Jul;10(7):442.

Cytosolic bacterial pathogens activate the cytosolic surveillance pathway (CSP)
and induce innate immune responses, but how the host detects vacuolar pathogens
like Mycobacterium tuberculosis is poorly understood. We show that
M. tuberculosis also initiates the CSP upon macrophage infection via limited
perforation of the phagosome membrane mediated by the ESX-1 secretion system.
Although the bacterium remains within the phagosome, this permeabilization
results in phagosomal and cytoplasmic mixing and allows extracellular
mycobacterial DNA to access host cytosolic receptors, thus blurring the
distinction between "vacuolar" and "cytosolic" pathogens. Activation of cytosolic
receptors induces signaling through the Sting/Tbk1/Irf3 axis, resulting in IFN-ß 
production. Surprisingly, Irf3(-/-) mice, which cannot respond to cytosolic DNA, 
are resistant to long-term M. tuberculosis infection, suggesting that the CSP
promotes M. tuberculosis infection. Thus, cytosolic sensing of mycobacterial DNA 
plays a key role in M. tuberculosis pathogenesis and likely contributes to the
high type I IFN signature in tuberculosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3662372
PMID: 22607800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(16):8367-74. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00423-12. Epub 2012 May 16.

Vpu mediates depletion of interferon regulatory factor 3 during HIV infection by 
a lysosome-dependent mechanism.

Doehle BP(1), Chang K, Rustagi A, McNevin J, McElrath MJ, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington School of Medicine, Department of Immunology,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

HIV has evolved sophisticated mechanisms to avoid restriction by intracellular
innate immune defenses that otherwise serve to control acute viral infection and 
virus dissemination. Innate defenses are triggered when pattern recognition
receptor (PRR) proteins of the host cell engage pathogen-associated molecule
patterns (PAMPs) present in viral products. Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
plays a central role in PRR signaling of innate immunity to drive the expression 
of type I interferon (IFN) and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), including a
variety of HIV restriction factors, that serve to limit viral replication
directly and/or program adaptive immunity. Productive infection of T cells by HIV
is dependent upon the targeted proteolysis of IRF3 that occurs through a
virus-directed mechanism that results in suppression of innate immune defenses.
However, the mechanisms by which HIV controls innate immune signaling and IRF3
function are not defined. Here, we examined the innate immune response induced by
HIV strains identified through their differential control of PRR signaling. We
identified viruses that, unlike typical circulating HIV strains, lack the ability
to degrade IRF3. Our studies show that IRF3 regulation maps specifically to the
HIV accessory protein Vpu. We define a molecular interaction between Vpu and IRF3
that redirects IRF3 to the endolysosome for proteolytic degradation, thus
allowing HIV to avoid the innate antiviral immune response. Our studies reveal
that Vpu is an important IRF3 regulator that supports acute HIV infection through
innate immune suppression. These observations define the Vpu-IRF3 interface as a 
novel target for therapeutic strategies aimed at enhancing the immune response to
HIV.

PMCID: PMC3421752
PMID: 22593165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jun 8;422(3):501-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.028. Epub 2012 May 12.

TRIM59 interacts with ECSIT and negatively regulates NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF-3/7-mediated
signal pathways.

Kondo T(1), Watanabe M, Hatakeyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan.

Innate immune responses are triggered by pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) through pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and then activate
intracellular signaling pathways including NF-<U+03BA>B and interferon regulatory
factors. Recently, it has been reported that tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins
function as crucial regulators via ubiquitin-mediated modifications for these
signaling pathways. In this study, we showed that one of the TRIM family
ubiquitin ligases, TRIM59, interacts with ECSIT as an adaptor protein required
for the TLR-mediated transduction pathway. Luciferase reporter assays using
reporter plasmids including NF-<U+03BA>B responsive element, interferon ß (IFN-ß)
promoter and interferon-sensitive response element (ISRE) showed that
overexpression of TRIM59 repressed their transcriptional activities, whereas
knockdown of TRIM59 enhanced their transcriptional activities. Furthermore,
TRIM59 inhibited phosphorylation and dimerization of IRF3 and IRF7, suggesting
that TRIM59 negatively regulates upstream kinases for IRFs. These findings
indicate that TRIM59 may serve as a multifunctional regulator for innate immune
signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22588174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Immunity. 2012 Jun 29;36(6):1073-86. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.03.019. Epub 2012
May 10.

Structural analysis of the STING adaptor protein reveals a hydrophobic dimer
interface and mode of cyclic di-GMP binding.

Ouyang S(1), Song X, Wang Y, Ru H, Shaw N, Jiang Y, Niu F, Zhu Y, Qiu W,
Parvatiyar K, Li Y, Zhang R, Cheng G, Liu ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

STING is an essential signaling molecule for DNA and cyclic di-GMP
(c-di-GMP)-mediated type I interferon (IFN) production via TANK-binding kinase 1 
(TBK1) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) pathway. It contains an
N-terminal transmembrane region and a cytosolic C-terminal domain (CTD). Here, we
describe crystal structures of STING CTD alone and complexed with c-di-GMP in a
unique binding mode. The strictly conserved aa 153-173 region was shown to be
cytosolic and participated in dimerization via hydrophobic interactions. The
STING CTD functions as a dimer and the dimerization was independent of
posttranslational modifications. Binding of c-di-GMP enhanced interaction of a
shorter construct of STING CTD (residues 139-344) with TBK1. This suggests an
extra TBK1 binding site, other than serine 358. This study provides a glimpse
into the unique architecture of STING and sheds light on the mechanism of
c-di-GMP-mediated TBK1 signaling.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3654694
PMID: 22579474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Theor Biol. 2012 Aug 21;307:137-48. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2012.04.026. Epub 2012 
May 8.

Modelling the interactions between TLR4 and IFNß pathways.

Günel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Istanbul Technical University Informatics Institute, Maslak, 34469, Istanbul, 
Turkiye. aylingunel@yahoo.com

Erratum in
    J Theor Biol. 2013 Apr 7;322:94.

Bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) association with their connate receptor TLR4
triggers Type I interferon signaling cascade through its MyD88 independent
downstream. Compared to plethora of reported empirical data on both TLR4 and Type
I interferon pathways, there is no known model to decipher crosstalk mechanisms
between these two crucial innate immune pathogen activated pathways regulating
vital transcriptional factors such as nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF<U+03BA>B), IFNß, the
interferon-stimulated gene factor-3 (ISGF3) and an important cancer drug target
protein kinase-R (PKR). Innate immune system is based on a sensitive balance of
intricate interactions. In elucidating these interactions, in silico integration 
of pathways has great potential. Attempts confined to single pathway may not be
effective in truly addressing source of real systems behavior. This is the first 
report combining toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4) and interferon beta (IFNß) pathways 
in a single in silico model, analyzing their interactions, pinpointing the source
of delay in PKR late phase activity and limiting the transcription of IFN and PKR
by using a method including an statistical physics technique in reaction
equations. The model quite successfully recapitulates published interferon
regulatory factor-3 (IRF3) and IFNß data from mouse macrophages and PKR data from
mouse embryonic fibroblast cell lines. The simulations end up with an estimate of
IRF3, IFNß, ISGF3 dose dependent profiles mimicking nonlinear dose response
characteristic of the system. Involvement of concomitant PKR downstream can
unravel elusive mechanisms in specific profiles like NF<U+03BA>B regulation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22575970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Autoimmun. 2012 Dec;39(4):294-303. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2012.03.003. Epub 2012
May 3.

Porphyromonas gingivalis promotes Th17 inducing pathways in chronic
periodontitis.

Moutsopoulos NM(1), Kling HM, Angelov N, Jin W, Palmer RJ, Nares S, Osorio M,
Wahl SM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-4352, USA. nmoutsopoulos@dir.nidr.nih.gov

In periodontitis, a common chronic inflammatory condition, gram-negative-rich
bacterial biofilms trigger, in susceptible individuals, perpetuating inflammation
that results in extensive tissue damage of tooth supporting structures. To
delineate immune cell-dependent mechanisms whereby bacterial challenge drives
persistent destructive inflammation in periodontitis and other inflammatory
diseases, we studied involved tissues ex vivo and investigated host cell
responses to the periodontal pathogen Porphyromonas gingivalis, in vitro.
Diseased lesions were populated by abundant Th17 cells, linked to infection,
chronic inflammation/autoimmunity and tissue pathology. In vitro, P. gingivalis, 
particularly the more virulent strain W83, stimulated myeloid antigen presenting 
cells (APC) to drive Th17 polarization. Supernatants from myeloid APC exposed to 
P. gingivalis were capable of enhancing Th17 but not Th1 polarization. P.
gingivalis favored the generation of Th17 responses by stimulating the production
of Th17 related cytokines IL-1ß, IL-6 and IL-23, but not Th1 related IL-12. By
inducing NF<U+03BA>B activation, P. gingivalis promoted IL-1ß, IL-6 and IL-12p40
production, but not IRF3 phosphorylation, connected to generation of the IL-12p35
chain, ultimately restricting formation of the intact IL-12 molecule. Promotion
of Th17 lineage responses was also aided by P. gingivalis proteases, which
appeared to differentially degrade pivotal cytokines. In this regard, IL-12 was
largely degraded by P. gingivalis, whereas IL-1ß was more resistant to
proteolysis. Our data unveil multiple pathways by which P. gingivalis may
orchestrate chronic inflammation, providing insights into interventional
strategies.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3416947
PMID: 22560973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35866. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035866. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Trappin-2/elafin modulate innate immune responses of human endometrial epithelial
cells to PolyI:C.

Drannik AG(1), Nag K, Yao XD, Henrick BM, Sallenave JM, Rosenthal KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Molecular Medicine, McMaster Immunology Research
Centre, Michael G. DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Upon viral recognition, innate and adaptive antiviral immune
responses are initiated by genital epithelial cells (ECs) to eradicate or contain
viral infection. Such responses, however, are often accompanied by inflammation
that contributes to acquisition and progression of sexually transmitted
infections (STIs). Hence, interventions/factors enhancing antiviral protection
while reducing inflammation may prove beneficial in controlling the spread of
STIs. Serine antiprotease trappin-2 (Tr) and its cleaved form, elafin (E), are
alarm antimicrobials secreted by multiple cells, including genital epithelia.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We investigated whether and how each Tr and E
(Tr/E) contribute to antiviral defenses against a synthetic mimic of viral dsRNA,
polyinosine-polycytidylic acid (polyI:C) and vesicular stomatitis virus. We show 
that delivery of a replication-deficient adenovector expressing Tr gene (Ad/Tr)
to human endometrial epithelial cells, HEC-1A, resulted in secretion of
functional Tr, whereas both Tr/E were detected in response to polyI:C. Moreover, 
Tr/E were found to significantly reduce viral replication by either acting
directly on virus or through enhancing polyI:C-driven antiviral protection. The
latter was associated with reduced levels of pro-inflammatory factors IL-8, IL-6,
TNFa, lowered expression of RIG-I, MDA5 and attenuated NF-<U+03BA>B activation.
Interestingly, enhanced polyI:C-driven antiviral protection of HEC-Ad/Tr cells
was partially mediated through IRF3 activation, but not associated with higher
induction of IFNß, suggesting multiple antiviral mechanisms of Tr/E and the
involvement of alternative factors or pathways.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first evidence of both Tr/E altering
viral binding/entry, innate recognition and mounting of antiviral and
inflammatory responses in genital ECs that could have significant implications
for homeostasis of the female genital tract.

PMCID: PMC3335805
PMID: 22545145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Pineal Res. 2012 Nov;53(4):325-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-079X.2012.01002.x. Epub 
2012 Apr 27.

Melatonin modulates TLR4-mediated inflammatory genes through MyD88- and
TRIF-dependent signaling pathways in lipopolysaccharide-stimulated RAW264.7
cells.

Xia MZ(1), Liang YL, Wang H, Chen X, Huang YY, Zhang ZH, Chen YH, Zhang C, Zhao
M, Xu DX, Song LH.

Author information: 
(1)Life Science College, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei, China.

Increasing evidence demonstrates that melatonin has an anti-inflammatory effect. 
Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms remain obscure. In this study, we
investigated the effect of melatonin on toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-mediated
molecule myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88)-dependent and TRIF-dependent
signaling pathways in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated macrophages. RAW264.7
cells were incubated with LPS (2.0 µg/mL) in the absence or presence of melatonin
(10, 100, 1000 µm). As expected, melatonin inhibited TLR4-mediated tumor necrosis
factor alpha (TNF-a), interleukin (IL)-1ß, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10 in
LPS-stimulated macrophages. In addition, melatonin significantly attenuated
LPS-induced upregulation of cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 and inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) in macrophages. Further analysis showed that melatonin inhibited 
the expression of MyD88 in LPS-stimulated macrophages. Although it had no effect 
on TLR4-mediated phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), p38, and
extracellular regulated protein kinase (ERK), melatonin significantly attenuated 
the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in LPS-stimulated macrophages.
In addition, melatonin inhibited TLR4-mediated Akt phosphorylation in
LPS-stimulated macrophages. Moreover, melatonin significantly attenuated the
elevation of interferon (IFN)-regulated factor-3 (IRF3), which was involved in
TLR4-mediated TRIF-dependent signaling pathway, in LPS-stimulated macrophages.
Correspondingly, melatonin significantly alleviated LPS-induced IFN-ß in
macrophages. In conclusion, melatonin modulates TLR4-mediated inflammatory genes 
through MyD88-dependent and TRIF-dependent signaling pathways.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22537289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Virol. 2012 Jul;86(13):7136-45. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06705-11. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Inhibition of interferon regulatory factor 3 activation by paramyxovirus V
protein.

Irie T(1), Kiyotani K, Igarashi T, Yoshida A, Sakaguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.

The V protein of Sendai virus (SeV) suppresses innate immunity, resulting in
enhancement of viral growth in mouse lungs and viral pathogenicity. The innate
immunity restricted by the V protein is induced through activation of interferon 
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). The V protein has been shown to interact with
melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) and to inhibit beta interferon 
production. In the present study, we infected MDA5-knockout mice with V-deficient
SeV and found that MDA5 was largely unrelated to the innate immunity that the V
protein suppresses in vivo. We therefore investigated the target of the SeV V
protein. We previously reported interaction of the V protein with IRF3. Here we
extended the observation and showed that the V protein appeared to inhibit
translocation of IRF3 into the nucleus. We also found that the V protein
inhibited IRF3 activation when induced by a constitutive active form of IRF3. The
V proteins of measles virus and Newcastle disease virus inhibited IRF3
transcriptional activation, as did the V protein of SeV, while the V proteins of 
mumps virus and Nipah virus did not, and inhibition by these proteins correlated 
with interaction of each V protein with IRF3. These results indicate that IRF3 is
important as an alternative target of paramyxovirus V proteins.

PMCID: PMC3416347
PMID: 22532687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Virol. 2012 Jul;86(13):7334-44. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06867-11. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Isoflavone agonists of IRF-3 dependent signaling have antiviral activity against 
RNA viruses.

Bedard KM(1), Wang ML, Proll SC, Loo YM, Katze MG, Gale M Jr, Iadonato SP.

Author information: 
(1)Kineta, Inc., Seattle, Washington, USA. kbedard@kineta.us

There is a growing need for novel antiviral therapies that are broad spectrum,
effective, and not subject to resistance due to viral mutations. Using
high-throughput screening methods, including computational docking studies and an
interferon-stimulated gene 54 (ISG54)-luciferase reporter assay, we identified a 
class of isoflavone compounds that act as specific agonists of innate immune
signaling pathways and cause activation of the interferon regulatory factor
(IRF-3) transcription factor. The isoflavone compounds activated the ISG54
promoter, mediated nuclear translocation of IRF-3, and displayed highly potent
activity against hepatitis C virus (HCV) and influenza virus. Additionally, these
agonists efficiently activated IRF-3 in the presence of the HCV protease NS3-4A, 
which is known to blunt the host immune response. Furthermore, genomic studies
showed that discrete innate immune pathways centered on IRF signaling were
regulated following agonist treatment without causing global changes in host gene
expression. Following treatment, the expression of only 64 cellular genes was
significantly induced. This report provides the first evidence that innate immune
pathways dependent on IRF-3 can be successfully targeted by small-molecule drugs 
for the development of novel broad-spectrum antiviral compounds.

PMCID: PMC3416323
PMID: 22532686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Virol. 2012 Aug;86(15):7728-38. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00187-12. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Arenavirus nucleoprotein targets interferon regulatory factor-activating kinase
IKKe.

Pythoud C(1), Rodrigo WW, Pasqual G, Rothenberger S, Martínez-Sobrido L, de la
Torre JC, Kunz S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology University Hospital Center and University of
Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

Arenaviruses perturb innate antiviral defense by blocking induction of type I
interferon (IFN) production. Accordingly, the arenavirus nucleoprotein (NP) was
shown to block activation and nuclear translocation of interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3) in response to virus infection. Here, we sought to identify
cellular factors involved in innate antiviral signaling targeted by arenavirus
NP. Consistent with previous studies, infection with the prototypic arenavirus
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) prevented phosphorylation of IRF3 in
response to infection with Sendai virus, a strong inducer of the retinoic
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)/mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) pathway of
innate antiviral signaling. Using a combination of coimmunoprecipitation and
confocal microscopy, we found that LCMV NP associates with the I<U+03BA>B kinase
(IKK)-related kinase IKKe but that, rather unexpectedly, LCMV NP did not bind to 
the closely related TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK-1). The NP-IKKe interaction was
highly conserved among arenaviruses from different clades. In LCMV-infected
cells, IKKe colocalized with NP but not with MAVS located on the outer membrane
of mitochondria. LCMV NP bound the kinase domain (KD) of IKKe (IKBKE) and blocked
its autocatalytic activity and its ability to phosphorylate IRF3, without
undergoing phosphorylation. Together, our data identify IKKe as a novel target of
arenavirus NP. Engagement of NP seems to sequester IKKe in an inactive complex.
Considering the important functions of IKKe in innate antiviral immunity and
other cellular processes, the NP-IKKe interaction likely plays a crucial role in 
arenavirus-host interaction.

PMCID: PMC3421673
PMID: 22532683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Syst Biol. 2012 Apr 24;8:577. doi: 10.1038/msb.2012.10.

Asymmetric positive feedback loops reliably control biological responses.

Ratushny AV(1), Saleem RA, Sitko K, Ramsey SA, Aitchison JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA.

Positive feedback is a common mechanism enabling biological systems to respond to
stimuli in a switch-like manner. Such systems are often characterized by the
requisite formation of a heterodimer where only one of the pair is subject to
feedback. This ASymmetric Self-UpREgulation (ASSURE) motif is central to many
biological systems, including cholesterol homeostasis (LXRa/RXRa), adipocyte
differentiation (PPAR<U+03B3>/RXRa), development and differentiation (RAR/RXR),
myogenesis (MyoD/E12) and cellular antiviral defense (IRF3/IRF7). To understand
why this motif is so prevalent, we examined its properties in an evolutionarily
conserved transcriptional regulatory network in yeast (Oaf1p/Pip2p). We
demonstrate that the asymmetry in positive feedback confers a competitive
advantage and allows the system to robustly increase its responsiveness while
precisely tuning the response to a consistent level in the presence of varying
stimuli. This study reveals evolutionary advantages for the ASSURE motif, and
mechanisms for control, that are relevant to pharmacologic intervention and
synthetic biology applications.

PMCID: PMC3361002
PMID: 22531117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Jul;92(1):159-69. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0711360. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

RLR-mediated production of interferon-ß by a human dendritic cell subset and its 
role in virus-specific immunity.

Szabo A(1), Bene K, Gogolák P, Réthi B, Lányi Á, Jankovich I, Dezso B,
Rajnavölgyi E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Medical and Health Science Centre, University of
Debrecen, Debrecen, Hungary.

Cytosolic RIG-I-like helicases (RLR) are PRRs involved in type I IFN production
and antiviral immunity. This study focuses to the comparison of the expression,
function, and signaling cascades associated to RLR in the previously identified
CD14(-)DC-SIGN(+)PPAR<U+03B3>(low)CD1a(+) and CD14(low)DC-SIGN(+)PPAR<U+03B3>(high)CD1a(-)
human moDC subsets. Our results revealed that the expression of RLR genes and
proteins as well as the activity of the coupled signaling pathways are
significantly higher in the CD1a(+) subset than in its phenotypically and
functionally distinct counterpart. Specific activation of RLR in moDCs by
poly(I:C) or influenza virus was shown to induce the secretion of IFN-ß via IRF3,
whereas induction of proinflammatory cytokine responses were predominantly
controlled by TLR3. The requirement of RLR-mediated signaling in CD1a(+) moDCs
for priming naïve CD8(+) T lymphocytes and inducing influenza virus-specific
cellular immune responses was confirmed by RIG-I/MDA5 silencing, which abrogated 
these functions. Our results demonstrate the subset-specific activation of RLR
and the underlying mechanisms behind its cytokine secretion profile and identify 
CD1a(+) moDCs as an inflammatory subset with specialized functional activities.
We also provide evidence that this migratory DC subset can be detected in human
tonsil and reactive LNs.

PMID: 22517920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Virol. 2012 Jul;86(13):7384-92. doi: 10.1128/JVI.07090-11. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Differential impact of interferon regulatory factor 7 in initiation of the type I
interferon response in the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus-infected central
nervous system versus the periphery.

Christensen JE(1), Fenger C, Issazadeh-Navikas S, Krug A, Liljestrøm P, Goriely
S, Paludan SR, Finsen B, Christensen JP, Thomsen AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRFs) are a family of transcription factors 
involved in regulating type I IFN genes and other genes participating in the
early antiviral host response. To better understand the mechanisms involved in
virus-induced central nervous system (CNS) inflammation, we studied the influence
of IRF1, -3, -7, and -9 on the transcriptional activity of key genes encoding
antiviral host factors in the CNS of mice infected with lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). A key finding is that neither IRF3 nor IRF7 is
absolutely required for induction of a type I IFN response in the LCMV-infected
CNS, whereas concurrent elimination of both factors markedly reduces the
virus-induced host response. This is unlike the situation in the periphery, where
deficiency of IRF7 almost eliminates the LCMV-induced production of the type I
IFNs. This difference is seemingly related to the local environment, as
peripheral production of type I IFNs is severely reduced in intracerebrally
(i.c.) infected IRF7-deficient mice, which undergo a combined infection of the
CNS and peripheral organs, such as spleen and lymph nodes. Interestingly, despite
the redundancy of IRF7 in initiating the type I IFN response in the CNS, the
response is not abolished in IFN-ß-deficient mice, as might have been expected.
Collectively, these data demonstrate that the early type I IFN response to LCMV
infection in the CNS is controlled by a concerted action of IRF3 and -7.
Consequently this work provides strong evidence for differential regulation of
the type I IFN response in the CNS versus the periphery during viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3416342
PMID: 22514347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34041. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034041. Epub 2012 Mar 30.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM21 positively regulates
interaction with IRF3 and hence TRIM21 activity.

Stacey KB(1), Breen E, Jefferies CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Royal College Surgeons in
Ireland Research Institute, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin,
Ireland.

Patients suffering from Systemic Lupus Erythematous (SLE) have elevated type I
interferon (IFN) levels which correlate with disease activity and severity.
TRIM21, an autoantigen associated with SLE, has been identified as an ubiquitin
E3 ligase that targets the transcription factor IRF3 in order to turn off and
limit type I IFN production following detection of viral and bacterial infection 
by Toll Like Receptors (TLRs). However, how the activity of TRIM21 is regulated
downstream of TLRs is unknown. In this study we demonstrate that TRIM21 is
tyrosine phosphorylated following TLR3 and TLR4 stimulation, suggesting that its 
activity is potentially regulated by tyrosine phosphorylation. Using Netphos, we 
have identified three key tyrosines that are strongly predicted to be
phosphorylated, two of which are conserved between the human and murine forms of 
TRIM21, at residues 343, 388, and 393, all of which have been mutated from
tyrosine to phenylalanine (Y343F, Y388F, and Y393F). We have observed that
tyrosine phosphorylation of TRIM21 only occurs in the substrate binding PRY/SPRY 
domain, and that Y393, and to a lesser extent, Y388 are required for TRIM21 to
function as a negative regulator of IFN-ß promoter activity. Further studies
revealed that mutating Y393 to phenylalanine inhibits the ability of TRIM21 to
interact with its substrate, IRF3, thus providing a molecular explanation for the
lack of activity of Y393 on the IFN-ß promoter. Our data demonstrates a novel
role for tyrosine phosphorylation in regulating the activity of TRIM21 downstream
of TLR3 and TLR4. Given the pathogenic role of TRIM21 in systemic autoimmunity,
these findings have important implications for the development of novel
therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC3316593
PMID: 22479513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Cell Res. 2012 May;22(5):822-35. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.53. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

Enhanced TLR-induced NF-<U+03BA>B signaling and type I interferon responses in NLRC5
deficient mice.

Tong Y(1), Cui J, Li Q, Zou J, Wang HY, Wang RF.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA.

Nod-like receptors (NLRs) are intracellular sensors that respond to a variety of 
pathogen and intracellular danger signals to induce innate immune responses.
NLRC5 has recently been identified to be an important regulator of NF-<U+03BA>B, type I 
interferon (IFN) and inflammasome signaling pathways, but the in vivo function
and mechanisms of NLRC5 remain to be defined. Here, we describe the generation
and characterization of NLRC5 knockout mice. We show that induction of NLRC5
expression by Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligand or cytokine stimulation requires
the signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat)1-mediated signaling
pathway. NLRC5 ablation reduces MHC class I expression, and enhances IKK and IRF3
phosphorylation in response to TLR stimulation or viral infection. Consistent
with these observations, we found that NLRC5 deficiency enhanced IL-6 and IFN-ß
production in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), peritoneal macrophages and bone
marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs), but not bone marrow-derived dendritic cells
(BMDCs) after LPS stimulation or vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) infection.
Furthermore, we found that NLRC5-deficient mice produced higher amounts of IL-6
and IFN-ß in the sera when they were challenged with LPS or infected with VSV.
Taken together, these results provide in vivo evidence that NLRC5 plays critical 
roles in MHC class I expression, innate immune signaling and antiviral innate
immune responses, thus serving as an important target for modulating innate
immune signaling and regulation.

PMCID: PMC3343662
PMID: 22473004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Sci Rep. 2012;2:347. doi: 10.1038/srep00347. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

STING mediates neuronal innate immune response following Japanese encephalitis
virus infection.

Nazmi A(1), Mukhopadhyay R, Dutta K, Basu A.

Author information: 
(1)National Brain Research Centre , Manesar, Haryana-122051, India.

Flavivirus-mediated inflammation causes neuronal death, but whether the infected 
neurons can evoke an innate immune response to elicit their own protection, is
unknown. In an earlier study we have shown that neuronal RIG-I, play a
significant role in inducing production and release of molecules that are related
to inflammation. In this study, using a neuronal cell line, we show that RIG-I
acts with STING in a concerted manner following its interaction with Japanese
encephalitis viral RNA to induce a type 1 interferon response. Knock-down of
STING showed that the expressions of various inflammatory signaling molecules
were down-regulated along with increased intracellular viral load. Alternatively,
over-expressing STING decreased intracellular viral load. Our results indicate
that at the sub-cellular level, interaction between the pattern recognition
receptor RIG-I and the adapter molecule STING, is a major contributor to elicit
immunological responses involving the type 1 interferons in neurons following JEV
infections.

PMCID: PMC3317237
PMID: 22470840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochimie. 2012 Jun;94(6):1390-7. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2012.03.011. Epub 2012
Mar 17.

Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 regulate basal transcription of the human IRF-3
gene.

Xu HG(1), Jin R, Ren W, Zou L, Wang Y, Zhou GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210029, China.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) plays a crucial role in initiation and
development of the IFN antiviral response. The expression level of human IRF-3 is
thought to be closely related to antiviral state of cells. However, the
mechanisms of the transcription regulation of IRF-3 have remained largely
unknown. We previously reported that transcription factor E2F1 negatively
regulates the basal transcriptional activity of IRF-3. Here we demonstrate that
transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 up-regulate the basal transcriptional activity 
of IRF-3 and increase IRF-3 expression at mRNA level. By transient transfection
analysis we revealed that mutation of Sp1/NRF-1 binding site resulted in a
profound reduction of IRF-3 promoter activity. Overexpression of Sp1 and Sp3, but
not NRF-1, transactivated the IRF-3 promoter activity in reporter gene assays
while knocking-down of endogenous Sp1 and Sp3 by a shRNA strategy markedly
inhibited IRF-3 promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
showed that Sp1 and Sp3 interact with the IRF-3 promoter in vivo. These results
suggest that basal expression level of IRF-3 is regulated by transcription
factors Sp1 and Sp3.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 10;109(15):5791-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1119238109. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Bruton's tyrosine kinase phosphorylates Toll-like receptor 3 to initiate
antiviral response.

Lee KG(1), Xu S, Kang ZH, Huo J, Huang M, Liu D, Takeuchi O, Akira S, Lam KP.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Group, Bioprocessing Technology Institute, Agency for Science,
Technology and Research (ASTAR), Republic of Singapore 138668.

Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) mediates antiviral response by recognizing
double-stranded RNA. Its cytoplasmic domain is tyrosine phosphorylated upon
ligand binding and initiates downstream signaling via the adapter TIR-containing 
adaptor inducing interferon-ß (TRIF). However, the kinase responsible for TLR3
phosphorylation remains unknown. We show here that Bruton's tyrosine kinase
(BTK)-deficient macrophages failed to secrete inflammatory cytokines and IFN-ß
upon TLR3 stimulation and were impaired in clearing intracellular dengue virus
infection. Mutant mice were also less susceptible to
d-galactosamine/p(I:C)-induced sepsis. In the absence of BTK, TLR3-induced
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), AKT and MAPK signaling and activation of NF<U+03BA>B, 
IRF3, and AP-1 transcription factors were all defective. We demonstrate that BTK 
directly phosphorylates TLR3 and in particular the critical Tyr759 residue. BTK
point mutations that abrogate or led to constitutive kinase activity have
opposite effects on TLR3 phosphorylation. Loss of BTK also compromises the
formation of the downstream TRIF/receptor-interacting protein 1 (RIP1)/TBK1
complex. Thus, BTK plays a critical role in initiating TLR3 signaling.

PMCID: PMC3326448
PMID: 22454496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Molecules. 2012 Mar 23;17(4):3599-608. doi: 10.3390/molecules17043599.

MDP up-regulates the gene expression of type I interferons in human aortic
endothelial cells.

Lv Q(1), Yang M, Liu X, Zhou L, Xiao Z, Chen X, Chen M, Xie X, Hu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Cardiology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South
University, Changsha 410008, China. cathay057@sina.com

Muramyldipeptide (MDP), the minimum essential structure responsible for the
immuno-adjuvant activity of peptidoglycan, is recognized by intracellular
nuclear-binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2). Here, we obtained evidence that 
the treatment of human aortic endothelial cells (HAECs) with MDP up-regulated the
gene expression of type I interferons in a dose- and time-dependent manner. MDP
also up-regulated the expression of the receptor NOD2, suggesting that MDP may
induce a positive feedback response. The up-regulation of interferons was not
dependent on the TNFa signaling, as HAECs did not express TNFa with the
stimulation of MDP, and TNFa neutralizing antibody did not decrease the induction
of IFNs induced by MDP. RT-PCR results showed that HAECs expressed the gene
transcripts of interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 1, 2, 3, 9. The western blot
results showed that MDP induced the phosphorylation of IRF3. These results
suggested that MDP induced the up-regulation of gene transcript of interferons
through the activation of IRF3 signaling pathway. Meanwhile, MDP induced the gene
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-1ß, IL-8, and MCP-1. Taken
together, these results suggested that HAECs may play roles in the anti-infection
immune response and in the induction of innate immunity.

PMID: 22447023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33299. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033299. Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Both TLR2 and TRIF contribute to interferon-ß production during Listeria
infection.

Aubry C(1), Corr SC, Wienerroither S, Goulard C, Jones R, Jamieson AM, Decker T, 
O'Neill LA, Dussurget O, Cossart P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Paris, France.

Synthesis of interferon-ß (IFN-ß) is an innate response to cytoplasmic infection 
with bacterial pathogens. Our recent studies showed that Listeria monocytogenes
limits immune detection and IFN-ß synthesis via deacetylation of its
peptidoglycan, which renders the bacterium resistant to lysozyme degradation.
Here, we examined signaling requirements for the massive IFN-ß production
resulting from the infection of murine macrophages with a mutant strain of L.
monocytogenes, <U+0394>pgdA, which is unable to modify its peptidoglycan. We report the 
identification of unconventional signaling pathways to the IFN-ß gene, requiring 
TLR2 and bacterial internalization. Induction of IFN-ß was independent of the
Mal/TIRAP adaptor protein but required TRIF and the transcription factors IRF3
and IRF7. These pathways were stimulated to a lesser degree by wild-type L.
monocytogenes. They operated in both resident and inflammatory macrophages
derived from the peritoneal cavity, but not in bone marrow-derived macrophages.
The novelty of our findings thus lies in the first description of TLR2 and TRIF
as two critical components leading to the induction of the IFN-ß gene and in
uncovering that individual macrophage populations adopt different strategies to
link pathogen recognition signals to IFN-ß gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3303824
PMID: 22432012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Viral Immunol. 2012 Apr;25(2):117-30. doi: 10.1089/vim.2011.0082. Epub 2012 Mar
13.

Exogenous nef induces proinflammatory signaling events in murine macrophages.

Mangino G(1), Serra V, Borghi P, Percario ZA, Horenkamp FA, Geyer M, Affabris E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University Roma Tre, Rome, Italy.

Despite the fact that murine cells are not permissive for human immunodeficiency 
virus type 1 (HIV-1) infection, several investigators have constructed transgenic
(Tg) mice to model HIV-1-induced diseases to overcome this restriction. The
generation of Tg mice expressing selected HIV-1 genes revealed that Nef harbors a
major disease determinant. HIV-1 Nef protein is a molecular adapter able to
interact with several cellular partners, interfering with cellular functions. The
phenotype of Nef Tg mice was extensively characterized regarding in vivo
development of AIDS-like disease and the effects of Nef expression in T
lymphocytes, but the functions eventually corrupted by Nef in monocytes and
macrophages were less studied. Nef treatment of human monocyte-derived
macrophages induces the internalization of the protein and modulates the
production and secretion of different chemokines and cytokines by activating
specific intracellular signaling pathways (i.e., NF-<U+03BA>B, MAPK, and IRF3).
Therefore we set up an in vitro murine macrophage-based model using stabilized
cell lines and primary peritoneal macrophages, and treated them with recombinant 
myristoylated Nef(SF2) (recNef). Like human cells, murine macrophages responded
to Nef treatment, activating IKK-a and IKK-ß, JNK, and p38 MAP kinases.
Activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway is mandatory for the synthesis and release of a
pool of cytokines and chemokines, including IFN-ß, that induce tyrosine
phosphorylation of the signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)-1,
STAT-2, and STAT-3, in an autocrine and paracrine manner, confirming that murine 
macrophages respond to Nef similarly to human ones. These data extend the results
previously obtained in human primary macrophages, allowing the use of murine
cells in culture to study signaling events modulated by Nef in myeloid-derived
cells. In particular, it may be feasible to use macrophages derived from mice
knocked out in specific signaling intermediates to obtain greater insight into
the mechanism of Nef-induced effects.

PMID: 22413916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32427. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032427. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Identification of DreI as an antiviral factor regulated by RLR signaling pathway.

Li S(1), Sun F, Zhang YB, Gui JF, Zhang QY.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Wuhan Center for
Developmental Biology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Graduate School of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: Retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs) had been
demonstrated to prime interferon (IFN) response against viral infection via the
conserved RLR signaling in fish, and a novel fish-specific gene, the grass carp
reovirus (GCRV)-induced gene 2 (Gig2), had been suggested to play important role 
in host antiviral response.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we cloned and characterized
zebrafish Gig2 homolog (named Danio rerio Gig2-I, DreI), and revealed its
antiviral role and expressional regulation signaling pathway. RT-PCR, Western
blot and promoter activity assay indicate that DreI can be induced by poly I:C,
spring viremia of carp virus (SVCV) and recombinant IFN (rIFN), showing that DreI
is a typical ISG. Using the pivotal signaling molecules of RLR pathway, including
RIG-I, MDA5 and IRF3 from crucian carp, it is found that DreI expression is
regulated by RLR cascade and IRF3 plays an important role in this regulation.
Furthermore, promoter mutation assay confirms that the IFN-stimulated regulatory 
elements (ISRE) in the 5' flanking region of DreI is essential for its induction.
Finally, overexpression of DreI leads to establish a strong antiviral state
against SVCV and Rana grylio virus (RGV) infection in EPC (Epithelioma papulosum 
cyprinid) cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data indicate that DreI is an antiviral protein, 
which is regulated by RLR signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3296712
PMID: 22412872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Immunol Res. 2012 Sep;53(1-3):25-40. doi: 10.1007/s12026-012-8293-7.

Activation and regulation of interferon-ß in immune responses.

Sin WX(1), Li P, Yeong JP, Chin KC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation and Inflammation, Singapore Immunology Network, 
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 8A Biomedical Grove, #04
Immunos, Biopolis, Singapore.

Interferons (IFNs) were discovered more than half a century ago, and extensive
research has since identified multifarious roles for type I IFN in human immune
responses. Here, we review the functions of IFN-ß in innate and adaptive
immunity. We also discuss the activation and influence of IFN-ß on myeloid cell
types, including monocytes and dendritic cells, as well as address the effects of
IFN-ß on T cells and B cells. Findings from our own laboratory, which explores
the molecular mechanisms of IFN-ß activation by LPS and viruses, as well as from 
other groups investigating the regulation of IFN-ß by viral proteins and
endogenous factors are described. The effects of post-translational modifications
of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3 on IFN-ß induction are also
highlighted. Many unanswered questions remain concerning the regulation of the
type I IFN response in inflammation, especially the role of transcription factors
in the modulation of inflammatory gene expression, and these questions will form 
the basis for exciting avenues of future research.

PMID: 22411096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Autoimmun. 2012 Aug;39(1-2):77-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2012.01.014. Epub 2012
Mar 7.

The immunobiology of Ro52 (TRIM21) in autoimmunity: a critical review.

Oke V(1), Wahren-Herlenius M.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine
L8:04, Karolinska Institutet, 17176 Stockholm, Sweden.

Ro52 is a common target of circulating autoantibodies in autoimmune disease. Data
indicate that anti-Ro52 antibodies are associated with distinct clinical
manifestations. It is therefore of major interest to understand how it becomes an
antigenic target and what cells express this protein under what conditions and
what cellular function it has. Ro52 contains a RING and a B-box motif, followed
by a coiled-coil domain and a B30.2 (or PRYSPRY) region in the C-terminal end.
This molecular structure places Ro52 within the family of tripartite motif
proteins (TRIM), and it is also denoted TRIM21. Like several other TRIM proteins,
Ro52 has E3 ligase activity and functions in the process of ubiquitination. Ro52 
is expressed in the immune system as a predominantly cytoplasmic protein that can
be upregulated and translocate to the nucleus in a proinflammatory environment.
Reported substrates for Ro52-mediated ubiquitination include IRF3, IRF5, IRF7 and
IRF8, and via these transcription factors Ro52 regulates type 1 interferon and
cytokine production. Ro52 is upregulated at the site of autoimmune inflammation, 
such as cutaneous lupus lesions. This implies that Ro52 may have an important
role in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity, and this paper will review the
available data on the role of Ro52 in immune responses and autoimmune
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22402340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(3):e1002570. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002570. Epub 2012 Mar
1.

A20 (Tnfaip3) deficiency in myeloid cells protects against influenza A virus
infection.

Maelfait J(1), Roose K, Bogaert P, Sze M, Saelens X, Pasparakis M, Carpentier I, 
van Loo G, Beyaert R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Signal Transduction in Inflammation, Department for
Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium [corrected].

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2012 Apr;8(4):
doi/10.1371/annotation/a2136b9a-3cbf-426f-9cfb-73e3c9c6396d.

The innate immune response provides the first line of defense against viruses and
other pathogens by responding to specific microbial molecules. Influenza A virus 
(IAV) produces double-stranded RNA as an intermediate during the replication life
cycle, which activates the intracellular pathogen recognition receptor RIG-I and 
induces the production of proinflammatory cytokines and antiviral interferon.
Understanding the mechanisms that regulate innate immune responses to IAV and
other viruses is of key importance to develop novel therapeutic strategies. Here 
we used myeloid cell specific A20 knockout mice to examine the role of the
ubiquitin-editing protein A20 in the response of myeloid cells to IAV infection. 
A20 deficient macrophages were hyperresponsive to double stranded RNA and IAV
infection, as illustrated by enhanced NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 activation, concomitant with
increased production of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines and type I
interferon. In vivo this was associated with an increased number of alveolar
macrophages and neutrophils in the lungs of IAV infected mice. Surprisingly,
myeloid cell specific A20 knockout mice are protected against lethal IAV
infection. These results challenge the general belief that an excessive host
proinflammatory response is associated with IAV-induced lethality, and suggest
that under certain conditions inhibition of A20 might be of interest in the
management of IAV infections.

PMCID: PMC3291650
PMID: 22396652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Sci Signal. 2012 Mar 6;5(214):ra20. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002521.

STING specifies IRF3 phosphorylation by TBK1 in the cytosolic DNA signaling
pathway.

Tanaka Y(1), Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Cytosolic double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) stimulates the production of type I
interferon (IFN) through the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident adaptor protein 
STING (stimulator of IFN genes), which activates the transcription factor
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3); however, how STING activates IRF3 is
unclear. Here, we showed that STING stimulates phosphorylation of IRF3 by the
kinase TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase 1) in an in vitro reconstitution system. With
this system, we identified a carboxyl-terminal region of STING that was both
necessary and sufficient to activate TBK1 and stimulate the phosphorylation of
IRF3. We also found that STING interacted with both TBK1 and IRF3 and that
mutations in STING that selectively disrupted its binding to IRF3 abrogated
phosphorylation of IRF3 without impairing the activation of TBK1. These results
suggest that STING functions as a scaffold protein to specify and promote the
phosphorylation of IRF3 by TBK1. This scaffolding function of STING (and possibly
of other adaptor proteins) may explain why IRF3 is activated in only a subset of 
signaling pathways that activate TBK1.

PMCID: PMC3549669
PMID: 22394562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Sci Signal. 2012 Mar 6;5(214):pe9. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002919.

The STING in the tail for cytosolic DNA-dependent activation of IRF3.

Bowie A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Research Centre, School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity
Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland.
agbowie@tcd.ie

Cytosolic pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) sense intracellular nucleic acids 
from pathogens such as bacteria and viruses, which leads to the induction of type
I interferon (IFN) responses that are essential for an effective immune response.
Further, these PRR pathways can be aberrantly activated by self DNA, which leads 
to autoimmunity. Therefore, understanding the signaling mechanisms that underlie 
PRR-induced production of IFN is vital to health and disease. A key transcription
factor that is involved in these pathways is IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3),
which is often activated by the kinase TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). STING
(stimulator of interferon genes) is a master regulator for the cyto-solic nucleic
acid-mediated activation of IRF3 through TBK1 stimulation, but how the
STING-TBK1-IRF3 signaling axis operates has been unclear. A study now shows that 
in response to cytosolic double-stranded DNA, the C-terminal tail of STING
provides a scaffold to assemble IRF3 and TBK1, which leads to TBK1-dependent
phosphorylation of IRF3. Thus, STING directs TBK1 to activate IRF3 in DNA-sensing
pathways.

PMID: 22394560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev. 2012 Mar;76(1):33-45. doi: 10.1128/MMBR.05012-11.

Emerging role of ubiquitination in antiviral RIG-I signaling.

Maelfait J(1), Beyaert R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Signal Transduction in Inflammation, Department for
Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.

Detection of viruses by the innate immune system involves the action of
specialized pattern recognition receptors. Intracellular RIG-I receptors sense
the presence of viral nucleic acids in infected cells and trigger signaling
pathways that lead to the production of proinflammatory and antiviral proteins.
Over the past few years, posttranslational modification of RIG-I and downstream
signaling proteins by different types of ubiquitination has been found to be a
key event in the regulation of RIG-I-induced NF-<U+03BA>B and interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3) activation. Multiple ubiquitin ligases, deubiquitinases, and
ubiquitin binding scaffold proteins contribute to both positive and negative
regulation of the RIG-I-induced antiviral immune response. A better understanding
of the function and activity of these proteins might eventually lead to the
development of novel therapeutic approaches for management of viral diseases.

PMCID: PMC3294425
PMID: 22390971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Nat Immunol. 2012 Mar 4;13(4):387-95. doi: 10.1038/ni.2239.

NLRP4 negatively regulates type I interferon signaling by targeting the kinase
TBK1 for degradation via the ubiquitin ligase DTX4.

Cui J(1), Li Y, Zhu L, Liu D, Songyang Z, Wang HY, Wang RF.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Mol Immunol. 2012 Nov;9(6):431-3.

Stringent control of the type I interferon signaling pathway is important for
maintaining host immune responses and homeostasis, yet the molecular mechanisms
responsible for its tight regulation are still poorly understood. Here we report 
that the pattern-recognition receptor NLRP4 regulated the activation of type I
interferon mediated by double-stranded RNA or DNA by targeting the kinase TBK1
for degradation. NLRP4 recruited the E3 ubiquitin ligase DTX4 to TBK1 for Lys48
(K48)-linked polyubiquitination at Lys670, which led to degradation of TBK1.
Knockdown of either DTX4 or NLRP4 abrogated K48-linked ubiquitination and
degradation of TBK1 and enhanced the phosphorylation of TBK1 and the
transcription factor IRF3. Our results identify a previously unrecognized role
for NLRP4 in the regulation of type I interferon signaling and provide molecular 
insight into the mechanisms by which NLRP4-DTX4 targets TBK1 for degradation.

PMCID: PMC3760161
PMID: 22388039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Mar 23;419(4):735-40. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.02.091. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Inhibition of LPS binding to MD-2 co-receptor for suppressing TLR4-mediated
expression of inflammatory cytokine by 1-dehydro-10-gingerdione from dietary
ginger.

Park SH(1), Kyeong MS, Hwang Y, Ryu SY, Han SB, Kim Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju 361-763, Republic 
of Korea.

Myeloid differentiation protein 2 (MD-2) is a co-receptor of toll-like receptor 4
(TLR4) for innate immunity. Here, we delineated a new mechanism of
1-dehydro-10-gingerdione (1D10G), one of pungent isolates from ginger (Zingiber
officinale), in the suppression of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced gene
expression of inflammatory cytokines. 1D10G inhibited LPS binding to MD-2 with
higher affinity than gingerol and shogaol from dietary ginger. Moreover, 1D10G
down-regulated TLR4-mediated expression of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) or
activating protein 1 (AP1)-target genes such as tumor necrosis factor a (TNF-a)
and interleukin-1ß, as well as those of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3
(IRF3)-target IFN-ß gene and IFN-<U+03B3> inducible protein 10 (IP-10) in LPS-activated 
macrophages. Taken together, MD-2 is a molecular target in the anti-inflammatory 
action of 1D10G.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22387540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Virol. 2012 May;86(9):4947-55. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06326-11. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

Protective role of interferon regulatory factor 3-mediated signaling against
prion infection.

Ishibashi D(1), Atarashi R, Fuse T, Nakagaki T, Yamaguchi N, Satoh K, Honda K,
Nishida N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan. dishi@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Abnormal prion protein (PrP(Sc)) generated from the cellular isoform of PrP
(PrP(C)) is assumed to be the main or sole component of the pathogen, called
prion, of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE). Because PrP is a
host-encoded protein, acquired immune responses are not induced in TSE.
Meanwhile, activation of the innate immune system has been suggested to partially
block the progression of TSE; however, the mechanism is not well understood. To
further elucidate the role of the innate immune system in prion infection, we
investigated the function of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a key
transcription factor of the MyD88-independent type I interferon (IFN) production 
pathway. We found that IRF3-deficient mice exhibited significantly earlier onset 
with three murine TSE strains, namely, 22L, FK-1, and murine bovine spongiform
encephalopathy (mBSE), following intraperitoneal transmission, than with
wild-type controls. Moreover, overexpression of IRF3 attenuated prion infection
in the cell culture system, while PrP(Sc) was increased in prion-infected cells
treated with small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) against IRF3, suggesting that IRF3
negatively regulates PrP(Sc) formation. Our findings provide new insight into the
role of the host innate immune system in the pathogenesis of prion diseases.

PMCID: PMC3347345
PMID: 22379081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2012 May;32(5):869-78. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.02.015.
Epub 2012 Feb 19.

Cloning and expression analysis of interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and 7 in 
large yellow croaker, Larimichthys crocea.

Yao CL(1), Huang XN, Fan Z, Kong P, Wang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture/Fisheries College, Jimei University, Jimei, Xiamen, China.
clyao@jmu.edu.cn

The interferon regulatory factor (IRF)3 and IRF7 are considered to play essential
roles in innate immune system's antiviral responses. In this report, the
full-length cDNA and genomic structure and immune response characterizations of
IRF3 and IRF7 were investigated in large yellow croaker, Larimichthys crocea. The
full-length cDNA of L. crocea (Lc)IRF3 was of 2204 bp, including a 5'-terminal
untranslated region (UTR) of 41 bp, a 3'-terminal UTR of 774 bp and an open
reading frame (ORF) of 1389 bp encoding a polypeptide of 462 amino acids
residues. The full-length cDNA of LcIRF7 was of 1979 bp, including a 5'-terminal 
UTR of 47 bp, a 3'-terminal UTR of 636 bp and an ORF of 1296 bp encoding a
polypeptide of 431 amino acids. The putative amino acid sequence of both LcIRF3
and LcIRF7 contained a typical IRF domain at the N-terminal and an IRF3 domain at
the C-terminal. Furthermore, we obtained 4517 nucleotides (nt) LcIRF3 genome
sequence based on the full-length cDNA, which contained 11 exons and 10 introns. 
The full-length genome sequence of LcIRF7 was of 3991 nucleotides, including 9
exons and 8 introns. Quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR analysis
revealed a broad expression of LcIRF3 and LcIRF7 with the most predominant
expression of LcIRF3 and LcIRF7 in the liver and in the gill, respectively. The
expression levels of LcIRF3 and LcIRF7 after challenged with LPS, poly I:C and
Vibrio parahaemolyticus were tested in blood, spleen and liver. The results
showed that the highest relative expression of LcIRF3 was in the liver at 24 h
after poly I:C injection with 90 times greater than that of the non-injection
group (p < 0.05). Moreover, LcIRF3 transcription increased significantly at most 
time point in blood and spleen tissue after poly I:C stimulation compared with
that of the control group. After LPS injection, the peak value of LcIRF7 was in
the liver with 207 times (at 3 h) as much as that in the control group (p <
0.05). In addition, LcIRF7 expression was significantly induced by poly I:C
injection in spleen. Both LcIRF3 and LcIRF7 transcripts did not show significant 
change after V. parahaemolyticus stimulation. These results indicated that IRF3
and IRF7 might play an important role in large yellow croaker's defense against
viral and bacterial infection.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22374413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 1;188(7):2967-71. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103185. Epub 2012
Feb 27.

Cutting edge: independent roles for IRF-3 and IRF-7 in hematopoietic and
nonhematopoietic cells during host response to Chikungunya infection.

Schilte C(1), Buckwalter MR, Laird ME, Diamond MS, Schwartz O, Albert ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunobiologie des Cellules Dendritiques, Département d'Immunologie,
Institut Pasteur, Paris 75724, France.

The host response to Chikungunya virus is dependent on the direct action of type 
I IFN on infected nonhematopoietic cells. Prior studies have demonstrated that
multiple host sensors coordinate an antiviral response; however, the tissue
source(s) and signaling pathways for IFN production remain unknown. In this
study, we demonstrate that IRF-3 and IRF-7 are functionally redundant, but lack
of both factors results in lethal infection in adult mice. Reciprocal bone marrow
chimeras indicated that IRF-3 or IRF-7 expression in either hematopoietic or
nonhemotopoietic cell compartments was capable of inducing an antiviral response.
Interestingly, redundancy of IRF-3 and IRF-7 was age dependent, as neonatal
animals lacking either factor succumbed to infection. We further demonstrate that
IPS-1 is essential in nonhematopoietic cells and preferentially required during
early life. These results highlight the interplay between nonimmune and immune
cells during Chikungunya virus infection and suggest an important role for
nonhematopoietic cells as a critical source of IFN-a/ß.

PMID: 22371392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31688. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031688. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

The nitric oxide pathway provides innate antiviral protection in conjunction with
the type I interferon pathway in fibroblasts.

Mehta DR(1), Ashkar AA, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster Immunology Research
Centre, Michael DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The innate host response to virus infection is largely dominated by the
production of type I interferon and interferon stimulated genes. In particular,
fibroblasts respond robustly to viral infection and to recognition of viral
signatures such as dsRNA with the rapid production of type I interferon;
subsequently, fibroblasts are a key cell type in antiviral protection. We
recently found, however, that primary fibroblasts deficient for the production of
interferon, interferon stimulated genes, and other cytokines and chemokines mount
a robust antiviral response against both DNA and RNA viruses following
stimulation with dsRNA. Nitric oxide is a chemical compound with pleiotropic
functions; its production by phagocytes in response to interferon-<U+03B3> is associated
with antimicrobial activity. Here we show that in response to dsRNA, nitric oxide
is rapidly produced in primary fibroblasts. In the presence of an intact
interferon system, nitric oxide plays a minor but significant role in antiviral
protection. However, in the absence of an interferon system, nitric oxide is
critical for the protection against DNA viruses. In primary fibroblasts, NF-<U+03BA>B
and interferon regulatory factor 1 participate in the induction of inducible
nitric oxide synthase expression, which subsequently produces nitric oxide. As
large DNA viruses encode multiple and diverse immune modulators to disable the
interferon system, it appears that the nitric oxide pathway serves as a secondary
strategy to protect the host against viral infection in key cell types, such as
fibroblasts, that largely rely on the type I interferon system for antiviral
protection.

PMCID: PMC3283670
PMID: 22363706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Immune Netw. 2011 Dec;11(6):420-3. doi: 10.4110/in.2011.11.6.420. Epub 2011 Dec
31.

CKD-712, (S)-1-(a-naphthylmethyl)-6,7-dihydroxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline,
Inhibits the NF-<U+03BA>B Activation and Augments Akt Activation during TLR4 Signaling.

Lee J(1), Yang EJ, Shin JS, Kim DH, Lee SS, Choi IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science,
Institute for Immunology and Immunological Diseases, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

Since CKD-712 has been developed as an anti-inflammatory agent, we examined the
effect of CKD-712 during TLR4 signaling. Using HEK293 cells expressing TLR4,
CKD-712 was pre-treated 1 hr before LPS stimulation. Activation of NF-<U+03BA>B was
assessed by promoter assay. The activation of ERK, JNK, p38, IRF3 and Akt was
measured by western blotting. CKD-712 inhibited the NF-<U+03BA>B signaling triggered by 
LPS. The activation of ERK, JNK, p38 or IRF3 was not inhibited by CKD-712. On the
contrary the activation of these molecules was augmented slightly. The activation
of Akt with stimulation of LPS was also enhanced with CKD-712 pre-treatment at
lower concentration, but was inhibited at higher concentration. We suggest that
during TLR4 signaling CKD-712 inhibits NF-<U+03BA>B activation. However, CKD-712
augmented the activation of Akt as well as Map kinases. Therefore, we suggest
that CKD-712 might have a role as an immunomodulator.

PMCID: PMC3275714
PMID: 22346785  [PubMed]


225. J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(8):4527-37. doi: 10.1128/JVI.07071-11. Epub 2012 Feb 15.

Sensing adenovirus infection: activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 in RAW
264.7 cells.

Stein SC(1), Falck-Pedersen E.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Molecular Biology Graduate Program, New York, New York, USA.

We have used the RAW 264.7 murine macrophage-like cell line as a platform to
characterize the recognition and early signaling response to recombinant
adenoviral vectors (rAdV). Infection of RAW 264.7 cells triggers an early
response (2 to 6 h postinfection) that includes phosphorylation of the interferon
(IFN) response factor 3 (IRF3) transcription factor, upregulation of IRF3 primary
response genes (interferon-stimulated gene 56 [ISG56], beta IFN [IFN-ß]), and
subsequent type I IFN secondary signaling (STAT1/2 phosphorylation). Using short 
hairpin RNA (shRNA) lentiviral vectors, we show an essential role for Tank
binding kinase 1 (TBK1) in this pathway. Data also support a role for STING
(MITA) as an adaptor functioning in response to rAdV infection. Using UV/psoralen
(Ps)-inactivated virus to block viral transcription, Ps-inactivated virus
stimulated primary (IRF3) and secondary (STAT1/2) activation events to the same
degree as untreated virus. IRF3 phosphorylation was not blocked in RAW 264.7
cells pretreated with the RNA polymerase III inhibitor ML60218. However, they
were compromised in the type I IFN-dependent secondary response (phosphorylation 
of STAT1/STAT2). At 24 h postinfection, ML60218-treated cells were compromised in
the overall antiviral response. Therefore, initial sensing of rAdV or viral DNA
(vDNA) does not depend on viral template transcription, but ML60218 treatment
influences cellular cascades required for an antiviral response to rAdV. Using
overexpression or knockdown assays, we examined how four DNA sensors influence
the antiviral response. Knockdown of DNA Activator of Interferon (DAI) and p204, 
the murine ortholog to IFI16, had minimal influence on IRF3 phosphorylation.
However, knockdown of absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) and the helicase DDX41 resulted
in diminished levels of (pser388)IRF3 following rAdV infection. Based on these
data, multiple DNA sensors contribute to an antiviral DNA recognition response,
leading to TBK1-dependent IRF3 phosphorylation in RAW 264.7 cells.

PMCID: PMC3318612
PMID: 22345436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Int Immunol. 2012 Apr;24(4):253-65. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxr126. Epub 2012 Feb 13.

Smad2 and Smad3 are redundantly essential for the suppression of iNOS synthesis
in macrophages by regulating IRF3 and STAT1 pathways.

Sugiyama Y(1), Kakoi K, Kimura A, Takada I, Kashiwagi I, Wakabayashi Y, Morita R,
Nomura M, Yoshimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Although transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß1 is a well-known immunosuppressive
cytokine, little is known about the role of its downstream transcription factors,
Smad2 and Smad3, in the suppression of macrophage activation. Previous studies
have demonstrated that Smad3 is critical for the suppression of LPS-mediated
inducible nitric oxide (NO) synthase (iNOS) induction, although the role of Smad2
remains to be investigated. In this study, we found that iNOS induction was
enhanced in Smad2-deficient bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) and
peritoneal macrophages in vitro and tumor-associated macrophages in vivo,
compared with wild-type (WT) macrophages. However, TGF-ß1 still suppressed iNOS
induction in Smad2-deficient macrophages. In Smad2/3 double knockout (KO)
(Smad2/3 DKO) BMDMs, LPS-mediated NO/iNOS induction was more strongly elevated
than in Smad2 or Smad3 single KO BMDMs, and its suppression by exogenous TGF-ß1
was severely impaired. These data suggest that Smad2 and Smad3 redundantly
regulate iNOS induction. Similarly, the production of IL-6 and TNFa, but not
IL-10 was augmented in Smad2/3 DKO BMDMs, suggesting that Smad2 and Smad3 also
redundantly suppressed some cytokines production. In Smad2/3 DKO macrophages,
TLR3- as well as TLR4-mediated IRF3 activation and IFN-ß production were strongly
augmented, which resulted in hyper STAT1 phosphorylation. Furthermore, IFN-ß- and
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced iNOS induction in the absence of TLR signaling and STAT1
transcriptional activity were augmented in Smad2/3 DKO BMDMs. These results
suggest that Smad2 and Smad3 negatively regulate iNOS induction in macrophages by
suppressing multiple steps in the IRF3-IFN-ß-STAT1 pathway.

PMID: 22331441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cell Signal. 2012 Jun;24(6):1185-94. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.01.018. Epub
2012 Feb 4.

The macrophage response towards LPS and its control through the p38(MAPK)-STAT3
axis.

Bode JG(1), Ehlting C, Häussinger D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Disease, University 
Hospital, Heinrich Heine University of Düsseldorf, Moorenstrasse 5, 40225
Düsseldorf, Germany. Johannes.Bode@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

In macrophages detection of gram-negative bacteria particularly involves binding 
of the outer-wall component lipopolysaccharide (LPS) to its cognate receptor
complex, comprising Toll like receptor 4 (TLR4), CD14 and MD2. LPS-induced
formation of the LPS receptor complex elicits a signaling network, including
intra-cellular signal-transduction directly activated by the TLR4 receptor
complex as well as successional induction of indirect autocrine and paracrine
signaling events. All these different pathways are integrated into the macrophage
response towards an inflammatory stimulus by a highly complex cross-talk of the
pathways engaged. This also includes a tight control by several intra- and
inter-cellular feedback loops warranting an inflammatory response sufficient to
battle invading pathogens and to avoid non-essential tissue damage caused by an
overwhelming inflammatory response. Several evidences indicate that the
reciprocal cross-talk between the p38(MAPK)-pathway and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT)3-mediated signal-transduction forms a critical 
axis successively activated by LPS. The balanced activation of this axis is
essential for both induction and propagation of the inflammatory macrophage
response as well as for the control of the resolution phase, which is largely
driven by IL-10 and sustained STAT3 activation. In this context regulation of
suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)3 expression and the recently described
divergent regulatory roles of the two p38(MAPK)-activated protein kinases MK2 and
MK3 for the regulation of LPS-induced NF-<U+03BA>B- and IRF3-mediated
signal-transduction and gene expression, which includes the regulation of IFNß,
IL-10 and DUSP1, appears to play an important role.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22330073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Cell Signal. 2012 Jun;24(6):1141-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.01.021. Epub 2012
Feb 10.

OxLDL inhibits LPS-induced IFNß expression by Pellino3- and IRAK1/4-dependent
modification of TANK.

Tzieply N(1), Kuhn AM, Morbitzer D, Namgaladze D, Heeg A, Schaefer L, von Knethen
A, Jensen LE, Brüne B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry I/ZAFES, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe-University
Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

In atherosclerosis macrophages contribute to disease progression. After
infiltrating atherosclerotic lesions they accumulate oxLDL (oxidized low density 
lipoproteins) and differentiate into foam cells. During this process inhibition
of TLR4 (Toll-like receptor 4)-dependent IFNß expression occurs. To understand
molecular mechanisms how oxLDL inhibits LPS-induced IFNß expression in
macrophage-derived foam cells, we analyzed the impact of oxLDL on signaling
pathways upstream of IFNß expression. We identified mono-ubiquitination of TANK
(TRAF family member-associated NF<U+03BA>B activator), a scaffold protein of the TRIF
(TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing IFNß)-dependent TLR4-signaling cascade.
Modified TANK inhibits recruitment of TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase 1) to TRAF3 (TNF 
receptor associated factor 3) and the subsequent activation of the transcription 
factor IRF3 (interferon regulatory factor 3). OxLDL stimulates TANK
mono-ubiquitination by subsequent activation of IRAK1/4 (interleukin-1
receptor-associated kinases 1 and 4) and Pellino3 downstream of SR-A1 (scavenger 
receptor-A1). Our observations highlight the regulatory impact of IRAK1/4 and
Pellino3 on the TRIF-dependent TLR4-signaling cascade, which might be of general 
importance for disease conditions associated with macrophage pathologies such as 
atherosclerosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22330071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Hong Kong Med J. 2012 Feb;18 Suppl 2:12-6.

Interferon dysregulation and virus-induced cell death in avian influenza H5N1
virus infections.

Lee DC(1), Law AH, Hui K, Tam AH, Peiris JS, Lau AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong.

1. Hyper-induction of cytokines and chemokines was found in human blood
macrophages infected with the avian influenza H5N1 and H9N2/G1 viruses, as
compared to those infected with human influenza H1N1 virus. 2. IRF3 played a
significant role in the hyperinduction of cytokines including IFN-ß, IFN-<U+03BB>1,IFN-a
subtypes, MCP-1, and TNF-a, and also played a part in subsequent cytokine-induced
cell signalling cascades. 3. Compared with H1N1 viruses, avian influenza viruses 
including H5N1/97 and its precursors triggered a caspase-mediated but delayed
apoptotic response in human macrophages. 4. Therapies that can minimise
immunopathology-associated dysregulation of innate immunity without impairing
effective host defence may be valuable adjuncts to antiviral therapy.

PMID: 22311354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Eur J Immunol. 2012 May;42(5):1304-15. doi: 10.1002/eji.201142125.

Ankrd17 positively regulates RIG-I-like receptor (RLR)-mediated immune signaling.

Wang Y(1), Tong X, Li G, Li J, Deng M, Ye X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Immunology, CAS Key Laboratory of Pathogenic Microbiology
and Immunology, Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 
P R China.

Retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I)-like receptors (RLRs), such as RIG-I,
melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5), and virus-induced signaling
adaptor (VISA), are intracellular molecules that sense diverse viral RNAs and
trigger immune responses. In this study, we demonstrate that the ankyrin repeat
protein ankrd17 interacts with RIG-I, MDA5, and VISA and upregulates RLR-mediated
immune signaling. Overexpression of ankrd17 enhances RLR-mediated activation of
IRF-3 and NF-<U+03BA>B and upregulates the transcription of IFN-ß. It also promotes RLR 
signaling in response to poly (I:C), influenza virus RNA, and Sendai virus.
Consistently, knockdown of ankrd17 impairs RLR signaling. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that ankrd17 enhances the interaction of RIG-I and MDA5 with VISA;
the ankyrin repeat domain of ankrd17 is required for its interaction with RIG-I
as well as for its function in regulating the RLR pathway. Taken together, our
results indicate that ankrd17 is a positive regulator of the RLR signaling
pathway.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22328336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Pediatr Nephrol. 2012 Nov;27(11):2017-29. doi: 10.1007/s00467-011-2089-1. Epub
2012 Feb 12.

Susceptibility to acute pyelonephritis or asymptomatic bacteriuria: host-pathogen
interaction in urinary tract infections.

Ragnarsdóttir B(1), Svanborg C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Section of Microbiology, Immunology and
Glycobiology (MIG), Lund University, Sölvegatan 23, 22362 Lund, Sweden.

Our knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of urinary tract infection (UTI)
pathogenesis has advanced greatly in recent years. In this review, we provide a
general background of UTI pathogenesis, followed by an update on the mechanisms
of UTI susceptibility, with a particular focus on genetic variation affecting
innate immunity. The innate immune response of the host is critically important
in the antibacterial defence mechanisms of the urinary tract, and bacterial
clearance normally proceeds without sequelae. However, slight dysfunctions in
these mechanisms may result in acute disease and tissue destruction. The symptoms
of acute pyelonephritis are caused by the innate immune response, and
inflammation in the urinary tract decreases renal tubular function and may give
rise to renal scarring, especially in paediatric patients. In contrast, in
children with asymptomatic bacteriuria (ABU), bacteria persist without causing
symptoms or pathology. Pathogenic agents trigger a response determined by their
virulence factors, mediating adherence to the urinary tract mucosa, signalling
through Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and activating the defence mechanisms. In ABU 
strains, such virulence factors are mostly not expressed. However, the influence 
of the host on UTI severity cannot be overestimated, and rapid progress is being 
made in clarifying host susceptibility mechanisms. For example, genetic
alterations that reduce TLR4 function are associated with ABU, while
polymorphisms reducing IRF3 or CXCR1 expression are associated with acute
pyelonephritis and an increased risk for renal scarring. It should be plausible
to "individualize" diagnosis and therapy by combining information on bacterial
virulence and the host response.

PMID: 22327887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Hepatology. 2012 Jul;56(1):57-66. doi: 10.1002/hep.25642. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Major vault protein: a virus-induced host factor against viral replication
through the induction of type-I interferon.

Liu S(1), Hao Q, Peng N, Yue X, Wang Y, Chen Y, Wu J, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and College of Life Sciences, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China.

Major vault protein (MVP) is the major constituent of vaults and is involved in
multidrug resistance, nucleocytoplasmic transport, and cell signaling. However,
little is known about the role of MVP during viral infections. In this study,
high levels of MVP were found in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, sera, and
liver tissue from patients infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) relative to
healthy individuals. HCV infections resulted in elevated levels of MVP messenger 
RNA (mRNA) and protein expression in the hepatocyte cell lines Huh7.5.1 and Huh7.
Further studies demonstrated that the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and Sp1
pathways are involved in the induction of MVP expression by HCV. Interestingly,
MVP expression suppressed HCV replication and protein synthesis by way of
induction of type-I interferon mRNA expression and protein secretion. Upon
investigating the mechanisms behind this event, we found that MVP enhanced the
expression of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), but not IRF3. Translocation 
of activated IRF7 and NF-<U+03BA>B from the cytosol to the nucleus was involved in this 
process. Furthermore, vesicular stomatitis virus, influenza A virus, and
enterovirus 71 also induced MVP production, and MVP in turn hampered viral
replication and production.CONCLUSION: MVP is a novel virus-induced host factor
and its expression up-regulates type-I interferon production, leading to cellular
antiviral responses.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22318991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2012 May;32(5):221-9. doi: 10.1089/jir.2011.0068. Epub
2012 Feb 7.

N(pro) of classical swine fever virus prevents type I interferon-mediated priming
of conventional dendritic cells for enhanced interferon-a response.

Hüsser L(1), Ruggli N, Summerfield A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunoprophylaxis, Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.

A hallmark of acute classical swine fever is the high interferon (IFN)-a levels
found in the serum early after infection, followed by an inflammatory cytokine
storm. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) represent the only known cell type
that produces IFN-a upon classical swine fever virus (CSFV) infection in vitro.
In primary target cells of the virus the viral protein N(pro) inhibits the
induction of type I IFN via the degradation of IRF3. We hypothesized that the
early systemic pDC-derived IFN-a response sensitizes immune cells for enhanced
responsiveness and augment cytokine responses after CSFV infection through the
upregulation of IRF7. Therefore, bone marrow-derived granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-induced DCs, were pretreated with
IFN-ß or conditioned medium from CSFV-activated enriched pDC, and expression of
the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-1ß, IL-6, and IFN-a was assessed 
after infection with wild-type CSFV and with an N(pro) mutant [N(pro)(D(136)N)]
unable to interact with IRF3 and IRF7. While type I IFN treatment sensitized the 
DCs for enhanced IFN and cytokine responses after stimulation with influenza
virus, lipopolysaccharide or poly(I):poly(C), this was not observed for CSFV. In 
contrast, the N(pro)(D(136)N) mutant CSFV induced elevated IFN-a responses in
type I IFN-pretreated GM-CSF DCs. These results indicate that CSFV has evolved to
prevent type I IFN sensitization in infected cells through the action of the
N(pro).

PMID: 22313263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(7):3528-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06713-11. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Herpes simplex virus 1 tegument protein US11 downmodulates the RLR signaling
pathway via direct interaction with RIG-I and MDA-5.

Xing J(1), Wang S, Lin R, Mossman KL, Zheng C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Klinische und Molekulare Virologie, Universitätsklinikum,
Friedrich Alexander Universität, Erlangen, Germany.

The interferon (IFN)-mediated antiviral response is a major defense of the host
immune system. In order to complete their life cycle, viruses must modulate host 
IFN-mediated immune responses. Herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) is a large DNA
virus containing more than 80 genes, many of which encode proteins that are
involved in virus-host interactions and show immune modulatory capabilities. In
this study, we demonstrate that the US11 protein, an RNA binding tegument protein
of HSV-1, is a novel antagonist of the beta IFN (IFN-ß) pathway. US11
significantly inhibited Sendai virus (SeV)-induced IFN-ß production, and its
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) binding domain was indispensable for this inhibition 
activity. Additionally, wild-type HSV-1 coinfection showed stronger inhibition
than US11 mutant HSV-1 in SeV-induced IFN-ß production. Coimmunoprecipitation
analysis demonstrated that the US11 protein in HSV-1-infected cells interacts
with endogenous RIG-I and MDA-5 through its C-terminal RNA-binding domain, which 
was RNA independent. Expression of US11 in both transfected and HSV-1-infected
cells interferes with the interaction between MAVS and RIG-I or MDA-5. Finally,
US11 dampens SeV-mediated IRF3 activation. Taken together, the combined data
indicate that HSV-1 US11 binds to RIG-I and MDA-5 and inhibits their downstream
signaling pathway, preventing the production of IFN-ß, which may contribute to
the pathogenesis of HSV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC3302539
PMID: 22301138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Jan 28;18(4):388-92. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i4.388.

No association between IRF3 polymorphism and susceptibility to hepatitis B virus 
infection in Chinese patients.

Yan F(1), Gao YF, Lv F, Zhang TC, Li X, Yin HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui
Medical University, Hefei 230032, Anhui Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the association between three tag single nucleotide
polymorphisms (tagSNPs) in interferon regulatory factors (IRF3) and the genetic
susceptibility to chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection.
METHODS: We performed a case-control study of 985 Chinese cases of chronic HBV
infection and 294 self-limiting HBV-infected individuals as controls. Three
tagSNPs in IRF3 (rs10415576, rs2304204, rs2304206) were genotyped with the
Multiplex SNaPshot technique. The genotype and allele frequencies were calculated
and analyzed.
RESULTS: The three SNPs showed no significant genotype/allele associations with
chronic HBV infection. Overall allele P values were: rs10415576, P = 0.0908, odds
ratio (OR) [95% confidence interval (CI)] = 1.1798 (0.9740-1.4291); rs2304204, P 
= 0.5959, OR (95% CI) = 1.0597 (0.8552-1.3133); rs2304206, P = 0.8372, OR (95%
CI) = 1.0250 (0.8097-1.2976). Overall genotype P values were: rs10415576, P =
0.2106; rs2304204, P = 0.8458; rs2304206, P = 0.8315. There were no statistically
significant differences between patients with chronic HBV infection and controls.
Haplotypes generated by these three SNPs were also not significantly different
between the two groups.
CONCLUSION: The three tagSNPs of IRF3 are not associated with HBV infection in
the Han Chinese population.

PMCID: PMC3261535
PMID: 22294846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Pharmacol Sci. 2012;118(2):161-70. Epub 2012 Jan 27.

Norkurarinol inhibits toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3)-mediated pro-inflammatory
signaling pathway and rotavirus replication.

Oh HM(1), Lee SW, Park MH, Kim MH, Ryu YB, Kim MS, Kim HH, Park KH, Lee WS, Park 
SJ, Rho MC.

Author information: 
(1)Bioindustrial Process Research Center and AI Control Material Research Center,
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Republic of Korea.

This study examined the effect of norkurarinol on the toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3)-mediated signaling pathways and rotavirus replication. Norkurarinol, a
lavandulylated flavanone, was isolated from the roots of Sophora flavescens,
which has been shown to have anti-inflammatory activity. Norkurarinol suppressed 
the NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1 inducible secreted embryonic alkaline phosphatase (SEAP)
activity induced by poly(I:C), TLR3 ligand, in THP1-Blue-CD14 cells with IC(50)
values of 20.9 µM. Norkurarinol also significantly suppressed the mRNA expression
of pro-inflammatory and adhesive molecules induced by poly(I:C) and rotavirus
infection. Pretreatment of norkurarinol blocked the NF-<U+03BA>B and AP-1 signaling
pathway and the phosphorylation of MAPKs induced by poly(I:C). On the other hand,
norkurarinol increased the level of IRF3 phosphorylation and IFNß expression in a
dose-dependent manner. Moreover, norkurarinol inhibited the rotavirus-induced
cytopathic effects. These results suggest that norkurarinol can modulate the
TLR3-mediated inflammatory responses and rotavirus replication.

PMID: 22293288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30166. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030166. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

LPS regulates SOCS2 transcription in a type I interferon dependent
autocrine-paracrine loop.

Hu J(1), Lou D, Carow B, Winerdal ME, Rottenberg M, Wikström AC, Norstedt G,
Winqvist O.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Immunology Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Recent studies suggest that SOCS2 is involved in the regulation of TLR signaling.
In this study, we found that the expression of SOCS2 is regulated in human
monocyte-derived DC by ligands stimulating TLR2, 3, 4, 5, 8 and 9 signaling.
SOCS2 induction by LPS was dependent on the type I IFN regulated transcription
factors IRF1 and IRF3 as shown by using silencing RNAs for IRFs. Blocking
endogenous type I IFN signaling, by neutralizing antibodies to the receptor
IFNAR2, abolished SOCS2 mRNA expression after TLR4 stimulation. Transcription
factors STAT3, 5 and 6 displayed putative binding sites in the promoter regions
of the human SOCS2 gene. Subsequent silencing experiments further supported that 
STAT3 and STAT5 are involved in LPS induced SOCS2 regulation. In mice we show
that SOCS2 mRNA induction is 45% lower in bone marrow derived macrophages derived
from MyD88(-/-) mice, and do not increase in BMMs from IRF3(-/-) mice after BCG
infection. In conclusion, our results suggest that TLR4 signaling indirectly
increases SOCS2 in late phase mainly via the production of endogenous type I IFN,
and that subsequent IFN receptor signaling activates SOCS2 via STAT3 and STAT5.

PMCID: PMC3264591
PMID: 22291912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Med Sci (Paris). 2012 Jan;28(1):31-3. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2012281011. Epub 2012
Jan 27.

[Host DNA, an immune system's ally in alum vaccination].

[Article in French]

Marichal T(1), Bureau F, Desmet CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire Et Moléculaire, GIGA-Recherche,
Université de Liège, Avenue de l'Hôpital 1, B-4000 Liège, Belgique.
t.marichal@ulg.ac.be

PMID: 22289825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. FEBS Lett. 2012 Mar 23;586(6):705-10. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.01.016. Epub
2012 Jan 26.

LY294002 inhibits TLR3/4-mediated IFN-ß production via inhibition of IRF3
activation with a PI3K-independent mechanism.

Zhao W(1), Qi J, Wang L, Zhang M, Wang P, Gao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Shandong University Medical School, Jinan, Shandong 
250012, PR China.

TLR3 and TLR4 utilize adaptor TRIF to activate interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3), resulting in interferon ß (IFN-ß) production to mediate anti-viral
infection. In this report, we analyzed the effect of two known
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitors LY294002 and wortmannin on LPS-
and poly(I:C)-induced IFN-ß production in peritoneal macrophages. LY294002
inhibited LPS- and poly(I:C)-induced IFN-ß transcription and secretion. In
contrast, wortmannin could not inhibit IFN-ß production. Furthermore, IRF3
transcriptional activation and binding to IFN-ß promoter were found to be
inhibited by LY294002. Therefore, our findings demonstrate LY294002 negatively
regulates LPS- and poly(I:C)-induced IFN-ß production through inhibition of IRF3 
activation in a PI3K-independent manner.

Copyright Â© 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22285490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(7):3787-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06307-11. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

Adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 1 (ADAR1) suppresses the induction of
interferon by measles virus.

Li Z(1), Okonski KM, Samuel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara, California, USA.

ADAR1, the interferon (IFN)-inducible adenosine deaminase acting on RNA,
catalyzes the C-6 deamination of adenosine (A) to produce inosine (I) in RNA
substrates with a double-stranded character. Because double-stranded RNA is a
known inducer of IFN, we tested the role of ADAR1 in IFN induction following
virus infection. HeLa cells made stably deficient in ADAR1 (ADAR1(kd)) were
compared to vector control (CON(kd)) and protein kinase PKR-deficient (PKR(kd))
cells for IFN-ß induction following infection with either parental (wild-type
[WT]) recombinant Moraten vaccine strain measles virus (MV) or isogenic knockout 
mutants deficient for either V (V(ko)) or C (C(ko)) protein expression. We
observed potent IFN-ß transcript induction in ADAR1(kd) cells by all three
viruses; in contrast, in ADAR1-sufficient CON(kd) cells, only the C(ko) mutant
virus was an effective inducer and the IFN-ß RNA induction was amplified by PKR. 
The enhanced IFN-ß transcript-inducing capacity of the WT and V(ko) viruses seen 
in ADAR1-deficient cells correlated with the enhanced activation of PKR, IFN
regulatory factor IRF3, and activator of transcription ATF2, reaching levels
similar to those seen in C(ko) virus-infected cells. However, the level of IFN-ß 
protein produced was not proportional to the level of IFN-ß RNA but rather
correlated inversely with the level of activated PKR. These results suggest that 
ADAR1 functions as an important suppressor of MV-mediated responses, including
the activation of PKR and IRF3 and the induction of IFN-ß RNA. Our findings
further implicate a balanced interplay between PKR and ADAR1 in modulating IFN-ß 
protein production following virus infection.

PMCID: PMC3302501
PMID: 22278222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Gastroenterology. 2012 Apr;142(4):978-88. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.12.055. Epub
2012 Jan 13.

HCV infection induces a unique hepatic innate immune response associated with
robust production of type III interferons.

Thomas E(1), Gonzalez VD, Li Q, Modi AA, Chen W, Noureddin M, Rotman Y, Liang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases/National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Polymorphisms in the IL28B gene have been associated with
clearance of hepatitis C virus (HCV), indicating a role for type III interferons 
(IFNs) in HCV infection. Little is known about the function of type III IFNs in
intrinsic antiviral innate immunity.
METHODS: We used in vivo and in vitro models to characterize the role of the type
III IFNs in HCV infection and analyzed gene expression in liver biopsy samples
from HCV-infected chimpanzees and patients. Messenger RNA and protein expression 
were studied in HCV-infected hepatoma cell lines and primary human hepatocytes.
RESULTS: HCV infection of primary human hepatocytes induced production of
chemokines and type III IFNs, including interleukin (IL)-28, and led to
expression of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Chimpanzees infected with HCV showed
rapid induction of hepatic type III IFN, associated with up-regulation of ISGs
and minimal induction of type I IFNs. In liver biopsy specimens from HCV-infected
patients, hepatic expression of IL-28 correlated with levels of ISGs but not of
type I IFNs. HCV infection produced extensive changes with gene expression in
addition to ISGs in primary human hepatocytes. The induction of type III IFNs is 
regulated by IFN regulatory factor 3 and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B. Type III IFNs
up-regulate ISGs with a different kinetic profile than type 1 IFNs and induce a
distinct set of genes, which might account for their functional differences.
CONCLUSIONS: HCV infection results predominantly in induction of type III IFNs in
livers of humans and chimpanzees; the level of induction correlates with hepatic 
levels of ISGs. These findings might account for the association among IL-28,
level of ISGs, and recovery from HCV infection and provide a therapeutic strategy
for patients who do not respond to IFN therapy.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3435150
PMID: 22248663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Adv Immunol. 2012;113:135-56. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-394590-7.00002-6.

Innate immune pathways triggered by Listeria monocytogenes and their role in the 
induction of cell-mediated immunity.

Witte CE(1), Archer KA, Rae CS, Sauer JD, Woodward JJ, Portnoy DA.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Group in Microbiology, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, 
California, USA.

Acquired cell-mediated immunity to Listeria monocytogenes is induced by infection
with live, replicating bacteria that grow in the host cell cytosol, whereas
killed bacteria, or those trapped in a phagosome, fail to induce protective
immunity. In this chapter, we focus on how L. monocytogenes is sensed by the
innate immune system, with the presumption that innate immunity affects the
development of acquired immunity. Infection by L. monocytogenes induces three
innate immune pathways: an MyD88-dependent pathway emanating from a phagosome
leading to expression of inflammatory cytokines; a STING/IRF3-dependent pathway
emanating from the cytosol leading to the expression of IFN-ß and coregulated
genes; and very low levels of a Caspase-1-dependent, AIM2-dependent inflammasome 
pathway resulting in proteolytic activation and secretion of IL-1ß and IL-18 and 
pyroptotic cell death. Using a combination of genetics and biochemistry, we
identified the listerial ligand that activates the STING/IRF3 pathway as secreted
cyclic diadenosine monophosphate, a newly discovered conserved bacterial
signaling molecule. We also identified L. monocytogenes mutants that caused
robust inflammasome activation due to bacteriolysis in the cytosol, release of
DNA, and activation of the AIM2 inflammasome. A strain was constructed that
ectopically expressed and secreted a fusion protein containing Legionella
pneumophila flagellin that robustly activated the Nlrc4-dependent inflammasome
and was highly attenuated in mice, also in an Nlrc4-dependent manner.
Surprisingly, this strain was a poor inducer of adaptive immunity, suggesting
that inflammasome activation is not necessary to induce cell-mediated immunity
and may even be detrimental under some conditions. To the best of our knowledge, 
no single innate immune pathway is necessary to mount a robust acquired immune
response to L. monocytogenes infection.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22244582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Mucosal Immunol. 2012 Mar;5(2):173-83. doi: 10.1038/mi.2011.63. Epub 2012 Jan 11.

Resistance to HSV-1 infection in the epithelium resides with the novel innate
sensor, IFI-16.

Conrady CD(1), Zheng M, Fitzgerald KA, Liu C, Carr DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are innate sentinels required for clearance of
bacterial and fungal infections of the cornea, but their role in viral immunity
is currently unknown. We report that TLR signaling is expendable in herpes
simplex virus (HSV)-1 containment as depicted by plaque assays of knockout mice
(MyD88(-/-), Trif(-/-) and MyD88(-/-) Trif(-/-) double knockout) resembling
wild-type controls. To identify the key sentinel in viral recognition of the
cornea, in vivo knockdown of the DNA sensor IFI-16/p204 in the corneal epithelium
was performed and resulted in a loss of IFN-regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) nuclear
translocation, interferon-a production, and viral containment. The sensor seems
to have a similar function in other HSV clinically relevant sites such as the
vaginal mucosa in which a loss of p204/IFI-16 results in significantly more HSV-2
shedding. Thus, we have identified an IRF-3-dependent, IRF-7- and TLR-independent
innate sensor responsible for HSV containment at the site of acute infection.

PMCID: PMC3288395
PMID: 22236996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29291. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029291. Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Genomic HIV RNA induces innate immune responses through RIG-I-dependent sensing
of secondary-structured RNA.

Berg RK(1), Melchjorsen J, Rintahaka J, Diget E, Søby S, Horan KA, Gorelick RJ,
Matikainen S, Larsen CS, Ostergaard L, Paludan SR, Mogensen TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Aarhus University Hospital-Skejby, Aarhus, 
Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Innate immune responses have recently been appreciated to play an
important role in the pathogenesis of HIV infection. Whereas inadequate innate
immune sensing of HIV during acute infection may contribute to failure to control
and eradicate infection, persistent inflammatory responses later during infection
contribute in driving chronic immune activation and development of
immunodeficiency. However, knowledge on specific HIV PAMPs and cellular PRRs
responsible for inducing innate immune responses remains sparse.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we demonstrate a major role for RIG-I and the
adaptor protein MAVS in induction of innate immune responses to HIV genomic RNA. 
We found that secondary structured HIV-derived RNAs induced a response similar to
genomic RNA. In primary human peripheral blood mononuclear cells and primary
human macrophages, HIV RNA induced expression of IFN-stimulated genes, whereas
only low levels of type I IFN and tumor necrosis factor a were produced.
Furthermore, secondary structured HIV-derived RNA activated pathways to NF-<U+03BA>B,
MAP kinases, and IRF3 and co-localized with peroxisomes, suggesting a role for
this organelle in RIG-I-mediated innate immune sensing of HIV RNA.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results establish RIG-I as an innate immune
sensor of cytosolic HIV genomic RNA with secondary structure, thereby expanding
current knowledge on HIV molecules capable of stimulating the innate immune
system.

PMCID: PMC3250430
PMID: 22235281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 Dec 30;8:187. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-187.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 plays an anti-inflammatory role in microglia by
activating the PI3K/Akt pathway.

Tarassishin L(1), Suh HS, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA. 
leonid.tarassishin@einstein.yu.edu

BACKGROUND: Microglia are the principal cells involved in the innate immune
response in the CNS. Activated microglia produce a number of proinflammatory
cytokines implicated in neurotoxicity but they also are a major source of
anti-inflammatory cytokines, antiviral proteins and growth factors. Therefore, an
immune therapy aiming at suppressing the proinflammatory phenotype while
enhancing the anti-inflammatory, growth promoting phenotype would be of great
benefit. In the current study, we tested the hypothesis that interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a transcription factor required for the induction of 
IFNß following TLR3 or TLR4 activation, is critical to the microglial phenotype
change from proinflammatory to anti-inflammatory, and that this phenotype change 
can be greatly facilitated by IRF3 gene transfer.
METHODS: Cultures of primary human fetal microglia were transduced with IRF3
using recombinant adenovirus (Ad-IRF3) and subjected to microarray analysis,
real-time PCR, immunoblotting and ELISA to determine inflammatory gene
expression. Two different types of immune stimuli were tested, the TLR ligands,
poly IC (PIC) and LPS, and the proinflammatory cytokines, IL-1/IFN<U+03B3>. In addition,
the role of the PI3K/Akt pathway was examined by use of a pharmacological
inhibitor, LY294002.
RESULTS: Our results show that Ad-IRF3 suppressed proinflammatory genes (IL-1a,
IL-1ß, TNFa, IL-6, IL-8 and CXCL1) and enhanced anti-inflammatory genes (IL-1
receptor antagonist, IL-10 and IFNß) in microglia, regardless of the cell stimuli
applied. Furthermore, Ad-IRF3 activated Akt, and LY294002 reversed the effects of
Ad-IRF3 on microglial inflammatory gene expression. pAkt was critical in LPS- or 
PIC-induced production of IL-10 and IL-1ra. Significantly, microglial IFNß
protein production was also dependent on pAkt and required both Ad-IRF3 and
immunological stimuli (PIC > IL-1/IFN<U+03B3>). pAkt played much less prominent and
variable roles in microglial proinflammatory gene expression. This
anti-inflammatory promoting role of PI3K/Akt appeared to be specific to
microglia, since astrocyte proinflammatory gene expression (as well as IFNß
expression) required PI3K/Akt.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show a novel anti-inflammatory role for the PI3K/Akt
signaling pathway in microglia. They further suggest that IRF3 gene therapy could
facilitate the microglial phenotype switch from proinflammatory ("M1-like") to
anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory ("M2-like"), in part, by augmenting the
level of pAkt.

PMCID: PMC3259120
PMID: 22208359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Dec;5(12):e1420. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001420. Epub
2011 Dec 20.

Activation of the innate immune response against DENV in normal non-transformed
human fibroblasts.

Bustos-Arriaga J(1), García-Machorro J, León-Juárez M, García-Cordero J,
Santos-Argumedo L, Flores-Romo L, Méndez-Cruz AR, Juárez-Delgado FJ,
Cedillo-Barrón L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biomedicina Molecular Centro de Investigación y de Estudios
Avanzados, México Distrito Federal, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: When mosquitoes infected with DENV are feeding, the proboscis must
traverse the epidermis several times ("probing") before reaching a blood vessel
in the dermis. During this process, the salivary glands release the virus, which 
is likely to interact first with cells of the various epidermal and dermal
layers, cells which could be physiologically relevant to DENV infection and
replication in humans. However, important questions are whether more abundant
non-hematopoietic cells such as fibroblasts become infected, and whether they
play any role in antiviral innate immunity in the very early stages of infection,
or even if they might be used by DENV as primary replication cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Fibroblasts freshly released from healthy skin
and infected 12 hours after their isolation show a positive signal for DENV. In
addition, when primary skin fibroblast cultures were established and subsequently
infected, we showed DENV-2 antigen-positive intracellular signal at 24 hours and 
48 hours post-infection. Moreover, the fibroblasts showed productive infection in
a conventional plaque assay. The skin fibroblasts infected with DENV-2 underwent 
potent signaling through both TLR3 and RIG- 1, but not Mda5, triggering
up-regulation of IFNß, TNFa, defensin 5 (HB5) and ß defensin 2 (HßD2). In
addition, DENV infected fibroblasts showed increased nuclear translocation of
interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), but not interferon regulatory factor
7 (IRF7), when compared with mock-infected fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In this work, we demonstrated the high susceptibility
to DENV infection by primary fibroblasts from normal human skin, both in situ and
in vitro. Our results suggest that these cells may contribute to the
pro-inflammatory and anti-viral microenvironment in the early stages of
interaction with DENV-2. Furthermore, the data suggest that fibroblast may also
be used as a primary site of DENV replication and provide viral particles that
may contribute to subsequent viral dissemination.

PMCID: PMC3243703
PMID: 22206025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jan 10;109(2):600-5. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1114232109.
Epub 2011 Dec 21.

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) and survivin induction
by varicella-zoster virus promote replication and skin pathogenesis.

Sen N(1), Che X, Rajamani J, Zerboni L, Sung P, Ptacek J, Arvin AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA
94305, USA. nandinis@stanford.edu

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) is a human a-herpesvirus that causes varicella
(chickenpox) during primary infection and zoster (shingles) upon reactivation.
Like other viruses, VZV must subvert the intrinsic antiviral defenses of
differentiated human cells to produce progeny virions. Accordingly, VZV inhibits 
the activation of the cellular transcription factors IFN regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) and signal transducers and activators of transcription 1 (STAT1), thereby 
downregulating antiviral factors, including IFNs. Conversely, in this study, we
found that VZV triggers STAT3 phosphorylation in cells infected in vitro and in
human skin xenografts in SCID mice in vivo and that STAT3 activation induces the 
anti-apoptotic protein survivin. Small-molecule inhibitors of STAT3
phosphorylation and survivin restrict VZV replication in vitro, and VZV infection
of skin xenografts in vivo is markedly impaired by the administration of the
phospho-STAT3 inhibitor S3I-201. STAT3 and survivin are required for malignant
transformation caused by <U+03B3>-herpesviruses, such as Kaposi's sarcoma virus. We show
that STAT3 activation is also critical for VZV, a nononcogenic herpesvirus, via a
survivin-dependent mechanism. Furthermore, STAT3 activation is critical for the
life cycle of the virus because VZV skin infection is necessary for viral
transmission and persistence in the human population. Therefore, we conclude that
takeover of this major cell-signaling pathway is necessary, independent of cell
transformation, for herpesvirus pathogenesis and that STAT3 activation and
up-regulation of survivin is a common mechanism important for the pathogenesis of
lytic as well as tumorigenic herpesviruses.

PMCID: PMC3258638
PMID: 22190485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Transl Med. 2011 Dec 21;9:219. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-9-219.

TLR4 dependent heparan sulphate-induced pancreatic inflammatory response is
IRF3-mediated.

Akbarshahi H(1), Axelsson JB, Said K, Malmström A, Fischer H, Andersson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University, BMC, D12, SE-221 84
Lund, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Degraded extracellular matrix can stimulate the innate immune system 
via the Toll-Like Receptor-4 (TLR4). In the pancreas, syndecan-anchored heparan
sulphate (HS) on the ductal epithelium can be cleaved off its protein cores by
the proteases (trypsin and elastase) and potentially activate TLR4 signalling.
METHODS: To investigate this signalling event, a low sulphated HS (500 µg/ml) was
infused into the biliary-pancreatic duct of C57BL/6J wild-type mice. Phosphate
buffered saline (PBS) and lipopolysaccharide (LPS) were used as negative and
positive controls, respectively. Mice were sacrificed after 1, 3, 6, 9, and 48
hours and tissues were analysed for neutrophil and cytokine contents. In order to
study the TLR4 signalling pathway of HS in the pancreas, genetically engineered
mice lacking TLR4, Myeloid Differentiation primary response gene (88) (MyD88) or 
Interferon Regulatory Factor 3 (IRF3) were subjected to pancreatic infusion of
HS.
RESULTS: Neutrophil sequestration and corresponding myeloperoxidase (MPO)
activity in the pancreas were increased 9 hours following HS challenge. In
wild-type mice, the monocyte chemoattractant protein-1(MCP-1) increased at 3
hours after infusion, while RANTES increased after 9 hours.TLR4, MyD88, and IRF3 
knockout mice showed an abrogated neutrophil recruitment and myeloperoxidase
activity in the HS group, while the LPS response was only abolished in TLR4 and
MyD88 knockouts.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study show that HS is capable of initiating a
TLR4-dependent innate immune response in the pancreas which is distinctly
different from that induced by LPS. This inflammatory response was mediated
predominantly through IRF3- dependent pathway. Release of HS into the pancreatic 
duct may be one important mediator in the pancreatic ductal defence.

PMCID: PMC3286488
PMID: 22188870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Glia. 2011 Dec;59(12):1911-22. doi: 10.1002/glia.21233.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 inhibits astrocyte inflammatory gene expression
through suppression of the proinflammatory miR-155 and miR-155*.

Tarassishin L(1), Loudig O, Bauman A, Shafit-Zagardo B, Suh HS, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA. 
leonid.tarassishin@einstein.yu.edu

Astrocytes, together with microglia and macrophages, participate in innate
inflammatory responses in the CNS. Although inflammatory mediators such as
interferons generated by astrocytes may be critical in the defense of the CNS,
sustained unopposed cytokine signaling could result in harmful consequences.
Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is a transcription factor required for IFNß
production and antiviral immunity. Most cells express low levels of IRF3 protein,
and the transcriptional mechanism that upregulates IRF3 expression is not known. 
In this study, we explored the consequence of adenovirus-mediated IRF3 gene
transfer (Ad-IRF3) in primary human astrocytes. We show that IRF3 transgene
expression suppresses proinflammatory cytokine gene expression upon challenge
with IL-1/IFN<U+03B3> and alters astrocyte activation phenotype from a proinflammatory
to an anti-inflammatory one, akin to an M1-M2 switch in macrophages. This was
accompanied by the rescue of neurons from cytokine-induced death in
glial-neuronal co-cultures. Furthermore, Ad-IRF3 suppressed the expression of
microRNA-155 and its star-form partner miR-155*, immunoregulatory miRNAs highly
expressed in multiple sclerosis lesions. Astrocyte miR-155/miR155* were induced
by cytokines and TLR ligands with a distinct hierarchy and involved in
proinflammatory cytokine gene induction by targeting suppressor of cytokine
signaling 1, a negative regulator of cytokine signaling and potentially other
factors. Our results demonstrate a novel proinflammatory role for
miR-155/miR-155* in human astrocytes and suggest that IRF3 can suppress
neuroinflammation through regulating immunomodulatory miRNA expression. © 2011
Wiley-Liss, Inc.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3241213
PMID: 22170100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Glia. 2012 Mar;60(3):414-21. doi: 10.1002/glia.22275. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Astrogliosis involves activation of retinoic acid-inducible gene-like signaling
in the innate immune response after spinal cord injury.

de Rivero Vaccari JP(1), Minkiewicz J, Wang X, De Rivero Vaccari JC, German R,
Marcillo AE, Dietrich WD, Keane RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis,
Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida, USA.
JdeRivero@med.miami.edu

Spinal cord injury (SCI) induces a glial response in which astrocytes become
activated and produce inflammatory mediators. The molecular basis for regulation 
of glial-innate immune responses remains poorly understood. Here, we examined the
activation of retinoic acid-inducible gene (RIG)-like receptors (RLRs) and their 
involvement in regulating inflammation after SCI. We show that astrocytes express
two intracellular RLRs: RIG-I and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5. SCI
and stretch injury of cultured astrocytes stimulated RLR signaling as determined 
by phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) leading to production
of type I interferons (IFNs). RLR signaling stimulation with synthetic
ribonucleic acid resulted in RLR activation, phosphorylation of IRF3, and
increased expression of glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) and vimentin, two 
hallmarks of reactive astrocytes. Moreover, mitochondrial E3 ubiquitin protein
ligase 1, an RLR inhibitor, decreased production of GFAP and vimentin after RIG-I
signaling stimulation. Our findings identify a role for RLR signaling and type I 
IFN in regulating astrocyte innate immune responses after SCI.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3265608
PMID: 22161971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2012 Feb 3;287(6):3704-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C111.328559. Epub 2011
Dec 12.

Phospholipase C<U+03B3>-2 and intracellular calcium are required for
lipopolysaccharide-induced Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) endocytosis and interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activation.

Chiang CY(1), Veckman V, Limmer K, David M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego,
California 92093, USA.

Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is unique among the TLRs in its use of multiple
adaptor proteins leading to activation of both the interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathways. Previous work has demonstrated
that TLR4 initiates NF-<U+03BA>B activation from the plasma membrane, but that
subsequent TLR4 translocation to the endosomes is required for IRF3 activation.
Here we have characterized several components of the signaling pathway that
governs TLR4 translocation and subsequent IRF3 activation. We find that
phospholipase C <U+03B3>2 (PLC<U+03B3>2) accounts for LPS-induced inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
(IP(3)) production and subsequent calcium (Ca(2+)) release. Blockage of PLC<U+03B3>2
function by inhibitors or knockdown of PLC<U+03B3>2 expression by siRNAs in RAW 264.7
macrophages lead to reduced IRF3, but enhanced NF-<U+03BA>B activation. In addition,
bone marrow-derived macrophages from PLC<U+03B3>2-deficient mice showed impaired IRF3
phosphorylation and expression of IRF3-regulated genes after LPS stimulation.
Using cell fractionation, we show that PLC<U+03B3>2-IP(3)-Ca(2+) signaling cascade is
required for TLR4 endocytosis following LPS stimulation. In conclusion, our
results describe a novel role of the PLC<U+03B3>2-IP(3)-Ca(2+) cascade in the
LPS-induced innate immune response pathway where release of intracellular Ca(2+) 
mediates TLR4 trafficking and subsequent activation of IRF3.

PMCID: PMC3281733
PMID: 22158869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Virus Res. 2012 Feb;163(2):660-6. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.11.020. Epub 2011 
Dec 4.

Formation of membrane-defined compartments by tick-borne encephalitis virus
contributes to the early delay in interferon signaling.

Miorin L(1), Albornoz A, Baba MM, D'Agaro P, Marcello A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, The International Center for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, Padriciano, Trieste 34149, Italy.

Interferons are key mediators of the innate antiviral response of the cell
against viral infections. Viruses on the other hand have evolved various
strategies to delay innate immunity in order to establish a productive infection.
In this work we analyzed the pathway of interferon induction by the tick-borne
encephalitis virus. We initially observed a consistent delay of interferon
induction following virus replication. RIG-I, but not MDA5, and nuclear
translocation of IRF3 were eventually required for interferon activation pointing
to a defect in pattern recognition receptor's signaling. However, viral proteins 
could not directly inhibit the pathway suggesting an indirect mechanism. We found
that dsRNA replication intermediates and replicated viral RNA localized to
membrane-defined perinuclear compartments that resisted RNAse treatment. Thus,
initial escape from innate immunity involved the formation of replication
vesicles that may function as a barrier to pattern recognition receptors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22155022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Virol J. 2011 Dec 8;8:526. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-8-526.

Rotavirus nonstructural protein 1 antagonizes innate immune response by
interacting with retinoic acid inducible gene I.

Qin L(1), Ren L, Zhou Z, Lei X, Chen L, Xue Q, Liu X, Wang J, Hung T.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Genetic Engineering, Institute 
of Pathogen Biology, Peking Union Medical College & Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, # 9 Dong Dan San Tiao, Dongcheng District, Beijing 100730, PR China.

BACKGROUND: The nonstructural protein 1 (NSP1) of rotavirus has been reported to 
block interferon (IFN) signaling by mediating proteasome-dependent degradation of
IFN-regulatory factors (IRFs) and (or) the ß-transducin repeat containing protein
(ß-TrCP). However, in addition to these targets, NSP1 may subvert innate immune
responses via other mechanisms.
RESULTS: The NSP1 of rotavirus OSU strain as well as the IRF3 binding domain
truncated NSP1 of rotavirus SA11 strain are unable to degrade IRFs, but can still
inhibit host IFN response, indicating that NSP1 may target alternative host
factor(s) other than IRFs. Overexpression of NSP1 can block IFN-ß promoter
activation induced by the retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I), but does not
inhibit IFN-ß activation induced by the mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein
(MAVS), indicating that NSP1 may target RIG-I. Immunoprecipitation experiments
show that NSP1 interacts with RIG-I independent of IRF3 binding domain. In
addition, NSP1 induces down-regulation of RIG-I in a proteasome-independent way.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that inhibition of RIG-I mediated type I
IFN responses by NSP1 may contribute to the immune evasion of rotavirus.

PMCID: PMC3254192
PMID: 22152002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28289. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028289. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

Genetic control of the variable innate immune response to asymptomatic
bacteriuria.

Grönberg-Hernández J(1), Sundén F, Connolly J, Svanborg C, Wullt B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Glycobiology, Institute of
Laboratory Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(1):doi/10.1371/annotation/ab823a8e-01b1-48b8-8b2a-0993d805fc50. 
Hernández, Jenny Grönberg [corrected to Grönberg-Hernández, Jenny].

The severity of urinary tract infection (UTI) reflects the quality and magnitude 
of the host response. While strong local and systemic innate immune activation
occurs in patients with acute pyelonephritis, the response to asymptomatic
bacteriuria (ABU) is low. The immune response repertoire in ABU has not been
characterized, due to the inherent problem to distinguish bacterial differences
from host-determined variation. In this study, we investigated the host response 
to ABU and genetic variants affecting innate immune signaling and UTI
susceptibility. Patients were subjected to therapeutic urinary tract inoculation 
with E. coli 83972 to ensure that they were exposed to the same E. coli strain.
The innate immune response repertoire was characterized in urine samples,
collected from each patient before and after inoculation with bacteria or PBS, if
during the placebo arm of the study. Long-term E. coli 83972 ABU was established 
in 23 participants, who were followed for up to twelve months and the innate
immune response was quantified in 233 urine samples. Neutrophil numbers increased
in all but two patients and in an extended urine cytokine/chemokine analysis (31 
proteins), the chemoattractants IL-8 and GRO-a, RANTES, Eotaxin-1 and MCP-1, the 
T cell chemoattractant and antibacterial peptide IP-10, inflammatory regulators
IL-1-a and sIL-1RA and the T lymphocyte/dendritic cell product sIL-2Ra were
detected and variably increased, compared to sterile samples. IL-6, which is
associated with symptomatic UTI, remained low and numerous specific immune
mediators were not detected. The patients were also genotyped for UTI-associated 
IRF3 and TLR4 promoter polymorphisms. Patients with ABU associated TLR4
polymorphisms had low neutrophil numbers, IL-6, IP-10, MCP-1 and sIL-2Ra
concentrations. Patients with the ABU-associated IRF3 genotype had lower
neutrophils, IL-6 and MCP-1 responses than the remaining group. The results
suggest that the host-specific, low immune response to ABU mainly includes innate
immune mediators and that host genetics directly influence the magnitude of this 
response.

PMCID: PMC3225390
PMID: 22140570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28125. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028125. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

TRAF6 and IRF7 control HIV replication in macrophages.

Sirois M(1), Robitaille L, Allary R, Shah M, Woelk CH, Estaquier J, Corbeil J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Infectious Disease Research Center, CHUL
Research Center and Laval University, Québec, Québec, Canada.

The innate immune system recognizes virus infection and evokes antiviral
responses which include producing type I interferons (IFNs). The induction of IFN
provides a crucial mechanism of antiviral defense by upregulating
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) that restrict viral replication. ISGs inhibit 
the replication of many viruses by acting at different steps of their viral
cycle. Specifically, IFN treatment prior to in vitro human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection stops or significantly delays HIV-1 production indicating that
potent inhibitory factors are generated. We report that HIV-1 infection of
primary human macrophages decreases tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor 6 (TRAF6) and virus-induced signaling adaptor (VISA) expression, which are
both components of the IFN signaling pathway controlling viral replication.
Knocking down the expression of TRAF6 in macrophages increased HIV-1 replication 
and augmented the expression of IRF7 but not IRF3. Suppressing VISA had no impact
on viral replication. Overexpression of IRF7 resulted in enhanced viral
replication while knocking down IRF7 expression in macrophages significantly
reduced viral output. These findings are the first demonstration that TRAF6 can
regulate HIV-1 production and furthermore that expression of IRF7 promotes HIV-1 
replication.

PMCID: PMC3225375
PMID: 22140520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Immunol. 2012 Jan 1;188(1):358-66. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102079. Epub 2011 Nov
30.

UXT-V1 facilitates the formation of MAVS antiviral signalosome on mitochondria.

Huang Y(1), Liu H, Ge R, Zhou Y, Lou X, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China.

Virus infection induces the MAVS-TNFR-associated factor (TRAF) 3 signaling axis
on mitochondria. It remains to elucidate the corresponding regulatory processes. 
In this study, we identify UXT-V1 as a novel TRAF3-binding protein. UXT-V1 is
critical for the virus-induced activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IFN regulatory factor 3.
Reduction of UXT-V1 impairs the induction of IFN-ß and attenuates the host
antiviral responses. The N-terminal TRAF-binding motif of UXT-V1 binds to the
C-terminal TRAF domain of TRAF3, thus facilitating the interaction between TRAF3 
and MAVS. Notably, TRAF3 and TNFR-associated death domain protein are recruited
onto mitochondria upon virus infection. These translocations are blocked when
knocking down UXT-V1. Thus, UXT-V1 represents a novel integral component of the
MAVS signalosome on mitochondria, mediating the innate antiviral signal
transduction.

PMID: 22131337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(3):1670-82. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06550-11. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Two microRNAs encoded within the bovine herpesvirus 1 latency-related gene
promote cell survival by interacting with RIG-I and stimulating NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
transcription and beta interferon signaling pathways.

Silva LF(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, Morrison Life Science Center, University of Nebraska, Lincoln,
Nebraska, USA.

Sensory neurons latently infected with bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) abundantly
express latency-related (LR) RNA (LR-RNA). Genetic evidence indicates that LR
protein expression plays a role in the latency-reactivation cycle, because an LR 
mutant virus that contains three stop codons downstream of the first open reading
frame (ORF2) does not reactivate from latency. The LR mutant virus induces higher
levels of apoptotic neurons in trigeminal ganglia, and ORF2 interferes with
apoptosis. Although ORF2 is important for the latency-reactivation cycle, other
factors encoded by the LR gene are believed to play a supportive role. For
example, two microRNAs (miRNAs) encoded within the LR gene are expressed in
trigeminal ganglia of latently infected calves. These miRNAs interfere with bICP0
protein expression and productive infection in transient-transfection assays. In 
this report, we provide evidence that the two LR miRNAs cooperate with poly(I·C),
interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), or IRF7 to stimulate beta interferon
(IFN-ß) promoter activity. Both miRNAs also stimulated IFN-ß promoter activity
and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B)-dependent transcription when cotransfected
with a plasmid expressing retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I). In the presence
of RIG-I, the LR miRNAs enhanced survival of mouse neuroblastoma cells, which
correlated with activation of the antiapoptosis cellular transcription factor,
NF-<U+03BA>B. Immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that both miRNAs stably interact
with RIG-I, suggesting that this interaction directly stimulates the RIG-I
signaling pathway. In summary, the results of these studies suggest that
interactions between LR miRNAs and RIG-I promote the establishment and
maintenance of latency by enhancing survival of infected neurons.

PMCID: PMC3264334
PMID: 22130548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 May;64(5):1601-9. doi: 10.1002/art.33494.

Enhanced interferon regulatory factor 3 binding to the interleukin-23p19 promoter
correlates with enhanced interleukin-23 expression in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Smith S(1), Gabhann JN, Higgs R, Stacey K, Wahren-Herlenius M, Espinosa A, Totaro
MG, Sica A, Ball E, Bell A, Johnston J, Browne P, O'Neill L, Kearns G, Jefferies 
CA.

Author information: 
(1)Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the role of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) in the
regulation of interleukin-23 (IL-23) production in patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: Bone marrow-derived macrophages were isolated from both wild-type and
IRF3(-/-) C57BL/6 mice. These cells were stimulated with the Toll-like receptor 3
(TLR-3) agonist poly(I-C), and IL-23p19 cytokine levels were analyzed by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. IRF-3 binding to the IL-23p19 gene promoter
region in monocytes from patients with SLE and healthy control subjects was
analyzed by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay. Luciferase reporter gene 
assays were performed to identify key drivers of IL-23p19 promoter activity.
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK-1) protein levels were determined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: ChIP assays demonstrated that IRF-3 was stably bound to the human
IL-23p19 promoter in monocytes; this association increased following TLR-3
stimulation. Patients with SLE demonstrated increased levels of IRF-3 bound to
the IL-23p19 promoter compared with control subjects, which correlated with
enhanced IL-23p19 production in monocytes from patients with SLE. Investigations 
of the TLR-3-driven responses in monocytes from patients with SLE revealed that
TBK-1, which is critical for regulating IRF-3 activity, was hyperactivated in
both resting and TLR-3-stimulated cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate for the first time that patients with SLE
display enhanced IL-23p19 expression as a result of hyperactivation of TBK-1,
resulting in increased binding of IRF-3 to the promoter. These findings provide
novel insights into the molecular pathogenesis of SLE and the potential role for 
TLR-3 in driving this response.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 22127978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(3):1650-60. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05924-11. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Apoptosis induced by mammalian reovirus is beta interferon (IFN) independent and 
enhanced by IFN regulatory factor 3- and NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent expression of Noxa.

Knowlton JJ(1), Dermody TS, Holm GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Colgate University, Hamilton, New York, USA.

A variety of signal transduction pathways are activated in response to viral
infection, which dampen viral replication and transmission. These mechanisms
involve both the induction of type I interferons (IFNs), which evoke an antiviral
state, and the triggering of apoptosis. Mammalian orthoreoviruses are
double-stranded RNA viruses that elicit apoptosis in vitro and in vivo. The
transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and nuclear factor
kappa light-chain enhancer of activated B cells (NF-<U+03BA>B) are required for the
expression of IFN-ß and the efficient induction of apoptosis in reovirus-infected
cells. However, it is not known whether IFN-ß induction is required for
apoptosis, nor have the genes induced by IRF-3 and NF-<U+03BA>B that are responsible for
apoptosis been identified. To determine whether IFN-ß is required for
reovirus-induced apoptosis, we used type I IFN receptor-deficient cells,
IFN-specific antibodies, and recombinant IFN-ß. We found that IFN synthesis and
signaling are dispensable for the apoptosis of reovirus-infected cells. These
results indicate that the apoptotic response following reovirus infection is
mediated directly by genes responsive to IRF-3 and NF-<U+03BA>B. Noxa is a proapoptotic 
BH3-domain-only protein of the Bcl-2 family that requires IRF-3 and NF-<U+03BA>B for
efficient expression. We found that Noxa is strongly induced at late times (36 to
48 h) following reovirus infection in a manner dependent on IRF-3 and NF-<U+03BA>B. The 
level of apoptosis induced by reovirus is significantly diminished in cells
lacking Noxa, indicating a key prodeath function for this molecule during
reovirus infection. These results suggest that prolonged innate immune response
signaling induces apoptosis by eliciting Noxa expression in reovirus-infected
cells.

PMCID: PMC3264342
PMID: 22090144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cell. 2011 Nov 11;147(4):853-67. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.10.022.

Systematic discovery of TLR signaling components delineates viral-sensing
circuits.

Chevrier N(1), Mertins P, Artyomov MN, Shalek AK, Iannacone M, Ciaccio MF,
Gat-Viks I, Tonti E, DeGrace MM, Clauser KR, Garber M, Eisenhaure TM, Yosef N,
Robinson J, Sutton A, Andersen MS, Root DE, von Andrian U, Jones RB, Park H, Carr
SA, Regev A, Amit I, Hacohen N.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA.

Deciphering the signaling networks that underlie normal and disease processes
remains a major challenge. Here, we report the discovery of signaling components 
involved in the Toll-like receptor (TLR) response of immune dendritic cells
(DCs), including a previously unkown pathway shared across mammalian antiviral
responses. By combining transcriptional profiling, genetic and small-molecule
perturbations, and phosphoproteomics, we uncover 35 signaling regulators,
including 16 known regulators, involved in TLR signaling. In particular, we find 
that Polo-like kinases (Plk) 2 and 4 are essential components of antiviral
pathways in vitro and in vivo and activate a signaling branch involving a dozen
proteins, among which is Tnfaip2, a gene associated with autoimmune diseases but 
whose role was unknown. Our study illustrates the power of combining systematic
measurements and perturbations to elucidate complex signaling circuits and
discover potential therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3809888
PMID: 22078882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Virol. 2012 Jan;86(1):610-4. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05099-11. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

<U+0394><U+03B3>1134.5 herpes simplex viruses encoding human cytomegalovirus IRS1 or TRS1
induce interferon regulatory factor 3 phosphorylation and an
interferon-stimulated gene response.

Cassady KA(1), Saunders U, Shimamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Infectious Disease, The University of
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA. kcassady@peds.uab.edu

The chimeric herpes simplex viruses (HSV) are <U+0394><U+03B3>134.5 vectors encoding the human 
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) IRS1 or TRS1 genes. They are capable of late viral protein
synthesis and are superior to <U+0394><U+03B3>134.5 HSVs in oncolytic activity. The interferon 
(IFN) response limits efficient HSV gene expression and replication. HCMV TRS1
and IRS1 restore one <U+03B3>134.5 gene function: evasion of IFN-inducible protein
kinase R, allowing late viral protein synthesis. Here we show that, unlike
wild-type HSV, the chimeric HSV do not restore another <U+03B3>134.5 function, the
suppression of early IFN signaling mediated by IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3).

PMCID: PMC3255867
PMID: 22072777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Virol. 2012 Jan;86(2):726-37. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05989-11. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

I<U+03BA>B kinase e-dependent phosphorylation and degradation of X-linked inhibitor of
apoptosis sensitizes cells to virus-induced apoptosis.

Nakhaei P(1), Sun Q, Solis M, Mesplede T, Bonneil E, Paz S, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis (XIAP) is a potent antagonist of caspase 3-, 7-, 
and 9-dependent apoptotic activities that functions as an E3 ubiquitin ligase,
and it targets caspases for degradation. In this study, we demonstrate that
Sendai virus (SeV) infection results in the IKKe- or TBK1-mediated
phosphorylation of XIAP in vivo at Ser430, resulting in Lys(48)-linked
autoubiquitination at Lys322/328 residues, followed by the subsequent proteasomal
degradation of XIAP. Interestingly, IKKe expression and XIAP turnover increases
SeV-triggered mitochondrion-dependent apoptosis via the release of caspase 3,
whereas TBK1 expression does not increase apoptosis. Interestingly,
phosphorylation also regulates XIAP interaction with the transcription factor
IRF3, suggesting a role in IRF3-Bax-mediated apoptosis. Our findings reveal a
novel function of IKKe as a regulator of the virus-induced triggering of
apoptosis via the phosphorylation-dependent turnover of XIAP.

PMCID: PMC3255812
PMID: 22072751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Virol. 2012 Jan;86(2):796-805. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05899-11. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Measles virus C protein interferes with Beta interferon transcription in the
nucleus.

Sparrer KM(1), Pfaller CK, Conzelmann KK.

Author information: 
(1)Max von Pettenkofer-Institute and Gene Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-University
Munich, Munich, Germany.

Transcriptional induction of beta interferon (IFN-ß) through pattern recognition 
receptors is a key event in the host defense against invading viruses. Infection 
of cells by paramyxoviruses, like measles virus (MV) (genus Morbillivirus), is
sensed predominantly by the ubiquitous cytoplasmic helicase RIG-I, recognizing
viral 5'-triphosphate RNAs, and to some degree by MDA5. While MDA5 activation is 
effectively prevented by the MV V protein, the viral mechanisms for inhibition of
MDA5-independent induction of IFN-ß remained obscure. Here, we identify the
186-amino-acid MV C protein, which shuttles between the nucleus and the
cytoplasm, as a major viral inhibitor of IFN-ß transcription in human cells.
Activation of the transcription factor IRF3 by upstream kinases and nuclear
import of activated IRF3 were not affected in the presence of C protein,
suggesting a nuclear target. Notably, C proteins of wild-type MV isolates, which 
are poor IFN-ß inducers, were found to comprise a canonical nuclear localization 
signal (NLS), whereas the NLSs of all vaccine strains, irrespective of their
origins, were mutated. Site-directed mutagenesis of the C proteins from an MV
wild-type isolate and from the vaccine virus strain Schwarz confirmed a
correlation of nuclear localization and inhibition of IFN-ß transcription. A
functional NLS and efficient nuclear accumulation are therefore critical for MV C
to retain its potential to downregulate IFN-ß induction. We suggest that a defect
in efficient nuclear import of C protein contributes to attenuation of MV vaccine
strains.

PMCID: PMC3255862
PMID: 22072748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Apr;36(4):697-706. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2011.10.008. Epub
2011 Oct 29.

Transcriptional regulation of type I interferon gene expression by interferon
regulatory factor-3 in Japanese flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus.

Ohtani M(1), Hikima J, Hwang SD, Morita T, Suzuki Y, Kato G, Kondo H, Hirono I,
Jung TS, Aoki T.

Author information: 
(1)Aquatic Biotechnology Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, Gyeongsang
National University, 900 Gajwa-dong, Jinju, Gyeongnam 660-710, South Korea.

Type I interferon (IFN) induces the antiviral response in innate immunity. The
type I IFN gene cloned from Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) has a
length of 1189 bp and consisting of 5 exons and 4 introns. In a phylogenetic tree
of type I IFNs, Japanese flounder grouped with other Acanthopterygii. To gain
insight into the transcriptional regulation of IFN gene, the 1.36 kb 5'-upstream 
region including numerous canonical motifs to bind transcription factors [for
example, IFN regulatory factor (IRF)] was analyzed. In HINAE cells using a
luciferase reporter assay, poly I:C-responsive transcriptional activity was found
in the region from -634 to -179 bp. This region includes several IRF motifs. In
the presence of poly I:C, overexpression of IRF3 and RLR strongly enhanced
transcriptional activity. These results suggest that the transcriptional
regulation of Japanese flounder type I IFN is regulated by IRF3 after triggering 
with dsRNA sensors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22067740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 30;286(52):44412-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.285205. Epub
2011 Nov 7.

Inhibitor of <U+03BA>B kinase epsilon (IKK(epsilon)), STAT1, and IFIT2 proteins define
novel innate immune effector pathway against West Nile virus infection.

Perwitasari O(1), Cho H, Diamond MS, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

West Nile virus is an emerging virus whose virulence is dependent upon viral
evasion of IFN and innate immune defenses. The actions of IFN-stimulated genes
(ISGs) impart control of virus infection, but the specific ISGs and regulatory
pathways that restrict West Nile virus (WNV) are not defined. Here we show that
inhibitor of <U+03BA>B kinase e (IKKe) phosphorylation of STAT1 at serine 708 (Ser-708) 
drives IFIT2 expression to mediate anti-WNV effector function of IFN. WNV
infection was enhanced in cells from IKKe(-/-) or IFIT2(-/-) mice. In IKKe(-/-)
cells, the loss of IFN-induced IFIT2 expression was linked to lack of STAT1
phosphorylation on Ser-708 but not Tyr-701 nor Ser-727. STAT1 Ser-708
phosphorylation occurs independently of IRF-3 but requires signaling through the 
IFN-a/ß receptor as a late event in the IFN-induced innate immune response that
coincides with IKKe-responsive ISGs expression. Biochemical analyses show that
STAT1 tyrosine dephosphorylation and CRM1-mediated STAT1 nuclear-cytoplasmic
shuttling are required for STAT1 Ser-708 phosphorylation. When compared with WT
mice, WNV-infected IKKe(-/-) mice exhibit enhanced kinetics of virus
dissemination and increased pathogenesis concomitant with loss of STAT1 Ser-708
phosphorylation and IFIT2 expression. Our results define an IFN-induced IKKe
signaling pathway of specific STAT1 phosphorylation and IFIT2 expression that
imparts innate antiviral immunity to restrict WNV infection and control viral
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3247963
PMID: 22065572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2011 Jun;19(6):450-3.

[Study on type I interferon and phospho-IRF3 in murine liver dendritic cells
after intervened by HBV].

[Article in Chinese]

Zheng JM(1), Shi GF, Li N, Qian ZP, Zhu MQ, Chen MQ, Li Q, Wang XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200040, China.

OBJECTIVE: To detect the secretions of type I interferon and the expressions of
phospho-IRF3 in murine liver dendritic cells intervened by HBV.
METHODS: The murine liver dendritic cells were isolated via anti-CD11c microbeads
and were incubated in the presence of GM-CSF and IL-4 to induce the DC generation
and proliferation in 24-well cell culture plates. HBV virions were isolated via
ultracentrifugation and were detected by quantitative Realtime-PCR. The DCs were 
divided into two groups: one group was cultured with HBV virions for 24 hours,
the other group was cultured without HBV as control group. The cells were
harvested at Oh, 1h, 2h, 6h and 24h after being stimulated with poly I:C and the 
expressions of p-IRF3 and the concentration of IFN beta in supernatants were
detected with western blot and ELISA respectively.
RESULTS: The IFN beta concentrations at 0 h, 6 h and 24 h in the supernatants of 
the HBV group and the control group were (12.38 +/- 3.71) pg/ml, (88.67 +/- 9.01)
pg/ml and (69.89 +/- 5.80) pg/ml vs (10.83 +/- 4.11) pg/ml, (137.68 +/- 12.28)
pg/ml and (72.25 +/- 8.61) pg/ml, respectively. No statistical differences found 
at 0 h (t = 0.8398, P > 0.05) and 24 h (t = 0.6820, P > 0.05) between the two
groups except that at 6 h (t = 9.653, P < 0.01). The expressions of phospho-IRF3 
in HBV group were lower than that in control group.
CONCLUSIONS: The type I interferon secretion and the phospho-IRF3 expression were
decreased in murine liver dendritic cells when intervened by HBV.

PMID: 22053377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Nov 21;505(3):279-81. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.10.040. Epub
2011 Oct 21.

Optineurin with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-related mutations abrogates
inhibition of interferon regulatory factor-3 activation.

Sakaguchi T(1), Irie T, Kawabata R, Yoshida A, Maruyama H, Kawakami H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.
tsaka@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Optineurin has been shown to be involved in primary open-angle glaucoma. We
recently found that optineurin is involved in familial amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS). On the other hand, optineurin has been shown to inhibit
transcription factors related to innate immunity such as NF-<U+03BA>B and interferon
regulatory factor-3 (IRF3). In the present study, the effect of ALS-associated
optineurin mutations on IRF3 activation was investigated. Optineurin inhibited
IRF3 activation induced by melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 or
Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing interferon-ß. The
inhibition was abrogated by mutations related to ALS but not by a mutation
related to glaucoma. Reporter assay indicated that the JAK-STAT signaling pathway
was not affected by optineurin. These results show that ALS-related optineurin is
involved in the IRF3 activation pathway. Pathogenesis of ALS may be associated
with some kind of innate immunity, especially that against virus infection,
through IRF3 activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22040667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26414. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026414. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

Relative quantification of protein-protein interactions using a dual luciferase
reporter pull-down assay system.

Jia S(1), Peng J, Gao B, Chen Z, Zhou Y, Fu Q, Wang H, Zhan L.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Transfusion Medicine, Beijing, China.

The identification and quantitative analysis of protein-protein interactions are 
essential to the functional characterization of proteins in the post-proteomics
era. The methods currently available are generally time-consuming, technically
complicated, insensitive and/or semi-quantitative. The lack of simple, sensitive 
approaches to precisely quantify protein-protein interactions still prevents our 
understanding of the functions of many proteins. Here, we develop a novel dual
luciferase reporter pull-down assay by combining a biotinylated Firefly
luciferase pull-down assay with a dual luciferase reporter assay. The
biotinylated Firefly luciferase-tagged protein enables rapid and efficient
isolation of a putative Renilla luciferase-tagged binding protein from a
relatively small amount of sample. Both of these proteins can be quantitatively
detected using the dual luciferase reporter assay system. Protein-protein
interactions, including Fos-Jun located in the nucleus; MAVS-TRAF3 in cytoplasm; 
inducible IRF3 dimerization; viral protein-regulated interactions, such as
MAVS-MAVS and MAVS-TRAF3; IRF3 dimerization; and protein interaction domain
mapping, are studied using this novel assay system. Herein, we demonstrate that
this dual luciferase reporter pull-down assay enables the quantification of the
relative amounts of interacting proteins that bind to streptavidin-coupled beads 
for protein purification. This study provides a simple, rapid, sensitive, and
efficient approach to identify and quantify relative protein-protein
interactions. Importantly, the dual luciferase reporter pull-down method will
facilitate the functional determination of proteins.

PMCID: PMC3198426
PMID: 22039483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;3(5):283-92. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjr020.

SENP2 negatively regulates cellular antiviral response by deSUMOylating IRF3 and 
conditioning it for ubiquitination and degradation.

Ran Y(1), Liu TT, Zhou Q, Li S, Mao AP, Li Y, Liu LJ, Cheng JK, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, China.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;3(5):269.

Transcription factor IRF3-mediated type I interferon induction is essential for
antiviral innate immunity. We identified the deSUMOylating enzyme
Sentrin/SUMO-specific protease  (SENP) 2 as a negative regulator of
virus-triggered IFN-ß induction. Overexpression of SENP2 caused IRF3
deSUMOylation, K48-linked ubiquitination, and degradation, whereas depletion of
SENP2 had opposite effects. Both the SUMOylation and K48-linked ubiquitination of
IRF3 occurred at lysines 70 and 87, and these processes are competitive. The
level of virus-triggered IFN-ß was markedly up-regulated and viral replication
was reduced in SENP2-deficient cells comparing with wild-type controls. Our
findings suggest that SENP2 regulates antiviral innate immunity by deSUMOylating 
IRF3 and conditioning it for ubiquitination and degradation, and provide an
example of cross-talk between the ubiquitin and SUMO pathways in innate immunity.

PMID: 22028379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;3(5):269. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjr026.

Small changes for works.

Wu J.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Dec;6(6):441.

Comment on
    J Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;3(5):301-8.
    J Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;3(5):283-92.
    J Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;3(5):276-82.
    J Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;3(5):293-300.

PMID: 22028378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 23;286(51):44211-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.242289. Epub 2011
Oct 25.

Galectin-9 protein expression in endothelial cells is positively regulated by
histone deacetylase 3.

Alam S(1), Li H, Margariti A, Martin D, Zampetaki A, Habi O, Cockerill G, Hu Y,
Xu Q, Zeng L.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London British Heart Founcation
Centre, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom.

Galectin-9 expression in endothelial cells can be induced in response to
inflammation. However, the mechanism of its expression remains unclear. In this
study, we found that interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) induced galectin-9 expression in human 
endothelial cells in a time-dependent manner, which coincided with the activation
of histone deacetylase (HDAC). When endothelial cells were treated with the HDAC3
inhibitor, apicidin, or shRNA-HDAC3 knockdown, IFN-<U+03B3>-induced galectin-9
expression was abolished. Overexpression of HDAC3 induced the interaction between
phosphoinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and IFN response factor 3 (IRF3), leading to IRF3
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and galectin-9 expression. HDAC3
functioned as a scaffold protein for PI3K/IRF3 interaction. In addition to
galectin-9 expression, IFN-<U+03B3> also induced galectin-9 location onto plasma
membrane, which was HDAC3-independent. Importantly, HDAC3 was essential for the
constitutive transcription of PI3K and IRF3, which might be responsible for the
basal level of galectin-9 expression. The phosphorylation of IRF3 was essential
for galectin-9 expression. This study provides new evidence that HDAC3 regulates 
galectin-9 expression in endothelial cells via interaction with PI3K-IRF3 signal 
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3243525
PMID: 22027828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Oct;7(10):e1002289. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002289. Epub
2011 Oct 13.

Hepatitis C virus reveals a novel early control in acute immune response.

Arnaud N(1), Dabo S, Akazawa D, Fukasawa M, Shinkai-Ouchi F, Hugon J, Wakita T,
Meurs EF.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Hepacivirus and Innate Immunity, Paris, France.

Recognition of viral RNA structures by the intracytosolic RNA helicase RIG-I
triggers induction of innate immunity. Efficient induction requires RIG-I
ubiquitination by the E3 ligase TRIM25, its interaction with the
mitochondria-bound MAVS protein, recruitment of TRAF3, IRF3- and NF-<U+03BA>B-kinases
and transcription of Interferon (IFN). In addition, IRF3 alone induces some of
the Interferon-Stimulated Genes (ISGs), referred to as early ISGs. Infection of
hepatocytes with Hepatitis C virus (HCV) results in poor production of IFN
despite recognition of the viral RNA by RIG-I but can lead to induction of early 
ISGs. HCV was shown to inhibit IFN production by cleaving MAVS through its NS3/4A
protease and by controlling cellular translation through activation of PKR, an
eIF2a-kinase containing dsRNA-binding domains (DRBD). Here, we have identified a 
third mode of control of IFN induction by HCV. Using HCVcc and the Huh7.25.CD81
cells, we found that HCV controls RIG-I ubiquitination through the
di-ubiquitine-like protein ISG15, one of the early ISGs. A transcriptome analysis
performed on Huh7.25.CD81 cells silenced or not for PKR and infected with JFH1
revealed that HCV infection leads to induction of 49 PKR-dependent genes,
including ISG15 and several early ISGs. Silencing experiments revealed that this 
novel PKR-dependent pathway involves MAVS, TRAF3 and IRF3 but not RIG-I, and that
it does not induce IFN. Use of PKR inhibitors showed that this pathway requires
the DRBD but not the kinase activity of PKR. We then demonstrated that PKR
interacts with HCV RNA and MAVS prior to RIG-I. In conclusion, HCV recruits PKR
early in infection as a sensor to trigger induction of several IRF3-dependent
genes. Among those, ISG15 acts to negatively control the RIG-I/MAVS pathway, at
the level of RIG-I ubiquitination.These data give novel insights in the machinery
involved in the early events of innate immune response.

PMCID: PMC3192838
PMID: 22022264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Infect Dis. 2011 Dec 15;204(12):1866-78. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir665. Epub 2011 
Oct 19.

H5N1 influenza virus-induced mediators upregulate RIG-I in uninfected cells by
paracrine effects contributing to amplified cytokine cascades.

Hui KP(1), Lee SM, Cheung CY, Mao H, Lai AK, Chan RW, Chan MC, Tu W, Guan Y, Lau 
YL, Peiris JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, China.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 viruses cause severe disease in humans,
and dysregulation of cytokine responses is believed to contribute to the
pathogenesis of human H5N1 disease. However, mechanisms leading to the increased 
induction of proinflammatory cytokines by H5N1 viruses are poorly understood. We 
show that the innate sensing receptor RIG-I is involved in interferon regulatory 
factor 3 (IRF3), NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear translocation, p38 activation, and the subsequent 
interferon (IFN) ß, IFN-<U+03BB>1, and tumor necrosis factor a induction during H5N1
infection. Soluble mediators from H5N1-infected human macrophages upregulate
RIG-I, MDA5, and TLR3 to much higher levels than those from seasonal H1N1 in
uninfected human macrophages and alveolar epithelial cells via paracrine
IFNAR1/JAK but not IFN-<U+03BB> receptor signaling. Compared with H1N1 virus-induced
mediators, H5N1 mediators markedly enhance the cytokine response to PolyIC and to
both seasonal and H5N1 virus infection in a RIG-I-dependent manner. Thus,
sensitizing neighboring cells by upregulation of RIG-I contributes to the
amplified cytokine cascades during H5N1 infection.

PMID: 22013225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Gen Virol. 2012 Feb;93(Pt 2):275-81. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.033589-0. Epub 2011 Oct
19.

Bat severe acute respiratory syndrome-like coronavirus ORF3b homologues display
different interferon antagonist activities.

Zhou P(1), Li H, Wang H, Wang LF, Shi Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan, Republic of China.

The ORF3b protein of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) has
a nuclear localization signal (NLS) at its C terminus and antagonizes interferon 
(IFN) function by modulating the activity of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3).
SARS-like coronaviruses (SL-CoVs) found in bats share an identical genome
organization and high sequence identity for most of their gene products. In this 
study, ORF3b homologues were identified from three bat SL-CoV strains. These
ORF3b homologues were C-terminally truncated and lacked the C-terminal NLS of
SARS-CoV. IFN antagonist activities analysis demonstrated that one SL-CoV ORF3b
still possessed IFN antagonist and IRF3-modulating activities. These results
indicate that different ORF3b proteins display different IFN antagonist
activities and this function is independent of the protein's nuclear
localization, suggesting a potential link between bat SL-CoV ORF3b function and
viral pathogenesis.

PMID: 22012463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Vaccine. 2011 Dec 6;29(52):9684-90. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.09.135. Epub 2011
Oct 12.

Attenuated NYCBH vaccinia virus deleted for the E3L gene confers partial
protection against lethal monkeypox virus disease in cynomolgus macaques.

Denzler KL(1), Babas T, Rippeon A, Huynh T, Fukushima N, Rhodes L, Silvera PM,
Jacobs BL.

Author information: 
(1)Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-5401, USA.

The New York City Board of Health (NYCBH) vaccinia virus is the currently
licensed vaccine for use in the US against smallpox. The vaccine under
investigation in this study has been attenuated by deletion of the innate immune 
evasion gene, E3L, and shown to be protective in homologous virus mouse challenge
and heterologous virus mouse and rabbit challenge models. In this study we
compared NYCBH deleted for the E3L gene (NYCBH<U+0394>E3L) to NYCBH for the ability to
induce phosphorylation of proinflammatory signaling proteins and the ability to
protect cynomolgus macaques from heterologous challenge with monkeypox virus
(MPXV). NYCBH<U+0394>E3L induced phosphorylation of PKR and eIF2a as well as p38,
SAPK/JNK, and IRF3 which can lead to induction of proinflammatory gene
transcription. Vaccination of macaques with two doses of NYCBH<U+0394>E3L resulted in
negligible pock formation at the site of scarification in comparison to
vaccination using a single dose of NYCBH, but still elicited neutralizing
antibodies and protected 75% of the animals from mortality after challenge with
MPXV. However, NYCBH<U+0394>E3L-vaccinated animals developed a high number of secondary 
skin lesions and blood viral load similar to that seen in unvaccinated controls. 
The NYCBH<U+0394>E3L-vaccinated animals that survived MPXV challenge were able to show
resolution of blood viral load, a decrease in number of skin lesions, and an
improved clinical score by three weeks post challenge. These results suggest that
although the highly attenuated NYCBH<U+0394>E3L allows proinflammatory signal
transduction to occur, it does not provide full protection against monkeypox
challenge.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22001879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 Oct 14;8:140. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-140.

LPS preconditioning redirects TLR signaling following stroke: TRIF-IRF3 plays a
seminal role in mediating tolerance to ischemic injury.

Vartanian KB(1), Stevens SL, Marsh BJ, Williams-Karnesky R, Lessov NS,
Stenzel-Poore MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, 97239, USA.

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is activated in response to cerebral
ischemia leading to substantial brain damage. In contrast, mild activation of
TLR4 by preconditioning with low dose exposure to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) prior 
to cerebral ischemia dramatically improves outcome by reprogramming the signaling
response to injury. This suggests that TLR4 signaling can be altered to induce an
endogenously neuroprotective phenotype. However, the TLR4 signaling events
involved in this neuroprotective response are poorly understood. Here we define
several molecular mediators of the primary signaling cascades induced by LPS
preconditioning that give rise to the reprogrammed response to cerebral ischemia 
and confer the neuroprotective phenotype.
METHODS: C57BL6 mice were preconditioned with low dose LPS prior to transient
middle cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO). Cortical tissue and blood were collected
following MCAO. Microarray and qtPCR were performed to analyze gene expression
associated with TLR4 signaling. EMSA and DNA binding ELISA were used to evaluate 
NF<U+03BA>B and IRF3 activity. Protein expression was determined using Western blot or
ELISA. MyD88-/- and TRIF-/- mice were utilized to evaluate signaling in LPS
preconditioning-induced neuroprotection.
RESULTS: Gene expression analyses revealed that LPS preconditioning resulted in a
marked upregulation of anti-inflammatory/type I IFN-associated genes following
ischemia while pro-inflammatory genes induced following ischemia were present but
not differentially modulated by LPS. Interestingly, although expression of
pro-inflammatory genes was observed, there was decreased activity of NF<U+03BA>B p65 and
increased presence of NF<U+03BA>B inhibitors, including Ship1, Tollip, and p105, in
LPS-preconditioned mice following stroke. In contrast, IRF3 activity was enhanced
in LPS-preconditioned mice following stroke. TRIF and MyD88 deficient mice
revealed that neuroprotection induced by LPS depends on TLR4 signaling via TRIF, 
which activates IRF3, but does not depend on MyD88 signaling.
CONCLUSION: Our results characterize several critical mediators of the TLR4
signaling events associated with neuroprotection. LPS preconditioning redirects
TLR4 signaling in response to stroke through suppression of NF<U+03BA>B activity,
enhanced IRF3 activity, and increased anti-inflammatory/type I IFN gene
expression. Interestingly, this protective phenotype does not require the
suppression of pro-inflammatory mediators. Furthermore, our results highlight a
critical role for TRIF-IRF3 signaling as the governing mechanism in the
neuroprotective response to stroke.

PMCID: PMC3217906
PMID: 21999375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Viruses. 2010 Nov;2(11):2443-80. doi: 10.3390/v2112443. Epub 2010 Nov 5.

Inhibition of the type I interferon antiviral response during arenavirus
infection.

Borrow P(1), Martínez-Sobrido L, de la Torre JC.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, The Jenner Institute, University of 
Oxford, Compton, Newbury, Berkshire RG20 7NN, UK; E-Mail:
persephone.borrow@jenner.ac.uk.

Arenaviruses merit interest both as tractable experimental model systems to study
acute and persistent viral infections, and as clinically-important human
pathogens. Several arenaviruses cause hemorrhagic fever (HF) disease in humans.
In addition, evidence indicates that the globally-distributed prototypic
arenavirus lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) is a human pathogen of
clinical significance in congenital infections, and also poses a great danger to 
immunosuppressed individuals. Arenavirus persistence and pathogenesis are
facilitated by their ability to overcome the host innate immune response.
Mammalian hosts have developed both membrane toll-like receptors (TLR) and
cytoplasmic pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that recognize specific
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), resulting in activation of the
transcription factors IRF3 or IRF7, or both, which together with NF-<U+03BA>B and
ATF-2/c-JUN induce production of type I interferon (IFN-I). IFN-I plays a key
role in host anti-microbial defense by mediating direct antiviral effects via
up-regulation of IFN-I stimulated genes (ISGs), activating dendritic cells (DCs) 
and natural killer (NK) cells, and promoting the induction of adaptive responses.
Accordingly, viruses have developed a plethora of strategies to disrupt the IFN-I
mediated antiviral defenses of the host, and the viral gene products responsible 
for these disruptions are often major virulence determinants. IRF3- and
IRF7-dependent induction of host innate immune responses is frequently targeted
by viruses. Thus, the arenavirus nucleoprotein (NP) was shown to inhibit the
IFN-I response by interfering with the activation of IRF3. This NP anti-IFN
activity, together with alterations in the number and function of DCs observed in
mice chronically infected with LCMV, likely play an important role in LCMV
persistence in its murine host. In this review we will discuss current knowledge 
about the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which arenaviruses can subvert the
host innate immune response and their implications for understanding HF
arenaviral disease as well as arenavirus persistence in their natural hosts.

PMCID: PMC3185579
PMID: 21994626  [PubMed]


278. Mol Ther. 2012 Jan;20(1):101-8. doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.212. Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Short-interfering RNAs induce retinal degeneration via TLR3 and IRF3.

Kleinman ME(1), Kaneko H, Cho WG, Dridi S, Fowler BJ, Blandford AD, Albuquerque
RJ, Hirano Y, Terasaki H, Kondo M, Fujita T, Ambati BK, Tarallo V, Gelfand BD,
Bogdanovich S, Baffi JZ, Ambati J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0284, USA.

The discovery of sequence-specific gene silencing by endogenous double-stranded
RNAs (dsRNA) has propelled synthetic short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) to the
forefront of targeted pharmaceutical engineering. The first clinical trials
utilized 21-nucleotide (nt) siRNAs for the treatment of neovascular age-related
macular degeneration (AMD). Surprisingly, these compounds were not formulated for
cell permeation, which is required for bona fide RNA interference (RNAi). We
showed that these "naked" siRNAs suppress neovascularization in mice not via RNAi
but via sequence-independent activation of cell surface Toll-like receptor-3
(TLR3). Here, we demonstrate that noninternalized siRNAs induce retinal
degeneration in mice by activating surface TLR3 on retinal pigmented epithelial
cells. Cholesterol conjugated siRNAs capable of cell permeation and triggering
RNAi also induce the same phenotype. Retinal degeneration was not observed after 
treatment with siRNAs shorter than 21-nts. Other cytosolic dsRNA sensors are not 
critical to this response. TLR3 activation triggers caspase-3-mediated apoptotic 
death of the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) via nuclear translocation of
interferon regulatory factor-3. While this unexpected adverse effect of siRNAs
has implications for future clinical trials, these findings also introduce a new 
preclinical model of geographic atrophy (GA), a late stage of dry AMD that causes
blindness in millions worldwide.

PMCID: PMC3255577
PMID: 21988875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Mar;69(6):963-79. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0819-y. Epub
2011 Oct 2.

Regulation of Toll-like receptor signaling by NDP52-mediated selective autophagy 
is normally inactivated by A20.

Inomata M(1), Niida S, Shibata K, Into T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Microbiology, Division of Oral Infections and Health
Sciences, Asahi University School of Dentistry, Hozumi 1851, Mizuho, Gifu
501-0296, Japan.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling is linked to autophagy that facilitates
elimination of intracellular pathogens. However, it is largely unknown whether
autophagy controls TLR signaling. Here, we report that poly(I:C) stimulation
induces selective autophagic degradation of the TLR adaptor molecule TRIF and the
signaling molecule TRAF6, which is revealed by gene silencing of the
ubiquitin-editing enzyme A20. This type of autophagy induced formation of
autophagosomes and could be suppressed by an autophagy inhibitor and lysosomal
inhibitors. However, this autophagy was not associated with canonical autophagic 
processes, including involvement of Beclin-1 and conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II.
Through screening of TRIF-interacting 'autophagy receptors' in human cells, we
identified that NDP52 mediated the selective autophagic degradation of TRIF and
TRAF6 but not TRAF3. NDP52 was polyubiquitinated by TRAF6 and was involved in
aggregation of TRAF6, which may result in the selective degradation.
Intriguingly, only under the condition of A20 silencing, NDP52 could effectively 
suppress poly(I:C)-induced proinflammatory gene expression. Thus, this study
clarifies a selective autophagic mechanism mediated by NDP52 that works
downstream of TRIF-TRAF6. Furthermore, although A20 is known as a signaling
fine-tuner to prevent excess TLR signaling, it paradoxically downregulates the
fine-tuning effect of NDP52 on TLR signaling.

PMCID: PMC3285758
PMID: 21964925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Immunol. 2011 Nov 15;187(10):5357-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100917. Epub 2011 
Sep 30.

IL-17 boosts proinflammatory outcome of antiviral response in human cells.

Ryzhakov G(1), Lai CC, Blazek K, To KW, Hussell T, Udalova I.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal
Sciences, Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, London W6 8LH,
UK. grigory.ryzhakov@kennedy.ox.ac.uk

Excessive inflammation during bacterial and viral infections is destructive to
the host and involves elevated production of proinflammatory cytokines. It is
especially deleterious in organs with space constraints such as lung and the CNS.
Indeed, a number of viruses that infect lungs, such as avian influenza virus,
SARS-associated coronavirus, and respiratory syncytial virus, elicit a very high 
level of proinflammatory cytokines; however, it is unclear what triggers their
production. In this study, we show that IL-17 commonly produced during viral
infection specifically augments a proinflammatory response by directly
synergizing with antiviral signaling. Costimulation of primary human fibroblasts 
with IL-17 greatly enhanced respiratory syncytial virus-induced or synthetic
dsRNA-based viral mimic polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid-induced expression of
proinflammatory genes without affecting expression of IFN-ß-stimulated or
IFN-stimulated genes. Knockdown of expression of known mediators of the antiviral
signaling pathway revealed that the IL-17-poly(I:C) synergy depends on the
presence of the transcriptional factors RelA and IFN regulatory factor 3 and I<U+03BA>B 
kinases. Moreover, this synergy was blocked by an I<U+03BA>B kinase inhibitor, BAY
11-7082. These findings shed light on the molecular mechanisms behind
IL-17-dependent immunopathology observed in viral infections.

PMID: 21964025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. EMBO J. 2011 Sep 27;30(23):4838-49. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2011.351.

PKC alpha regulates Sendai virus-mediated interferon induction through HDAC6 and 
ß-catenin.

Zhu J(1), Coyne CB, Sarkar SN.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Virology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Recognition of viral RNA by cytoplasmic retinoic acid inducible gene I
(RIG-I)-like receptors initiates signals leading to the induction of type I
interferon (IFN) transcription via transcription factors such as interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B). Here, we describe a new
signalling pathway that involves protein kinase C alpha (PKCa), histone
deacetylase 6 (HDAC6) and beta-catenin (ß-catenin), which is essential for IFN
gene induction following virus infection. Knockdown of PKCa in various human
cells, including primary cells, inhibited Sendai virus (SeV)-mediated IFN
induction and enhanced virus replication. In the absence of this pathway IRF3
becomes activated, but does not bind to its promoter and is thus unable to
support transcription. Mechanistically, SeV infection induced the activation of
PKCa, which promoted its interaction with HDAC6 and enhanced its deacetylation
activity in a phosphorylation-dependent manner. Further downstream, HDAC6 caused 
deacetylation of ß-catenin and enhanced its nuclear translocation and promoter
binding. In the nucleus, ß-catenin acted as a co-activator for IRF3-mediated
transcription. Our findings suggest an important role of a novel signalling
pathway mediated by PKCa-HDAC6-ß-catenin in controlling IRF3-mediated
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3243614
PMID: 21952047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Oct 11;108(41):17093-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1114194108. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

The TRAF-associated protein TANK facilitates cross-talk within the IkappaB kinase
family during Toll-like receptor signaling.

Clark K(1), Takeuchi O, Akira S, Cohen P.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation Unit, College of Life
Sciences, Sir James Black Centre, University of Dundee, Dundee, DD1 5EH Scotland,
United Kingdom.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands that signal via TIR-domain-containing
adapter-inducing IFNß (TRIF) activate the I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK)-related kinases, TRAF 
associated NF<U+03BA>B activator (TANK)-binding kinase-1 (TBK1) and IKKe, which then
phosphorylate IRF3 and induce the production of IFNß. Here we show that TBK1 and 
IKKe are also activated by TLR ligands that signal via MyD88. Notably, the
activation of IKKe is rapid, transient, and it precedes a more prolonged
activation of TBK1. The MyD88- and TRIF-dependent signaling pathways activate the
IKK-related kinases by two signaling pathways. One is mediated by the canonical
IKKs, whereas the other culminates in the autoactivation of the IKK-related
kinases. Once activated, TBK1/IKKe then phosphorylate and inhibit the canonical
IKKs. The negative regulation of the canonical IKKs by the IKK-related kinases
occurs in both the TRIF- and MyD88-dependent TLR pathways, whereas IRF3
phosphorylation is restricted to the TRIF-dependent signaling pathway. We have
discovered that the activation of IKKe is abolished, the activation of TBK1 is
reduced, and the interaction between the IKK-related kinases and the canonical
IKKs is suppressed in TANK(-/-) macrophages, preventing the IKK-related kinases
from negatively regulating the canonical IKKs. In contrast, IRF3 phosphorylation 
and IFNß production was normal in TANK(-/-) macrophages. Our results demonstrate 
a key role for TANK in enabling the canonical IKKs and the IKK-related kinases to
regulate each other, which is required to limit the strength of TLR signaling and
ultimately, prevent autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3193242
PMID: 21949249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Arch Virol. 2011 Dec;156(12):2187-95. doi: 10.1007/s00705-011-1116-7. Epub 2011
Sep 27.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus nucleocapsid protein
modulates interferon-ß production by inhibiting IRF3 activation in immortalized
porcine alveolar macrophages.

Sagong M(1), Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, South Korea.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) infection appears to 
elicit a weak innate immune response suppressing type 1 interferon (IFN)
production. Recent studies have revealed that several nonstructural proteins
encoded by the PRRSV genome independently antagonize the type 1 IFN system. The
present study sought to identify the structural proteins that possess the immune 
evasion properties in immortalized porcine alveolar macrophages (PAM). Each
structural protein gene was stably expressed in a porcine monocyte-derived
macrophage cell line, PAM-pCD163, and tested for its potential to inhibit IFN-ß
induction. We then focused on the nucleocapsid (N) protein, which has a strong
inhibitory effect on dsRNA-induced IFN-ß production. Upon dsRNA stimulation,
IFN-ß production was shown to decrease proportionally with increasing levels of N
expression. Furthermore, the PRRSV N protein was found to down-regulate
IFN-dependent gene production by dsRNA. Taken together, these results indicate
the ability of N to modulate the dsRNA-mediated IFN induction pathways. In
addition, the N protein significantly interfered with dsRNA-induced
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF3. Our data suggest that the
PRRSV N protein is a responsible component, independent of other nonstructural
elements, for evading the IFN response by antagonizing IRF3 activation.

PMID: 21947566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Nature. 2011 Sep 25;478(7370):515-8. doi: 10.1038/nature10429.

STING is a direct innate immune sensor of cyclic di-GMP.

Burdette DL(1), Monroe KM, Sotelo-Troha K, Iwig JS, Eckert B, Hyodo M, Hayakawa
Y, Vance RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA.

The innate immune system detects infection by using germline-encoded receptors
that are specific for conserved microbial molecules. The recognition of microbial
ligands leads to the production of cytokines, such as type I interferons (IFNs), 
that are essential for successful pathogen elimination. Cytosolic detection of
pathogen-derived DNA is one major mechanism of inducing IFN production, and this 
process requires signalling through TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and its
downstream transcription factor, IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). In addition, a
transmembrane protein called STING (stimulator of IFN genes; also known as MITA, 
ERIS, MPYS and TMEM173) functions as an essential signalling adaptor, linking the
cytosolic detection of DNA to the TBK1-IRF3 signalling axis. Recently, unique
nucleic acids called cyclic dinucleotides, which function as conserved signalling
molecules in bacteria, have also been shown to induce a STING-dependent type I
IFN response. However, a mammalian sensor of cyclic dinucleotides has not been
identified. Here we report evidence that STING itself is an innate immune sensor 
of cyclic dinucleotides. We demonstrate that STING binds directly to
radiolabelled cyclic diguanylate monophosphate (c-di-GMP), and we show that
unlabelled cyclic dinucleotides, but not other nucleotides or nucleic acids,
compete with c-di-GMP for binding to STING. Furthermore, we identify mutations in
STING that selectively affect the response to cyclic dinucleotides without
affecting the response to DNA. Thus, STING seems to function as a direct sensor
of cyclic dinucleotides, in addition to its established role as a signalling
adaptor in the IFN response to cytosolic DNA. Cyclic dinucleotides have shown
promise as novel vaccine adjuvants and immunotherapeutics, and our results
provide insight into the mechanism by which cyclic dinucleotides are sensed by
the innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC3203314
PMID: 21947006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Immunol. 2011 Nov 1;187(9):4754-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101704. Epub 2011
Sep 21.

Tripartite motif-containing protein 28 is a small ubiquitin-related modifier E3
ligase and negative regulator of IFN regulatory factor 7.

Liang Q(1), Deng H, Li X, Wu X, Tang Q, Chang TH, Peng H, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Ozato 
K, Zhu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306, USA.

IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a potent transcription factor of type I IFNs
and IFN-stimulated genes and is known as the master regulator of type I
IFN-dependent immune responses. Because excessive responses could harm the host, 
IRF7 itself is delicately regulated at the transcriptional, translational, and
posttranslational levels. Modification of IRF7 by small ubiquitin-related
modifiers (SUMOs) has been shown to regulate IFN expression and antiviral
responses negatively, but the specific E3 ligase needed for IRF7 SUMOylation has 
remained unknown. As reported in this article, we have identified the tripartite 
motif-containing protein 28 (TRIM28) as a binding partner of IRF7. We have
demonstrated that TRIM28 also interacts with the SUMO E2 enzyme and increases
SUMOylation of IRF7 both in vivo and in vitro, suggesting it acts as a SUMO E3
ligase of IRF7. Unlike the common SUMO E3 ligase, protein inhibitor of activated 
STAT1, the E3 activity of TRIM28 is specific to IRF7, because it has little
effect on IRF7's close relative IRF3. TRIM28 is therefore, so far as we know, the
first IRF7-specific SUMO E3 reported. TRIM28-mediated SUMOylation of IRF7 is
increased during viral infection, and SUMOylation of transcription factors
usually results in transcriptional repression. Overexpression of TRIM28 therefore
inhibits IRF7 transactivation activity, whereas knockdown of TRIM28 has the
opposite effect and potentiates IFN production and antiviral responses.
Collectively, our results suggest that TRIM28 is a specific SUMO E3 ligase and
negative regulator of IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3197880
PMID: 21940674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(23):12662-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05557-11. Epub 2011 Sep 21.

The virion host shutoff protein of herpes simplex virus 1 blocks the
replication-independent activation of NF-<U+03BA>B in dendritic cells in the absence of 
type I interferon signaling.

Cotter CR(1), Kim WK, Nguyen ML, Yount JS, López CB, Blaho JA, Moran TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology Institute, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, 1 Gustave L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Immune evasion is a defining feature of the virus-host relationship. During
infection, herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) utilizes multiple proteins to
manipulate the host immune response. In the present study, we investigated the
mechanism by which the virion host shutoff (vhs) protein blocks the activation of
dendritic cells (DCs). Previously, we found that coinfection of wild-type HSV-1
with a panel of RNA viruses resulted in a block to DC activation that was
attributable to vhs. These observations led us to hypothesize that the
vhs-mediated inhibition was dependent on signaling through the RIG-I-like
receptor (RLR) signaling pathway. By examining DCs generated from MAVS (IPS-1)
knockout (KO) mice, we determined that RLR/MAVS signaling is not essential for
the DC response to HSV-1. We also evaluated the requirement for the type I
interferon (IFN) signaling pathway in DC activation following infection with
HSV-1 and found that stimulation of DCs with wild-type HSV-1 required intact type
I IFN signaling for the production of cytokines, whereas the vhs deletion
(vhs(-)) mutant virus activated DCs without the need for exogenous IFN signaling.
Comparisons of transcription factor activation in DCs infected with wild-type HSV
and the vhs(-) mutant virus revealed that NF-<U+03BA>B activation was inhibited by vhs
in the early phase of the infection. In contrast, IRF3 activation was not
influenced by vhs. In these studies, measurement of proinflammatory cytokines and
type I IFN release from the infected DCs reflected the activation status of these
transcription factors. Taken together, the work presented here (i) describes a
novel role for the vhs protein as an inhibitor of the early activation of NF-<U+03BA>B
during HSV-1 infection of DCs and (ii) offers a mechanistic explanation of how
this protein interferes with DC activation.

PMCID: PMC3209407
PMID: 21937652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e24745. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024745. Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Host genetic risk factors for West Nile virus infection and disease progression.

Bigham AW(1), Buckingham KJ, Husain S, Emond MJ, Bofferding KM, Gildersleeve H,
Rutherford A, Astakhova NM, Perelygin AA, Busch MP, Murray KO, Sejvar JJ, Green
S, Kriesel J, Brinton MA, Bamshad M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America. awb150@u.washington.edu

West Nile virus (WNV), a category B pathogen endemic in parts of Africa, Asia and
Europe, emerged in North America in 1999, and spread rapidly across the
continental U.S. Outcomes of infection with WNV range from asymptomatic to severe
neuroinvasive disease manifested as encephalitis, paralysis, and/or death.
Neuroinvasive WNV disease occurs in less than one percent of cases, and although 
host genetic factors are thought to influence risk for symptomatic disease, the
identity of these factors remains largely unknown. We tested 360 common haplotype
tagging and/or functional SNPs in 86 genes that encode key regulators of immune
function in 753 individuals infected with WNV including: 422 symptomatic WNV
cases and 331 cases with asymptomatic infections. After applying a Bonferroni
correction for multiple tests and controlling for population stratification, SNPs
in IRF3 (OR 0.54, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.035) and MX1, (OR 0.19, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.014) were associated with
symptomatic WNV infection and a single SNP in OAS1 (OR 9.79, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.003) was
associated with increased risk for West Nile encephalitis and paralysis (WNE/P). 
Together, these results suggest that genetic variation in the interferon response
pathway is associated with both risk for symptomatic WNV infection and WNV
disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3174177
PMID: 21935451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002247. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002247. Epub 2011
Sep 8.

Vaccinia virus protein C6 is a virulence factor that binds TBK-1 adaptor proteins
and inhibits activation of IRF3 and IRF7.

Unterholzner L(1), Sumner RP, Baran M, Ren H, Mansur DS, Bourke NM, Randow F,
Smith GL, Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland.

Recognition of viruses by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) causes
interferon-ß (IFN-ß) induction, a key event in the anti-viral innate immune
response, and also a target of viral immune evasion. Here the vaccinia virus
(VACV) protein C6 is identified as an inhibitor of PRR-induced IFN-ß expression
by a functional screen of select VACV open reading frames expressed individually 
in mammalian cells. C6 is a member of a family of Bcl-2-like poxvirus proteins,
many of which have been shown to inhibit innate immune signalling pathways. PRRs 
activate both NF-<U+03BA>B and IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) to activate the IFN-ß
promoter induction. Data presented here show that C6 inhibits IRF3 activation and
translocation into the nucleus, but does not inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B activation. C6
inhibits IRF3 and IRF7 activation downstream of the kinases TANK binding kinase 1
(TBK1) and I<U+03BA>B kinase-e (IKKe), which phosphorylate and activate these IRFs.
However, C6 does not inhibit TBK1- and IKKe-independent IRF7 activation or the
induction of promoters by constitutively active forms of IRF3 or IRF7, indicating
that C6 acts at the level of the TBK1/IKKe complex. Consistent with this notion, 
C6 immunoprecipitated with the TBK1 complex scaffold proteins TANK, SINTBAD and
NAP1. C6 is expressed early during infection and is present in both nucleus and
cytoplasm. Mutant viruses in which the C6L gene is deleted, or mutated so that
the C6 protein is not expressed, replicated normally in cell culture but were
attenuated in two in vivo models of infection compared to wild type and revertant
controls. Thus C6 contributes to VACV virulence and might do so via the
inhibition of PRR-induced activation of IRF3 and IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3169548
PMID: 21931555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002169. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002169. Epub 2011
Sep 8.

Disruption of TLR3 signaling due to cleavage of TRIF by the hepatitis A virus
protease-polymerase processing intermediate, 3CD.

Qu L(1), Feng Z, Yamane D, Liang Y, Lanford RE, Li K, Lemon SM.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Division of Infectious
Diseases, Department of Medicine, The University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and cytosolic RIG-I-like helicases (RIG-I and MDA5)
sense viral RNAs and activate innate immune signaling pathways that induce
expression of interferon (IFN) through specific adaptor proteins, TIR
domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon-ß (TRIF), and mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS), respectively. Previously, we demonstrated
that hepatitis A virus (HAV), a unique hepatotropic human picornavirus, disrupts 
RIG-I/MDA5 signaling by targeting MAVS for cleavage by 3ABC, a precursor of the
sole HAV protease, 3C(pro), that is derived by auto-processing of the P3 (3ABCD) 
segment of the viral polyprotein. Here, we show that HAV also disrupts TLR3
signaling, inhibiting poly(I:C)-stimulated dimerization of IFN regulatory factor 
3 (IRF-3), IRF-3 translocation to the nucleus, and IFN-ß promoter activation, by 
targeting TRIF for degradation by a distinct 3ABCD processing intermediate, the
3CD protease-polymerase precursor. TRIF is proteolytically cleaved by 3CD, but
not by the mature 3C(pro) protease or the 3ABC precursor that degrades MAVS.
3CD-mediated degradation of TRIF depends on both the cysteine protease activity
of 3C(pro) and downstream 3D(pol) sequence, but not 3D(pol) polymerase activity. 
Cleavage occurs at two non-canonical 3C(pro) recognition sequences in TRIF, and
involves a hierarchical process in which primary cleavage at Gln-554 is a
prerequisite for scission at Gln-190. The results of mutational studies indicate 
that 3D(pol) sequence modulates the substrate specificity of the upstream 3C(pro)
protease when fused to it in cis in 3CD, allowing 3CD to target cleavage sites
not normally recognized by 3C(pro). HAV thus disrupts both RIG-I/MDA5 and TLR3
signaling pathways through cleavage of essential adaptor proteins by two distinct
protease precursors derived from the common 3ABCD polyprotein processing
intermediate.

PMCID: PMC3169542
PMID: 21931545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Curr Opin Immunol. 2011 Oct;23(5):573-82. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2011.08.009. Epub
2011 Sep 15.

Protein kinase PKR and RNA adenosine deaminase ADAR1: new roles for old players
as modulators of the interferon response.

Pfaller CK(1), Li Z, George CX, Samuel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA.

Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) plays a centrally important role in antiviral innate 
immunity, both for the production of interferon (IFN) and also in the actions of 
IFN. Among the IFN-inducible gene products are the protein kinase regulated by
RNA (PKR) and the adenosine deaminase acting on RNA 1 (ADAR1). PKR is an
established key player in the antiviral actions of IFN, through dsRNA-dependent
activation and subsequent phosphorylation of protein synthesis initiation factor 
eIF2a thereby altering the translational pattern in cells. In addition, PKR plays
an important role as a positive effector that amplifies the production of IFN.
ADAR1 catalyzes the deamination of adenosine (A) in RNA with double-stranded (ds)
character, leading to the destabilization of RNA duplex structures and genetic
recoding. By contrast to the antiviral and proapoptotic functions associated with
PKR, the actions of ADAR1 in some instances are proviral and cell protective as
ADAR1 functions as a suppressor of dsRNA-mediated antiviral responses including
activation of PKR and interferon regulatory factor 3.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3190076
PMID: 21924887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Exp Med. 2011 Sep 26;208(10):2099-112. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102667. Epub 2011 Sep
12.

E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP facilitates Toll-like receptor signaling by recruiting
and polyubiquitinating Src and atypical PKC{zeta}.

Yang M(1), Wang C, Zhu X, Tang S, Shi L, Cao X, Chen T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou
310058, China; National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of
Immunology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai200433, China.

The carboxyl terminus of constitutive heat shock cognate 70 (HSC70)-interacting
protein (CHIP, also known as Stub1) is a U box-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase
that is important for protein quality control. The role of CHIP in innate
immunity is not known. Here, we report that CHIP knockdown inhibits Toll-like
receptor (TLR) 4- and TLR9-driven signaling, but not TLR3-driven signaling;
proinflammatory cytokine and type 1 interferon (IFN) production; and maturation
of antigen-presenting cells, including macrophages and dendritic cells. We
demonstrate that CHIP can recruit the tyrosine kinase Src and atypical protein
kinase C <U+03B6> (PKC<U+03B6>) to the TLR complex, thereby leading to activation of IL-1
receptor-associated kinase 1, TANK-binding kinase 1, and IFN regulatory factors 3
and 7. CHIP acts as an E3 ligase for Src and PKC<U+03B6> during TLR signaling.
CHIP-mediated enhancement of TLR signaling is inhibited by IFNAR deficiency or
expression of ubiquitination resistant mutant forms of Src or PKC<U+03B6>. These
findings suggest that CHIP facilitates the formation of a TLR signaling complex
by recruiting, ubiquitinating, and activating Src and PKC<U+03B6>.

PMCID: PMC3182058
PMID: 21911421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Dec;13(12):1907-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01680.x.
Epub 2011 Oct 11.

Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) is activated by influenza virus vRNA via the
pathogen pattern receptor Rig-I to promote efficient type I interferon
production.

Hrincius ER(1), Dierkes R, Anhlan D, Wixler V, Ludwig S, Ehrhardt C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Virology, ZMBE, Von Esmarch-Str. 56, D-48149 Muenster, 
Germany.

The phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K) was identified to be activated upon
influenza A virus (IAV) infection. An early and transient induction of PI3K
signalling is caused by viral attachment to cells and promotes virus entry. In
later phases of infection the kinase is activated by the viral NS1 protein to
prevent premature apoptosis. Besides these virus supporting functions, it was
suggested that PI3K signalling is involved in dsRNA and IAV induced antiviral
responses by enhancing the activity of interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3).
However, molecular mechanisms of activation remained obscure. Here we show that
accumulation of vRNA in cells infected with influenza A or B viruses results in
PI3K activation. Furthermore, expression of the RNA receptors Rig-I and MDA5 was 
increased upon stimulation with virion extracted vRNA or IAV infection. Using
siRNA approaches, Rig-I was identified as pathogen receptor necessary for
influenza virus vRNA sensing and subsequent PI3K activation in a TRIM25 and MAVS 
signalling dependent manner. Rig-I induced PI3K signalling was further shown to
be essential for complete IRF-3 activation and consequently induction of the type
I interferon response. These data identify PI3K as factor that is activated as
part of the Rig-I mediated anti-pathogen response to enhance expression of type I
interferons.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21899695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Nat Immunol. 2011 Sep 4;12(10):959-65. doi: 10.1038/ni.2091.

The helicase DDX41 senses intracellular DNA mediated by the adaptor STING in
dendritic cells.

Zhang Z(1), Yuan B, Bao M, Lu N, Kim T, Liu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Cancer Immunology Research, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2012 Feb;13(2):196.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Oct;12(10):929-30.

The recognition of pathogenic DNA is important to the initiation of antiviral
responses. Here we report the identification of DDX41, a member of the DEXDc
family of helicases, as an intracellular DNA sensor in myeloid dendritic cells
(mDCs). Knockdown of DDX41 expression by short hairpin RNA blocked the ability of
mDCs to mount type I interferon and cytokine responses to DNA and DNA viruses.
Overexpression of both DDX41 and the membrane-associated adaptor STING together
had a synergistic effect in promoting Ifnb promoter activity. DDX41 bound both
DNA and STING and localized together with STING in the cytosol. Knockdown of
DDX41 expression blocked activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase TBK1 
and the transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 by B-form DNA. Our results suggest
that DDX41 is an additional DNA sensor that depends on STING to sense pathogenic 
DNA.

PMCID: PMC3671854
PMID: 21892174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22982. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022982. Epub 2011 Aug 23.

HIV-1 Nef induces proinflammatory state in macrophages through its acidic cluster
domain: involvement of TNF alpha receptor associated factor 2.

Mangino G(1), Percario ZA, Fiorucci G, Vaccari G, Acconcia F, Chiarabelli C,
Leone S, Noto A, Horenkamp FA, Manrique S, Romeo G, Polticelli F, Geyer M,
Affabris E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University Roma Tre, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 Nef is a virulence factor that plays multiple roles during HIV 
replication. Recently, it has been described that Nef intersects the CD40
signalling in macrophages, leading to modification in the pattern of secreted
factors that appear able to recruit, activate and render T lymphocytes
susceptible to HIV infection. The engagement of CD40 by CD40L induces the
activation of different signalling cascades that require the recruitment of
specific tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors (i.e. TRAFs). We
hypothesized that TRAFs might be involved in the rapid activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, MAPKs
and IRF-3 that were previously described in Nef-treated macrophages to induce the
synthesis and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines, chemokines and IFNß to
activate STAT1, -2 and -3.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Searching for possible TRAF binding sites on Nef,
we found a TRAF2 consensus binding site in the AQEEEE sequence encompassing the
conserved four-glutamate acidic cluster. Here we show that all the signalling
effects we observed in Nef treated macrophages depend on the integrity of the
acidic cluster. In addition, Nef was able to interact in vitro with TRAF2, but
not TRAF6, and this interaction involved the acidic cluster. Finally silencing
experiments in THP-1 monocytic cells indicate that both TRAF2 and, surprisingly, 
TRAF6 are required for the Nef-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1 and
STAT2.
CONCLUSIONS: Results reported here revealed TRAF2 as a new possible cellular
interactor of Nef and highlighted that in monocytes/macrophages this viral
protein is able to manipulate both the TRAF/NF-<U+03BA>B and TRAF/IRF-3 signalling axes,
thereby inducing the synthesis of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines as
well as IFNß.

PMCID: PMC3160284
PMID: 21886773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Cell Immunol. 2011;271(2):342-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2011.07.014. Epub 2011
Aug 10.

Targeting interferon regulatory factors to inhibit activation of the type I IFN
response: implications for treatment of autoimmune disorders.

Sweeney SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, United States. ssweeney@ucsd.edu

The type I interferon (IFN) response plays a critical role in autoimmunity and is
induced by innate receptor ligation and activation of IFN-regulatory factors
(IRF). The present study investigated the roles and functional hierarchy of IRF3,
IRF5, and IRF7 in expression of cytokines, chemokines, and matrix
metalloproteinases in human THP1 monocytic cells. Targeted IRF knockdown was
followed by evaluation of gene expression, promoter activation, and mRNA
stability to determine the role of IRF as potential targets for modulating IFN
responses in patients with autoimmune diseases. IRF played a distinct role in
regulation of type I IFN gene expression in human monocytic cells and
specifically regulated gene expression through the IFN-stimulated response
element, with no contribution to transcription of traditionally AP-1 or NF-kB
regulated genes. IRF7 regulated IL-6 gene expression by increasing IL-6 mRNA
stability. IRF regulation of inflammation and induction of the IFN signature
might contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases and therefore
represent novel therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3248225
PMID: 21872224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 14;286(41):35663-74. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.267567. Epub
2011 Aug 23.

Polyubiquitin binding to optineurin is required for optimal activation of
TANK-binding kinase 1 and production of interferon ß.

Gleason CE(1), Ordureau A, Gourlay R, Arthur JS, Cohen P.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation Unit, The Sir James Black
Centre, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1
5EH, Scotland, UK.

TANK-binding kinase (TBK1) is essential for transcription of the interferon (IFN)
ß gene in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and double-stranded RNA, but the
molecular mechanisms that underlie the activation of TBK1 are incompletely
understood. Previously, we identified the NF-<U+03BA>B essential modulator
(NEMO)-related polyubiquitin-binding protein, optineurin (OPTN), as a novel
binding partner of TBK1. To determine whether the ubiquitin-binding function of
OPTN is involved in regulating TBK1 and IFNß production, we generated a mouse in 
which wild-type optineurin was replaced by the polyubiquitin binding-defective
mutant, OPTN(D477N/D477N). In this study, we found that LPS or poly(I:C)-induced 
TBK1 activity was significantly reduced in bone marrow-derived macrophage (BMDM) 
from OPTN(D477N/D477N) mice. Consistent with this, the phosphorylation of IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and the production of IFNß mRNA and secretion were
reduced. Stimulation of BMDMs with LPS triggered the phosphorylation of OPTN,
which was reversed by phosphatase treatment and prevented by pharmacological
inhibition of both the canonical I<U+03BA>B kinases (IKKa/ß) and the IKK-related kinases
(TBK1/IKKe). In contrast, LPS-stimulated phosphorylation of OPTN(D477N) was
markedly reduced in BMDMs from OPTN(D477N/D477N) mice, and inhibition of the
canonical IKKs alone prevented phosphorylation, providing further evidence that
ubiquitin binding to OPTN contributes to LPS-induced TBK1 activation. TBK1 and
IKKß phosphorylated OPTN preferentially at Ser-177 and Ser-513, respectively, in 
vitro. In conclusion, our results suggest that OPTN binds to polyubiquitylated
species formed in response to LPS and poly(I:C), enhancing the activation of TBK1
that is required for optimal phosphorylation of IRF3 and production of IFNß.

PMCID: PMC3195586
PMID: 21862579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Immune Netw. 2011 Jun;11(3):155-62. doi: 10.4110/in.2011.11.3.155. Epub 2011 Jun 
30.

Ribosomal Protein L19 and L22 Modulate TLR3 Signaling.

Yang EJ(1), Seo JW, Choi IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Instititute for Immunology and Immunological
Diseases, and Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) recognizes double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
and induces inflammation. In this study we attempted to ascertain if there are
endogenous host molecules controlling the production of cytokines and chemokines.
Two candidates, ribosomal protein L19 and L22, were analyzed to determine if they
influence cytokine production followed by TLR3 activation. In this study we
report that L19 acts upon production of IP-10 or IL-8 differently in glioblastoma
cells.
METHODS: L19 or L22 was transfected into HEK293-TLR3, A549 or A172 cells. After
treatment with several inhibitors of NF-kB, PI3K, p38 or ERK, production of IL-8 
or IP-10 was measured by ELISA. siRNA was introduced to suppress expression of
L19. After Vesicular stomatitis virus infection, viral multiplication was
measured by western blot.
RESULTS: L19 increased ERK activation to produce IL-8. In A172 cells, in which
TLR3 is expressed at endosomes, L19 inhibited interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) activation and IP-10 production to facilitate viral multiplication,
whereas L19 inhibited viral multiplication in A549 cells bearing TLR3 on their
cell membrane.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that L19 regulates TLR3 signaling, which is cell 
type specific and may be involved in pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases and
chronic inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC3153667
PMID: 21860608  [PubMed]


298. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Nov;32(11):1660-7. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr189. Epub 2011 Aug
22.

Interferon-signaling pathway: associations with colon and rectal cancer risk and 
subsequent survival.

Slattery ML(1), Lundgreen A, Bondurant KL, Wolff RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah Health Sciences Center,
295 Chipeta Way, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA. marty.slattery@hsc.utah.edu

Interferons (IFNs) are proteins involved in many functions including antiviral
and antimicrobial response, apoptosis, cell cycle control and mediating other
cytokines. IFN gamma (IFNG) is a proinflammatory cytokine that modulates many
immune-related genes. In this study we examine genetic variation in IFNG, IFNGR1,
IFNGR2 and interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) to determine associations with
colon and rectal cancer and survival after diagnosis. We include data from two
population-based incident studies of colon cancer (1555 cases and 1956 controls) 
and rectal cancer (754 cases and 959 controls). Five tagSNPs in IFNG, IRF2 and
IRF3 were associated with colon cancer and eight tagSNPs in IFNGR1, IFNGR2, IRF2,
IRF4, IRF6 and IRF8 were associated with rectal cancer. IRF3 rs2304204 was
associated with the strongest direct association and IRF2 3775554 with the
strongest inverse association for colon cancer [odds ratios (ORs) 1.43, 95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.12-1.82 for recessive model and 0.52, 95% CI 0.28-0.97
for unrestricted model]. For rectal cancer, IFNGR1 rs3799488 was directly
associated with risk (OR 2.30, 95% CI 1.04-5.09 for recessive model), whereas
IRF6 rs861020 was inversely associated with risk (OR 0.57, 95% CI 0.34-0.95).
Several single-nucleotide polymorphisms interacted significant with both NF-<U+03BA>B1
and IL6 and with aspirin/non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and cigarette
smoking. Using a summary score to estimate mutational load, we observed a hazard 
rate ratio (HRR) close to 5.00 (95% CI 2.73-8.99) for both colon and rectal (HRR 
4.83, 95% CI 2.34-10.05) cancer for those in the category having the most at-risk
genotypes. These data suggest the importance of IFN-signaling pathway on colon
and rectal cancer risk and survival after diagnosis.

PMCID: PMC3204348
PMID: 21859832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Microbiol Immunol. 2011 Nov;55(11):760-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2011.00379.x.

Analysis of interaction of Sendai virus V protein and melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5.

Sakaguchi T(1), Irie T, Kuwayama M, Ueno T, Yoshida A, Kawabata R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima 734-8551, Japan.

Sendai virus (SeV), a pneumotropic virus of rodents, has an accessory protein, V,
and the V protein has been shown to interact with MDA5, inhibiting IRF3
activation and interferon-ß production. In the present study, interaction of the 
V protein with various IRF3-activating proteins including MDA5 was investigated
in a co-immunoprecipitation assay. We also investigated interaction of mutant V
proteins from SeVs of low pathogenicity with MDA5. The V protein interacted with 
at least retinoic acid inducible gene I, inhibitor of <U+03BA>B kinase epsilon and IRF3 
other than MDA5. However, only MDA5 interacted with the V protein dependently on 
the C-terminal V unique (Vu) region, inhibiting IRF3 reporter activation. The Vu 
region has been shown to be important for viral pathogenicity. We thus focused on
interaction of the V protein with MDA5. Point mutations in the Vu region
destabilized the V protein or abolished the interaction with MDA5 when the V
protein was stable. The V-R320G protein was highly stable and interacted with
MDA5, but did not inhibit activation of IRF3 induced by MDA5. Viral pathogenicity
of SeV is related to the inhibitory effect of the V protein on MDA5, but is not
always related to the binding of V protein with MDA5.

© 2011 The Societies and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 21851384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Infect Dis. 2011 Sep 1;204(5):793-801. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir381.

Hepatitis C Virus nonstructural 5A protein inhibits lipopolysaccharide-mediated
apoptosis of hepatocytes by decreasing expression of Toll-like receptor 4.

Tamura R(1), Kanda T, Imazeki F, Wu S, Nakamoto S, Tanaka T, Arai M, Fujiwara K, 
Saito K, Roger T, Wakita T, Shirasawa H, Yokosuka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Oncology, Chiba University, Graduate
School of Medicine, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) nonstructural protein 5A (NS5A) has been
shown to modulate multiple cellular processes, including apoptosis. The aim of
this study was to assess the effects of HCV NS5A on apoptosis induced by
Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 ligand, lipopolysaccharide (LPS).
METHODS: Apoptotic responses to TLR4 ligands and the expression of molecules
involved in TLR signaling pathways in human hepatocytes were examined with or
without expression of HCV NS5A.
RESULTS: HCV NS5A protected HepG2 hepatocytes against LPS-induced apoptosis, an
effect linked to reduced TLR4 expression. A similar downregulation of TLR4
expression was observed in Huh-7-expressing genotype 1b and 2a. In agreement with
these findings, NS5A inhibited the expression of numerous genes encoding for
molecules involved in TLR4 signaling, such as CD14, MD-2, myeloid differentiation
primary response gene 88, interferon regulatory factor 3, and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B2.
Consistent with a conferred prosurvival advantage, NS5A diminished the
poly(adenosine diphosphate-ribose) polymerase cleavage and the activation of
caspases 3, 7, 8, and 9 and increased the expression of anti-apoptotic molecules 
Bcl-2 and c-FLIP.
CONCLUSIONS: HCV NS5A downregulates TLR4 signaling and LPS-induced apoptotic
pathways in human hepatocytes, suggesting that disruption of TLR4-mediated
apoptosis may play a role in the pathogenesis of HCV infection.

PMID: 21844306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2011;780:101-11. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-5632-3_9.

A new role for myeloid HO-1 in the innate to adaptive crosstalk and immune
homeostasis.

Koliaraki V, Kollias G.

Increasing evidence supports the presence of a dynamic crosstalk between innate
and adaptive immunity with a pivotal role played by pathways governing innate
immune responses. TLRs (Toll-like receptors) and RLHs (retinoic acid-inducible
gene I [RIG-I]-like helicases) are known to play a key role in these processes. A
molecule of high significance in the protection against innate and adaptive
immune aberrations is heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1). HO-1 is a microsomal enzyme that
catalyses the degradation of heme to iron, carbon monoxide and bilirubin. These
by-products appear to be the key mediators of its anti--inflammatory and
cytoprotective action, mainly through the downregulation of pro-inflammatory and 
upregulation of anti-inflammatory molecules. Recent data from our lab support the
presence of an additional direct effect of myeloid HO-1 on innate immune
conditioning, and more specifically on the TLR3/TLR4/RIG-I pathway. In myeloid
cells, HO-1 forms a complex with the transcription factor IRF3 (Interferon
regulating factor 3) and is required for IRF3 phosphorylation and consequent
type-I interferon and chemokine gene induction. Myeloid HO-1-deficient mice show 
reduced expression of IRF3 target genes and altered responses to infectious and
organ-specific auto-immune diseases. This new frame of understanding HO-1
function should also be important for the future design of novel interventions
differentially targeting the enzymatic versus the IRF3 modulating properties of
HO-1.

PMID: 21842368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Virol. 2011 Oct;85(20):10814-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00104-11. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Myxoma virus induces type I interferon production in murine plasmacytoid
dendritic cells via a TLR9/MyD88-, IRF5/IRF7-, and IFNAR-dependent pathway.

Dai P(1), Cao H, Merghoub T, Avogadri F, Wang W, Parikh T, Fang CM, Pitha PM,
Fitzgerald KA, Rahman MM, McFadden G, Hu X, Houghton AN, Shuman S, Deng L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10065, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(23):12835.

Poxviruses are large DNA viruses that replicate in the cytoplasm of infected
cells. Myxoma virus is a rabbit poxvirus that belongs to the Leporipoxvirus
genus. It causes a lethal disease called myxomatosis in European rabbits but
cannot sustain any detectable infection in nonlagomorphs. Vaccinia virus is a
prototypal orthopoxvirus that was used as a vaccine to eradicate smallpox. Myxoma
virus is nonpathogenic in mice, whereas systemic infection with vaccinia virus
can be lethal even in immunocompetent mice. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs)
are potent type I interferon (IFN)-producing cells that play important roles in
antiviral innate immunity. How poxviruses are sensed by pDCs to induce type I IFN
production is not well understood. Here we report that infection of primary
murine pDCs with myxoma virus, but not with vaccinia virus, induces IFN-a, IFN-ß,
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and interleukin-12p70 (IL-12p70) production. Using
pDCs derived from genetic knockout mice, we show that the myxoma virus-induced
innate immune response requires the endosomal DNA sensor TLR9 and its adaptor
MyD88, transcription factors IRF5 and IRF7, and the type I IFN positive-feedback 
loop mediated by IFNAR1. It is independent of the cytoplasmic RNA sensing pathway
mediated by the mitochondrial adaptor molecule MAVS, the TLR3 adaptor TRIF, or
the transcription factor IRF3. Using pharmacological inhibitors, we demonstrate
that myxoma virus-induced type I IFN and IL-12p70 production in murine pDCs is
also dependent on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt. Furthermore, our 
results reveal that the N-terminal Z-DNA/RNA binding domain of vaccinia virulence
factor E3, which is missing in the orthologous M029 protein expressed by myxoma
virus, plays an inhibitory role in poxvirus sensing and innate cytokine
production by murine pDCs.

PMCID: PMC3187486
PMID: 21835795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Virol. 2011 Nov;85(21):11079-89. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05098-11. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Varicella-zoster virus immediate-early protein ORF61 abrogates the IRF3-mediated 
innate immune response through degradation of activated IRF3.

Zhu H(1), Zheng C, Xing J, Wang S, Li S, Lin R, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology and Viral Immunology Research Group, State Key Laboratory
of Virology, Wuhan Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan
430071, China.

Varicella-zoster virus (VZV) infection of differentiated cells within the host
and establishment of latency likely requires evasion of innate immunity and
limits secretion of antiviral cytokines. Here we report that its immediate-early 
protein ORF61 antagonizes the beta interferon (IFN-ß) pathway. VZV infection
down-modulated the Sendai virus (SeV)-activated IFN-ß pathway, including mRNA of 
IFN-ß and its downstream interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), ISG54 and ISG56.
Through a primary screening of VZV genes, we found that ORF61 inhibited
SeV-mediated activation of IFN-ß and ISRE (IFN-stimulated response element)
promoter activities but only slightly affected NF-<U+03BA>B promoter activity, implying 
that the IFN-ß pathway may be blocked in the IRF3 branch. An indirect
immunofluorescence assay demonstrated that ectopic expression of ORF61 abrogated 
the detection of IRF3 in SeV-infected cells; however, it did not affect
endogenous dormant IRF3 in noninfected cells. Additionally, ORF61 was shown to be
partially colocalized with activated IRF3 in the nucleus upon treatment with
MG132, an inhibitor of proteasomes, and the direct interaction between ORF61 and 
activated IRF3 was confirmed by a coimmunoprecipitation assay. Furthermore,
Western blot analysis demonstrated that activated IRF3 was ubiquitinated in the
presence of ORF61, suggesting that ORF61 degraded phosphorylated IRF3 via a
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Semiquantitative reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR)
analysis demonstrated that the level of ISG54 and ISG56 mRNAs was also
downregulated by ORF61. Taken together, our results convincingly demonstrate that
ORF61 down-modulates the IRF3-mediated IFN-ß pathway by degradation of activated 
IRF3 via direct interaction, which may contribute to the pathogenesis of VZV
infection.

PMCID: PMC3194975
PMID: 21835786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Hepatol. 2012 Jan;56(1):70-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2011.07.017. Epub 2011 Aug 9.

Targeted impairment of innate antiviral responses in the liver of chronic
hepatitis C patients.

Jouan L(1), Chatel-Chaix L, Melançon P, Rodrigue-Gervais IG, Raymond VA, Selliah 
S, Bilodeau M, Grandvaux N, Lamarre D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et en Cancérologie (IRIC), Université de 
Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Innate sensing of viral infection activates a global defense
response including type I interferon (IFN) and IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs)
expression. We previously reported that HCV NS3/4A protease, an essential protein
in viral polyprotein processing, can abrogate antiviral signaling pathways and
effectors' response when ectopically expressed in human hepatocytes by cleaving
antiviral adaptor CARDIF. However, whether HCV mediates evasion of innate
immunity in patients with chronic infection remains unclear.
METHODS: In this study, paired liver biopsies and corresponding purified
hepatocytes of chronic hepatitis C patients and controls were subjected to
transcriptional analysis of selected innate immune genes and to CARDIF protein
detection.
RESULTS: We report that an antiviral response is largely supported by infected
hepatocytes as demonstrated by upregulation of the representative antiviral genes
ISG15, ISG56, and OASL as well as chemokines genes CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL11
measured in both HCV-derived liver biopsies and hepatocytes; that the mRNA levels
of these indicator ISGs correlate inversely with HCV RNA level; and more
importantly that expression of the early responsive IRF3-dependent genes type I
IFNß, type III IL28A/IL29, and chemokine CCL5 are severely compromised and
associated to a global decrease of CARDIF adaptor in infected hepatocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether the data argue for a strong viral strategy that
counteracts the host's early antiviral response of hepatocytes from chronic
patients without impairing ISGs induced via classical IFN pathway.

Copyright © 2011 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21835140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Nephron Exp Nephrol. 2011;119(2):e40-8. doi: 10.1159/000328923. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid induces the expression of interferon-stimulated
gene 20 in mesangial cells.

Imaizumi T(1), Tanaka H, Mechti N, Matsumiya T, Yoshida H, Sato F, Aizawa-Yashiro
T, Tsuruga K, Hayakari R, Satoh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of
Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan. timaizum@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene 20 (ISG20) is a 3'-to-5'
exonuclease specific for single-stranded RNA and involved in host defense
reactions against RNA viruses. The expression and the role of ISG20 in mesangial 
cells have not been reported.
METHODS: Normal human mesangial cells were cultured and treated with
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly (I:C)), an authentic double-stranded RNA
which mimics viral infection to cells. The effect of RNA interference of
Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) or IFN-ß on the ISG20 expression was examined. The
effect of a blocking antibody against the receptor for IFN-ß or anti-inflammatory
steroid dexamethasone was also examined.
RESULTS: Treatment of cells with poly (I:C) induced the expression of ISG20. The 
poly (I:C)-induced expression of ISG20 was inhibited by knockdown of TLR3, IFN
regulatery factor 3 (IRF3) or IFN-ß. Blocking of the receptor for IFN-ß
suppressed and overexpression of IFN-ß enhanced ISG20 expression. The poly
(I:C)-induced expressions of IFN-ß and ISG20 were inhibited by dexamethasone.
Transfection of mesangial cells with poly (I:C) or 5'-triphosphate
single-stranded RNA as a complex with cationic lipid also induced the expression 
of ISG20, and this was inhibited by knockdown of retinoic acid-inducible gene-I
(RIG-I).
CONCLUSION: Poly (I:C) induces the expression of ISG20 in mesangial cells. ISG20 
may be involved in anti-viral reactions in renal mesangial cells. TLR3, IRF3 and 
de novo synthesized IFN-ß may mediate the poly (I:C)-induced expression of ISG20,
and RIG-I may mediate ISG20 expression induced by poly (I:C)/cationic lipid
complex.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21832855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Benef Microbes. 2011 Jun;2(2):115-28. doi: 10.3920/BM2011.0005.

Bifidobacterium breve - HT-29 cell line interaction: modulation of TNF-a induced 
gene expression.

Boesten RJ(1), Schuren FH, Willemsen LE, Vriesema A, Knol J, De Vos WM.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Department, TNO Quality of Life, Utrechtseweg, Zeist, the
Netherlands. rjboesten@hotmail.com

To provide insight in the molecular basis for intestinal host-microbe
interactions, we determined the genome-wide transcriptional response of human
intestinal epithelial cells following exposure to cells of Bifidobacterium breve.
To select an appropriate test system reflecting inflammatory conditions, the
responsiveness to TNF-a was compared in T84, Caco-2 and HT-29 cells. The highest 
TNF-a response was observed in HT-29 cells and this cell line was selected for
exposure to the B. breve strains M-16V, NR246 and UCC2003. After one hour of
bacterial pre-incubation followed by two hours of additional TNF-a stimulation,
B. breve M-16V (86%), but to a much lesser extent strains NR246 (50%) or UCC2003 
(32%), showed a strain-specific reduction of the HT-29 transcriptional response
to the inflammatory treatment. The most important functional groups of genes that
were transcriptionally suppressed by the presence of B. breve M-16V, were found
to be involved in immune regulation and apoptotic processes. About 54% of the
TNF-a induced genes were solely suppressed by the presence of B. breve M-16V.
These included apoptosis-related cysteine protease caspase 7 (CASP7), interferon 
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), amyloid beta (A4) precursor proteinbinding family A
member 1 (APBA1), NADPH oxidase (NOX5), and leukemia inhibitory factor receptor
(LIFR). The extracellular IL-8 concentration was determined by an immunological
assay but did not change significantly, indicating that B. breve M-16V only
partially modulates the TNF-a pathway. In conclusion, this study shows that B.
breve strains modulate gene expression in HT-29 cells under inflammatory
conditions in a strain-specific way.

PMID: 21831793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023135. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

MyD88 and STING signaling pathways are required for IRF3-mediated IFN-ß induction
in response to Brucella abortus infection.

de Almeida LA(1), Carvalho NB, Oliveira FS, Lacerda TL, Vasconcelos AC, Nogueira 
L, Bafica A, Silva AM, Oliveira SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, Institute of Biological Sciences,
Federal University of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte-Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Type I interferons (IFNs) are cytokines that orchestrate diverse immune responses
to viral and bacterial infections. Although typically considered to be most
important molecules in response to viruses, type I IFNs are also induced by most,
if not all, bacterial pathogens. In this study, we addressed the role of type I
IFN signaling during Brucella abortus infection, a facultative intracellular
bacterial pathogen that causes abortion in domestic animals and undulant fever in
humans. Herein, we have shown that B. abortus induced IFN-ß in macrophages and
splenocytes. Further, IFN-ß induction by Brucella was mediated by IRF3 signaling 
pathway and activates IFN-stimulated genes via STAT1 phosphorylation. In
addition, IFN-ß expression induced by Brucella is independent of TLRs and TRIF
signaling but MyD88-dependent, a pathway not yet described for Gram-negative
bacteria. Furthermore, we have identified Brucella DNA as the major bacterial
component to induce IFN-ß and our study revealed that this molecule operates
through a mechanism dependent on RNA polymerase III to be sensed probably by an
unknown receptor via the adaptor molecule STING. Finally, we have demonstrated
that IFN-aßR KO mice are more resistant to infection suggesting that type I IFN
signaling is detrimental to host control of Brucella. This resistance phenotype
is accompanied by increased IFN-<U+03B3> and NO production by IFN-aßR KO spleen cells
and reduced apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3149075
PMID: 21829705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. J Proteome Res. 2011 Oct 7;10(10):4661-70. doi: 10.1021/pr200461p. Epub 2011 Aug 
26.

Identification and functional characterization of 14-3-3 in TLR2 signaling.

Schuster TB(1), Costina V, Findeisen P, Neumaier M, Ahmad-Nejad P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Chemistry, Medical Faculty Mannheim, University of
Heidelberg , Theodor-Kutzer-Ufer 1-3, D-68167 Mannheim, Germany.

The Interleukin-1/Toll-like receptor signaling pathway is a crucial signaling
pathway within the innate immune system and the use of mass spectrometric
techniques became valuable to investigate signal transduction pathways. To date
only a few reports exist that focus on the mass spectrometric identification of
novel signaling intermediates within the TLR signal transduction pathway. Here we
used this approach systematically to identify new interaction partners of the TLR
signaling pathway and subsequently characterized them functionally. We identified
14-3-3 theta as a new member of the TLR signaling complex. With genetic
complementation assays, we demonstrate that 14-3-3 negatively regulates
TLR2-dependent NF-<U+03BA>B activity and amplifies the TLR4-dependent activation of the 
transcription factor. While 14-3-3 has no effect on TLR-induced apoptosis in
innate immune cells, it controls the release of the inflammatory, IRF3-dependent 
cytokines like RANTES and IP-10 after stimulation with LPS. Most strikingly,
14-3-3 controls the production of proinflammatory cytokines like IL-6, IL-8, and 
TNFa in a different manner. Our results identify 14-3-3 theta as a new and
important regulatory protein in the TLR signaling suppressing the MyD88-dependent
pathway.

PMID: 21827211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Infect Immun. 2011 Oct;79(10):4131-45. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05120-11. Epub 2011 Aug
8.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa suppresses interferon response to rhinovirus infection in 
cystic fibrosis but not in normal bronchial epithelial cells.

Chattoraj SS(1), Ganesan S, Faris A, Comstock A, Lee WM, Sajjan US.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0688, USA.

Despite increased morbidity associated with secondary respiratory viral
infections in cystic fibrosis (CF) patients with chronic Pseudomonas aeruginosa
infection, the underlying mechanisms are not well understood. Here, we
investigated the effect of P. aeruginosa infection on the innate immune responses
of bronchial epithelial cells to rhinovirus (RV) infection. CF cells sequentially
infected with mucoid P. aeruginosa (MPA) and RV showed lower levels of
interferons (IFNs) and higher viral loads than those of RV-infected cells. Unlike
results for CF cells, normal bronchial epithelial cells coinfected with MPA/RV
showed higher IFN expression than RV-infected cells. In both CF and normal cells,
the RV-stimulated IFN response requires phosphorylation of Akt and interferon
response factor 3 (IRF3). Preinfection with MPA inhibited RV-stimulated Akt
phosphorylation and decreased IRF3 phosphorylation in CF cells but not in normal 
cells. Compared to normal, unstimulated CF cells or normal cells treated with
CFTR inhibitor showed increased reactive oxygen species (ROS) production.
Treatment of CF cells with antioxidants prior to MPA infection partially reversed
the suppressive effect of MPA on the RV-stimulated IFN response. Together, these 
results suggest that MPA preinfection inhibits viral clearance by suppressing the
antiviral response particularly in CF cells but not in normal cells. Further,
increased oxidative stress in CF cells appears to modulate the innate immune
responses to coinfection.

PMCID: PMC3187241
PMID: 21825067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Immunity. 2011 Aug 26;35(2):194-207. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.016. Epub 2011
Aug 4.

Innate immune recognition of an AT-rich stem-loop DNA motif in the Plasmodium
falciparum genome.

Sharma S(1), DeOliveira RB, Kalantari P, Parroche P, Goutagny N, Jiang Z, Chan J,
Bartholomeu DC, Lauw F, Hall JP, Barber GN, Gazzinelli RT, Fitzgerald KA,
Golenbock DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 
01605, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Aug 26;35(2):149-51.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Sep;11(9):569.

Although Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) has been implicated in cytokine and type I
interferon (IFN) production during malaria in humans and mice, the high AT
content of the Plasmodium falciparum genome prompted us to examine the
possibility that malarial DNA triggered TLR9-independent pathways. Over 6000
ATTTTTAC ("AT-rich") motifs are present in the genome of P. falciparum, which we 
show here potently induce type I IFNs. Parasite DNA, parasitized erythrocytes and
oligonucleotides containing the AT-rich motif induce type I IFNs via a pathway
that did not involve the previously described sensors TLR9, DAI, RNA
polymerase-III or IFI16/p204. Rather, AT-rich DNA sensing involved an unknown
receptor that coupled to the STING, TBK1 and IRF3-IRF7 signaling pathway. Mice
lacking IRF3, IRF7, the kinase TBK1 or the type I IFN receptor were resistant to 
otherwise lethal cerebral malaria. Collectively, these observations implicate
AT-rich DNA sensing via STING, TBK1 and IRF3-IRF7 in P. falciparum malaria.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3162998
PMID: 21820332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Oct;9(10):1356-65. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0185. Epub 
2011 Aug 4.

Suppression of IRF4 by IRF1, 3, and 7 in Noxa expression is a necessary event for
IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated tumor elimination.

Piya S(1), Moon AR, Song PI, Hiscott J, Lin R, Seol DW, Kim TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chosun University School of Medicine, Dong-Gu,
Gwang-ju 501-759, Korea.

IFN-<U+03B3> plays a critical role in tumor immunosurveillance by affecting either
immune cells or tumor cells; however, IFN-mediated effects on tumor elimination
are largely unknown. In this study, we showed that IFN regulatory factors (IRF)
modulated by IFNs up- and downregulated Noxa expression, a prodeath BH3 protein, 
in various cancer cells. Inhibition of Noxa expression using short hairpin RNA in
tumor cells leads to resistance against lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced tumor
elimination, in which IFN-<U+03B3> is known as a critical effecter in mice. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis in both CT26 cells and SP2/0 cells, sensitive and
resistant to LPS-induced tumor elimination, respectively, revealed that the
responsiveness of IRF1, 3, 4, and 7 in the Noxa promoter region in response to
IFN-<U+03B3> might be crucial in LPS-induced tumor elimination. IRF1, 3, and 7 were
upregulated by IFN-<U+03B3> and activated Noxa expression, leading to the death of Noxa 
wild-type baby mouse kidney (BMK) cells but not of Noxa-deficient BMK cells. In
contrast, IRF4 acts as a repressor for Noxa expression and inhibits cell death
induced by IRF1, 3, or 7. Therefore, although IFN-<U+03B3> alone are not able to induce 
cell death in tumor cells in vitro, Noxa induction by IFN-<U+03B3>, which is regulated
by the balance between its activators (IRF1, 3, and 7) and its repressor (IRF4), 
is crucial to increasing the susceptibility of tumor cells to immune
cell-mediated cytotoxicity.

PMID: 21816905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 23;286(38):33037-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.257022. Epub
2011 Aug 4.

Caspase-8-mediated cleavage inhibits IRF-3 protein by facilitating its
proteasome-mediated degradation.

Sears N(1), Sen GC, Stark GR, Chattopadhyay S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) plays a central role in inducing the
expression of cellular antiviral genes, including the interferon-ß gene, in
response to Pattern Recognition Receptors. IRF-3 is targeted for
proteasome-mediated degradation, which modulates the strength and duration of the
innate immune responses that depend on it. We have found that caspase-8, which is
activated by cytosolic RIG-I-dependent signaling, catalyzes an essential
intermediate step in the ubiquitination and proteasome-mediated degradation of
IRF-3. Mutation of a consensus cleavage site within IRF-3 generates a form that
is not cleaved by caspase-8 and that is protected from ubiquitination and
degradation. An in vitro assay confirms the direct action of caspase-8 cleavage
on IRF-3. We also show that caspase-8-mediated cleavage of IRF-3 helps to
modulate dsRNA-dependent gene induction.

PMCID: PMC3190878
PMID: 21816816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 1;187(5):2595-601. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100088. Epub 2011
Aug 3.

MPYS is required for IFN response factor 3 activation and type I IFN production
in the response of cultured phagocytes to bacterial second messengers
cyclic-di-AMP and cyclic-di-GMP.

Jin L(1), Hill KK, Filak H, Mogan J, Knowles H, Zhang B, Perraud AL, Cambier JC, 
Lenz LL.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Department of Immunology, University of Colorado Denver School of
Medicine, Denver, CO 80206, USA.

Cyclic-di-GMP and cyclic-di-AMP are second messengers produced by bacteria and
influence bacterial cell survival, differentiation, colonization, biofilm
formation, virulence, and bacteria-host interactions. In this study, we show that
in both RAW264.7 macrophage cells and primary bone marrow-derived macrophages,
the production of IFN-ß and IL-6, but not TNF, in response to cyclic-di-AMP and
cyclic-di-GMP requires MPYS (also known as STING, MITA, and TMEM173).
Furthermore, expression of MPYS was required for IFN response factor 3 but not
NF-<U+03BA>B activation in response to these bacterial metabolites. We also confirm that
MPYS is required for type I IFN production by cultured macrophages infected with 
the intracellular pathogens Listeria monocytogenes and Francisella tularensis.
However, during systemic infection with either pathogen, MPYS deficiency did not 
impact bacterial burdens in infected spleens. Serum IFN-ß and IL-6 concentrations
in the infected control and MPYS(-/-) mice were also similar at 24 h
postinfection, suggesting that these pathogens stimulate MPYS-independent
cytokine production during in vivo infection. Our findings indicate that
bifurcating MPYS-dependent and -independent pathways mediate sensing of cytosolic
bacterial infections.

PMCID: PMC3159690
PMID: 21813776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 1;187(5):2559-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100963. Epub 2011
Aug 3.

IFN-induced TPR protein IFIT3 potentiates antiviral signaling by bridging MAVS
and TBK1.

Liu XY(1), Chen W, Wei B, Shan YF, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Intracellular RNA viruses are sensed by receptors retinoic acid-inducible gene
I/MDA5, which trigger formation of the mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS)
complex on mitochondria. Consequently, this leads to the activation of
TNFR-associated factor family member-associated NF-<U+03BA>B activator-binding kinase 1 
(TBK1) and phosphorylation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). It remains to be
elucidated how MAVS activates TBK1/IRF3. In this study, we report that
IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 3 (IFIT3) is significantly
induced upon RNA virus infection. Ectopic expression or knockdown of IFIT3 could,
respectively, enhance or impair IRF3-mediated gene expression. Mechanistically,
the tetratrico-peptide repeat motif (E164/E165) of IFIT3 interacts with the N
terminus (K38) of TBK1, thus bridging TBK1 to MAVS on the mitochondrion.
Disruption of this interaction markedly attenuates the activation of TBK1 and
IRF3. Furthermore, host antiviral responses are significantly boosted or crippled
in the presence or absence of IFIT3. Collectively, our study characterizes IFIT3 
as an important modulator in innate immunity, revealing a new function of the
IFIT family proteins (IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats).

PMID: 21813773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Virol. 2011 Oct;85(20):10926-31. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00862-11. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Membrane perturbation elicits an IRF3-dependent, interferon-independent antiviral
response.

Noyce RS(1), Taylor K, Ciechonska M, Collins SE, Duncan R, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Institute for Infectious
Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

We previously found that enveloped virus binding and penetration are necessary to
initiate an interferon-independent, IRF3-mediated antiviral response. To
investigate whether membrane perturbations that accompany membrane
fusion-dependent enveloped-virus entry are necessary and sufficient for
antiviral-state induction, we utilized a reovirus fusion-associated small
transmembrane (FAST) protein. Membrane disturbances during FAST protein-mediated 
fusion, in the absence of additional innate immune response triggers, are
sufficient to elicit interferon-stimulated gene induction and establishment of an
antiviral state. Using sensors of membrane disruption to activate an
IRF3-dependent, interferon-independent antiviral state may provide cells with a
rapid, broad-spectrum innate immune response to enveloped-virus infections.

PMCID: PMC3187479
PMID: 21813605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Virology. 2011 Sep 15;418(1):40-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2011.06.028. Epub 2011
Aug 2.

IRF3 polymorphisms induce different innate anti-Theiler's virus immune responses 
in RAW264.7 macrophages.

Moore TC(1), Al-Salleeh FM, Brown DM, Petro TM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska Lincoln, Lincoln, NE
68583-0740, USA.

Persistent viral infections can lead to disease such as myocarditis. Theiler's
murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) infects macrophages of SJL/J (H-2s) mice
establishing persistent infections leading to demyelinating disease. In contrast 
macrophages from B10.S (H-2s) mice clear TMEV. Activation of the transcription
factor IRF3 induces IFNß, ISG56, and apoptosis for viral clearance, but also
inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-23 and IL6, which contribute to disease. Here 
we identify polymorphisms in the IRF3 of SJL/J versus B10.S mice that are located
in DNA binding, nuclear localization, and autoinhibitory domains. SJL-IRF3
expression in RAW264.7 macrophage cells with or without TMEV infection decreased 
IL-23p19 promoter activity compared with B10S-IRF3. In contrast SJL-IRF3
increased IL-6, ISG56 and IFNß in response to TMEV. B10S-IRF3 expression
augmented apoptotic caspase activation and decreased viral RNA in TMEV-infected
macrophages while SJL-IRF3 increased viral replication with less caspase
activation. Therefore IRF3 polymorphisms contribute to viral persistence and
altered cytokine expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3163758
PMID: 21810534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Neurovirol. 2011 Aug;17(4):353-67. doi: 10.1007/s13365-011-0041-6. Epub 2011
Jul 30.

The type I interferon response bridles rabies virus infection and reduces
pathogenicity.

Chopy D(1), Detje CN, Lafage M, Kalinke U, Lafon M.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Virologie Institut Pasteur, Unité de Neuroimmunologie Virale,
75015, Paris, France.

Rabies virus (RABV) is a neurotropic virus transmitted by the bite of an infected
animal that triggers a fatal encephalomyelitis. During its migration in the
nervous system (NS), RABV triggers an innate immune response, including a type I 
IFN response well known to limit viral infections. We showed that although the
neuroinvasive RABV strain CVS-NIV dampens type I IFN signaling by inhibiting IRF3
phosphorylation and STAT2 translocation, an early and transient type I IFN
response is still triggered in the infected neuronal cells and NS. This urged us 
to investigate the role of type I IFN on RABV infection. We showed that primary
mouse neurons (DRGs) of type I IFN(a/ß) receptor deficient mice (IFNAR(-/-) mice)
were more susceptible to RABV than DRGs of WT mice. In addition, exogenous type I
IFN is partially efficient in preventing and slowing down infection in human
neuroblastoma cells. Intra-muscular inoculation of type I IFNAR deficient mice
[IFNAR(-/-) mice and NesCre ((+/-)) IFNAR ((flox/flox)) mice lacking IFNAR in
neural cells of neuroectodermal origin only] with RABV reveals that the type I
IFN response limits RABV dissemination in the inoculated muscle, slows down
invasion of the spinal cord, and delays mortality. Thus, the type I IFN which is 
still produced in the NS during RABV infection is efficient enough to reduce
neuroinvasiveness and pathogenicity and partially protect the host from fatal
infection.

PMID: 21805057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. ScientificWorldJournal. 2011 Jul 28;11:1496-508. doi: 10.1100/tsw.2011.133.

Circulating ribonucleic acids and metabolic stress parameters may reflect
progression of autoimmune or inflammatory conditions in juvenile type 1 diabetes.

Kocic G(1), Pavlovic R, Najman S, Nikolic G, Sokolovic D, Jevtovic-Stoimenov T,
Musovic D, Veljkovic A, Kocic R, Djindjic N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical Faculty University Nis, Serbia.
kocicrg@yahoo.co.uk

The sensing of ribonucleic acids (RNAs) by the monocyte/macrophage system occurs 
through the TLR7/8 Toll-like receptor family, the retinoic acid-inducible protein
I (RIG-I), and the melanoma differentiation-associated protein-5 (MDA-5). The aim
of the present study was to evaluate the effect of circulating RNAs, isolated
from juvenile type 1 diabetic patients and healthy control children, on the
inflammatory, apoptotic, and antiviral response in human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) isolated from a healthy donor. Obtained effects were
compared to the effects of metabolic stress parameters (hyperglycemia, oxidative 
and nitrosative stress). Forty-eight patients with juvenile type 1 diabetes and
control children were included in the study. By performing the chromatographic
analysis of circulating RNAs, the peak at the retention time 0.645 min for
diabetic and control RNA samples was identified. To determine whether circulating
RNAs have an agonistic or antagonistic effect on the signaling pathways involved 
in inflammatory, apoptotic, and antiviral cascade, their effect on TLR8, RIG-I,
MDA-5, MyD88, NF-KB, IRF-3, phosphoIRF-3, IRF-7, RIP, and p38 was evaluated. A
significantly lower level was achieved by cultivating PBMCs with circulating RNAs
isolated from type 1 diabetic children, compared to the intact PBMCs, in relation
to TLR-8, MDA-5, NF-KB, phospho IRF-3, and RIP, while it was higher for Bax. All 
the metabolic stress conditions up-regulated NF-KB, Bcl-2, and Bax. The NF-êB
determination seems to be the most sensitive parameter that may reflect disease
processes associated with the progression of autoimmune or inflammatory
conditions, while the IRF3/phosphoIRF3 ratio may suggest an insufficient
antiviral response.

PMID: 21805019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Oct 15;184(8):928-38. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201102-0271OC. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

Enhancing Nrf2 pathway by disruption of Keap1 in myeloid leukocytes protects
against sepsis.

Kong X(1), Thimmulappa R, Craciun F, Harvey C, Singh A, Kombairaju P, Reddy SP,
Remick D, Biswal S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Bloomberg School of Public
Health, Johns Hopkins University, 615 N. Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

RATIONALE: Sepsis syndrome is characterized by inappropriate amplified systemic
inflammatory response and bacteremia that promote multiorgan failure and
mortality. Nuclear factor-erythroid 2 p45-related factor 2 (Nrf2) regulates a
pleiotropic cytoprotective defense program including antioxidants and protects
against several inflammatory disorders by inhibiting oxidative tissue injuries.
However, the role of enhanced Nrf2 activity in modulating innate immune responses
to microbial infection and pathogenesis of sepsis is unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether Nrf2 in myeloid leukocytes alters inflammatory
response and protects against sepsis.
METHODS: Mice with deletion of Nrf2 or kelch-like ECH-associated protein (Keap1) 
in myeloid leukocyte cells and respective floxed controls were subjected to cecal
ligation and puncture-induced sepsis and were assessed for survival, organ
injury, systemic inflammation, and bacteremia. Using LPS-stimulated peritoneal
macrophages, Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 surface trafficking and downstream
signaling events were analyzed.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Mortality, organ injury, circulating levels of
inflammatory mediators, and bacteremia were markedly reduced in LysM-Keap1(-/-)
compared with respective floxed controls (Keap1(f/f) or Nrf2(f/f)) and
significantly elevated in LysM-Nrf2(-/-) mice after cecal ligation and puncture. 
Peritoneal macrophages from septic LysM-Keap1(-/-) mice showed a greater
bacterial phagocytic activity compared with LysM-Nrf2(-/-) and floxed controls.
LPS stimulation resulted in greater reactive oxygen species-induced cell surface 
transport of TLR4 from trans-Golgi network and subsequent TLR4 downstream
signaling (recruitment of MYD88 and TRIF, phosphorylation of IkB and IRF3, and
cytokine expression) in macrophages of LysM-Nrf2(-/-) compared with
LysM-Keap1(-/-) mice and floxed controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study shows that Nrf2 acts as a critical immunomodulator in
leukocytes, controls host inflammatory response to bacterial infection, and
protects against sepsis.

PMCID: PMC3208662
PMID: 21799073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 1;187(5):2531-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100642. Epub 2011 Jul
27.

Fish MITA serves as a mediator for distinct fish IFN gene activation dependent on
IRF3 or IRF7.

Sun F(1), Zhang YB, Liu TK, Shi J, Wang B, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China.

In mammals, cytosolic sensors retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like
receptors (RLRs) activate multiple signaling cascades initiating IFN-a/ß
expression. IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is required for the activation of
IFN-ß, which, in turn, primes the expression of most IFN-a genes by IFN-induced
IRF7 through the STAT1 pathway. In fish, RIG-I overexpression inhibits virus
infection by induction of IFN response; however, the subtle signaling cascade
mechanism remains to be identified. In this study, we clone an ortholog of MITA, 
a recently identified adaptor responsible for RLR pathway, from crucian carp
(Carassius auratus L.), and demonstrate its ability to suppress viral replication
through IRF3/7-dependent IFN response. The pivotal signaling molecules of RLR
pathway, including RIG-I, melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5, laboratory 
of genetics and physiology 2, and TANK-binding kinase 1, are also cloned and
characterized, confirming that the RLR-mediated IFN activation is conserved from 
fish to mammals. Further characterization of distinct IFN gene activation reveals
that zebrafish IFN1 and IFN3 are induced by the MITA pathway but are dependent on
distinct transcription factors. Whereas fish IFN genes cannot be classified into 
IFN-a or IFN-ß, zebrafish IFN1 is primarily regulated by IRF3, thereby resembling
that of IFN-ß, and zebrafish IFN3 is regulated by IRF7, thereby resembling of
those of IFN-as. In contrast with mammalian IFN-a/ß, zebrafish IFN1 and IFN3 are 
induced by the basally expressed IRF3 or IRF7, both of which are upregulated by
IFN and virus infection. Collectively, these data suggest that IFN genes in fish 
and mammals have evolved independently to acquire a similar mechanism triggering 
their expression.

PMID: 21795596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cell Microbiol. 2011 Nov;13(11):1668-82. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01646.x.
Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Dissection of a type I interferon pathway in controlling bacterial intracellular 
infection in mice.

Lippmann J(1), Müller HC, Naujoks J, Tabeling C, Shin S, Witzenrath M, Hellwig K,
Kirschning CJ, Taylor GA, Barchet W, Bauer S, Suttorp N, Roy CR, Opitz B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases and Pulmonary Medicine,
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin,
Germany.

Defence mechanisms against intracellular bacterial pathogens are incompletely
understood. Our study characterizes a type I IFN-dependent cell-autonomous
defence pathway directed against Legionella pneumophila, an intracellular model
organism and frequent cause of pneumonia. We show that macrophages infected with 
L. pneumophila produced IFNß in a STING- and IRF3- dependent manner. Paracrine
type I IFNs stimulated upregulation of IFN-stimulated genes and a cell-autonomous
defence pathway acting on replicating and non-replicating Legionella within their
specialized vacuole. Our infection experiments in mice lacking receptors for type
I and/or II IFNs show that type I IFNs contribute to expression of IFN-stimulated
genes and to bacterial clearance as well as resistance in L. pneumophila
pneumonia in addition to type II IFN. Overall, our study shows that paracrine
type I IFNs mediate defence against L. pneumophila, and demonstrates a protective
role of type I IFNs in in vivo infections with intracellular bacteria.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3196383
PMID: 21790939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Infect Immun. 2011 Oct;79(10):3922-33. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00140-11. Epub 2011 Jul
25.

Interferon regulatory transcription factor 3 protects mice from uterine horn
pathology during Chlamydia muridarum genital infection.

Prantner D(1), Sikes JD, Hennings L, Savenka AV, Basnakian AG, Nagarajan UM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Arkansas Children's Hospital Research Institute,
Little Rock, AR 72202, USA. nagarajanuma@uams.edu

Mice with the type I interferon (IFN) receptor gene knocked out (IFNAR KO mice)
or deficient for alpha/beta IFN (IFN-a/ß) signaling clear chlamydial infection
earlier than control mice and develop less oviduct pathology. Initiation of host 
IFN-ß transcription during an in vitro chlamydial infection requires interferon
regulatory transcription factor 3 (IRF3). The goal of the present study was to
characterize the influence of IRF3 on chlamydial genital infection and its
relationship to IFN-ß expression in the mouse model. IRF3 KO mice were able to
resolve infection as well as control mice, overcoming increased chlamydial
colonization and tissue burden early during infection. As previously observed for
IFNAR KO mice, IRF3 KO mice generated a potent antigen-specific T cell response. 
However, in contrast to IFNAR KO mice, IRF3 KO mice exhibited unusually severe
dilatation and pathology in the uterine horns but normal oviduct pathology after 
infection. Although IFN-ß expression in vivo was dependent on the presence of
IRF3 early in infection (before day 4), the IFN-independent function of IRF3 was 
likely driving this phenotype. Specifically, early during infection, the number
of apoptotic cells and the number of inflammatory cells were significantly less
in uterine horns from IRF3 KO mice than in those from control mice, despite an
increased chlamydial burden. To delineate the effects of IFN-ß versus IRF3,
neutralizing IFN-ß antibody was administered to wild-type (WT) mice during
chlamydial infection. IFN-ß depletion in WT mice mimicked that in IFN<U+0391>R KO mice
but not that in IRF3 KO mice with respect to both chlamydial clearance and
reduced oviduct pathology. These data suggest that IRF3 has a role in protection 
from uterine horn pathology that is independent of its function in IFN-ß
expression.

PMCID: PMC3187243
PMID: 21788382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Biochem Soc Trans. 2011 Aug;39(4):1086-91. doi: 10.1042/BST0391086.

Genetic relationships between A20/TNFAIP3, chronic inflammation and autoimmune
disease.

Vereecke L(1), Beyaert R, van Loo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, Unit of Molecular Signal
Transduction in Inflammation, VIB, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.

A20 [also known as TNFAIP3 (tumour necrosis factor a-induced protein 3)]
restricts and terminates inflammatory responses through modulation of the
ubiquitination status of central components in NF-<U+03BA>B (nuclear factor <U+03BA>B), IRF3
(interferon regulatory factor 3) and apoptosis signalling cascades. The phenotype
of mice with full or conditional A20 deletion illustrates that A20 expression is 
essential to prevent chronic inflammation and autoimmune pathology. In addition, 
polymorphisms within the A20 genomic locus have been associated with multiple
inflammatory and autoimmune disorders, including SLE (systemic lupus
erythaematosis), RA (rheumatoid arthritis), Crohn's disease and psoriasis. A20
has also been implicated as a tumour suppressor in several subsets of B-cell
lymphomas. The present review outlines recent findings that illustrate the effect
of A20 defects in disease pathogenesis and summarizes the identified A20
polymorphisms associated with different immunopathologies.

PMID: 21787353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Cell. 2011 Aug 5;146(3):448-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.06.041. Epub 2011 Jul
21.

MAVS forms functional prion-like aggregates to activate and propagate antiviral
innate immune response.

Hou F(1), Sun L, Zheng H, Skaug B, Jiang QX, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2011 Sep 2;146(5):841.

Comment in
    Cell. 2011 Aug 5;146(3):348-50.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Sep;11(9):570.

In response to viral infection, RIG-I-like RNA helicases bind to viral RNA and
activate the mitochondrial protein MAVS, which in turn activates the
transcription factors IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B to induce type I interferons. [corrected] We
have previously shown that RIG-I binds to unanchored lysine-63 (K63)
polyubiquitin chains and that this binding is important for MAVS activation;
however, the mechanism underlying MAVS activation is not understood. Here, we
show that viral infection induces the formation of very large MAVS aggregates,
which potently activate IRF3 in the cytosol. We find that a fraction of
recombinant MAVS protein forms fibrils that are capable of activating IRF3.
Remarkably, the MAVS fibrils behave like prions and effectively convert
endogenous MAVS into functional aggregates. We also show that, in the presence of
K63 ubiquitin chains, RIG-I catalyzes the conversion of MAVS on the mitochondrial
membrane to prion-like aggregates. These results suggest that a prion-like
conformational switch of MAVS activates and propagates the antiviral signaling
cascade.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3179916
PMID: 21782231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Innate Immun. 2012 Apr;18(2):325-32. doi: 10.1177/1753425911406944. Epub 2011 Jul
18.

Sindbis virus induced phosphorylation of IRF3 in human embryonic kidney cells is 
not dependent on mTOR.

Dhanushkodi NR(1), Mohankumar V, Raju R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Meharry Medical College, School of 
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) plays critical roles in immunity. We
previously showed that infection of human embryonic kidney (HEK) cells with
Sindbis virus (SIN), an enveloped RNA alphavirus, profoundly suppresses Akt/mTOR 
signaling, and host translation late during infection. To understand how SIN
mediated suppression of mTOR affects innate response, we analyzed phosphorylation
of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and expression of two antiviral genes.
Here we show strong phosphorylation of IRF3, and an increase in mRNA levels for
antiviral genes interferon stimulated gene (ISG)56 and interferon gamma inducible
protein (IP)-10 when intracellular viral RNA levels are high during late
infection. The mTOR inhibitors rapamycin and torin1 do not block, but mildly
upregulate these responses. Even after prolonged treatment with Ly294002, the
PI3K inhibitor only partially blocks SIN induced phosphorylation of IRF3. While
Ly294002 treatment downregulated the SIN induced expression of ISG56 mRNA levels,
it had no effect on SIN induced upregulation of IP-10 expression. These results
point to SIN replication-mediated activation of IRF3, independent of mTOR
function, when host protein synthesis is severely suppressed by virus infection.

PMID: 21768204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Nat Med. 2011 Jul 17;17(8):996-1002. doi: 10.1038/nm.2403.

DNA released from dying host cells mediates aluminum adjuvant activity.

Marichal T(1), Ohata K, Bedoret D, Mesnil C, Sabatel C, Kobiyama K, Lekeux P,
Coban C, Akira S, Ishii KJ, Bureau F, Desmet CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, Groupe Interdisciplinaire de 
Génoprotéomique Appliquée, University of Liège, Liège, Belgium.

Aluminum-based adjuvants (aluminum salts or alum) are widely used in human
vaccination, although their mechanisms of action are poorly understood. Here we
report that, in mice, alum causes cell death and the subsequent release of host
cell DNA, which acts as a potent endogenous immunostimulatory signal mediating
alum adjuvant activity. Furthermore, we propose that host DNA signaling
differentially regulates IgE and IgG1 production after alum-adjuvanted
immunization. We suggest that, on the one hand, host DNA induces primary B cell
responses, including IgG1 production, through interferon response factor 3
(Irf3)-independent mechanisms. On the other hand, we suggest that host DNA also
stimulates 'canonical' T helper type 2 (T(H)2) responses, associated with IgE
isotype switching and peripheral effector responses, through Irf3-dependent
mechanisms. The finding that host DNA released from dying cells acts as a
damage-associated molecular pattern that mediates alum adjuvant activity may
increase our understanding of the mechanisms of action of current vaccines and
help in the design of new adjuvants.

PMID: 21765404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Aug 5;411(3):516-22. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.06.161. Epub 2011 Jul 2.

Suppression of TLR4-mediated inflammatory response by macrophage class A
scavenger receptor (CD204).

Ohnishi K(1), Komohara Y, Fujiwara Y, Takemura K, Lei X, Nakagawa T, Sakashita N,
Takeya M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Faculty of 
Life Sciences, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

The class A scavenger receptor (SR-A, CD204), one of the principal receptors
expressed on macrophages, has been found to regulate inflammatory response and
attenuate septic endotoxemia. However, the detailed mechanism of this process has
not yet been well characterized. To clarify the regulative mechanisms of
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced macrophage activation by SR-A, we evaluated the 
activation of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-mediated signaling molecules in
SR-A-deficient (SR-A(-/-)) macrophages. In a septic shock model, the blood levels
of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a, interleukin (IL)-6 and interferon (IFN)-ß were 
significantly increased in SR-A(-/-) mice compared to wild-type mice, and
elevated nuclear factor kappa B (NF<U+03BA>B) activation was detected in SR-A(-/-)
macrophages. SR-A deletion increased the production of pro-inflammatory
cytokines, and the phosphorylation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and
NF<U+03BA>B in vitro. SR-A deletion also promoted the nuclear translocation of NF<U+03BA>B and 
IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3. In addition, a competitive binding assay with
acetylated low-density lipoprotein, an SR-A-specific ligand, and anti-SR-A
antibody induced significant activation of TLR4-mediated signaling molecules in
wild-type macrophages but not in SR-A(-/-) macrophages. These results suggest
that SR-A suppresses the macrophage activation by inhibiting the binding of LPS
to TLR4 in a competitive manner and it plays a pivotal role in the regulation of 
the LPS-induced inflammatory response.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21756882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Aug;22(8):1443-52. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010121260. Epub 2011 
Jul 8.

IRF4 deficiency abrogates lupus nephritis despite enhancing systemic cytokine
production.

Lech M(1), Weidenbusch M, Kulkarni OP, Ryu M, Darisipudi MN, Susanti HE,
Mittruecker HW, Mak TW, Anders HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Medizinische Poliklinik, University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.

The IFN-regulatory factors IRF1, IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 modulate processes involved
in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus and lupus nephritis, but the contribution
of IRF4, which has multiple roles in innate and adaptive immunity, is unknown. To
determine a putative pathogenic role of IRF4 in lupus, we crossed Irf4-deficient 
mice with autoimmune C57BL/6-(Fas)lpr mice. IRF4 deficiency associated with
increased activation of antigen-presenting cells in C57BL/6-(Fas)lpr mice,
resulting in a massive increase in plasma levels of TNF and IL-12p40, suggesting 
that IRF4 suppresses cytokine release in these mice. Nevertheless, IRF4
deficiency completely protected these mice from glomerulonephritis and lung
disease. The mice were hypogammaglobulinemic and lacked antinuclear and
anti-dsDNA autoantibodies, revealing the requirement of IRF4 for the maturation
of plasma cells. As a consequence, Irf4-deficient C57BL/6-(Fas)lpr mice neither
developed immune complex disease nor glomerular activation of complement. In
addition, lack of IRF4 impaired the maturation of Th17 effector T cells and
reduced plasma levels of IL-17 and IL-21, which are cytokines known to contribute
to autoimmune tissue injury. In summary, IRF4 deficiency enhances systemic
inflammation and the activation of antigen-presenting cells but also prevents the
maturation of plasma cells and effector T cells. Because these adaptive immune
effectors are essential for the evolution of lupus nephritis, we conclude that
IRF4 promotes the development of lupus nephritis despite suppressing
antigen-presenting cells.

PMCID: PMC3148699
PMID: 21742731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002076. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002076. Epub 2011
Jun 30.

A role for TLR4 in Clostridium difficile infection and the recognition of surface
layer proteins.

Ryan A(1), Lynch M, Smith SM, Amu S, Nel HJ, McCoy CE, Dowling JK, Draper E,
O'Reilly V, McCarthy C, O'Brien J, Ní Eidhin D, O'Connell MJ, Keogh B, Morton CO,
Rogers TR, Fallon PG, O'Neill LA, Kelleher D, Loscher CE.

Author information: 
(1)Immunomodulation Research Group, School of Biotechnology, Dublin City
University, Ireland.

Clostridium difficile is the etiological agent of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea
(AAD) and pseudomembranous colitis in humans. The role of the surface layer
proteins (SLPs) in this disease has not yet been fully explored. The aim of this 
study was to investigate a role for SLPs in the recognition of C. difficile and
the subsequent activation of the immune system. Bone marrow derived dendritic
cells (DCs) exposed to SLPs were assessed for production of inflammatory
cytokines, expression of cell surface markers and their ability to generate T
helper (Th) cell responses. DCs isolated from C3H/HeN and C3H/HeJ mice were used 
in order to examine whether SLPs are recognised by TLR4. The role of TLR4 in
infection was examined in TLR4-deficient mice. SLPs induced maturation of DCs
characterised by production of IL-12, TNFa and IL-10 and expression of MHC class 
II, CD40, CD80 and CD86. Furthermore, SLP-activated DCs generated Th cells
producing IFN<U+03B3> and IL-17. SLPs were unable to activate DCs isolated from
TLR4-mutant C3H/HeJ mice and failed to induce a subsequent Th cell response.
TLR4<U+207B>/<U+207B> and Myd88<U+207B>/<U+207B>, but not TRIF<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice were more susceptible than wild-type
mice to C. difficile infection. Furthermore, SLPs activated NF<U+03BA>B, but not IRF3,
downstream of TLR4. Our results indicate that SLPs isolated from C. difficile can
activate innate and adaptive immunity and that these effects are mediated by
TLR4, with TLR4 having a functional role in experimental C. difficile infection. 
This suggests an important role for SLPs in the recognition of C. difficile by
the immune system.

PMCID: PMC3128122
PMID: 21738466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011 Dec;13(12):1097-104. doi:
10.1111/j.1463-1326.2011.01466.x.

Metformin opposes impaired AMPK and SIRT1 function and deleterious changes in
core clock protein expression in white adipose tissue of genetically-obese db/db 
mice.

Caton PW(1), Kieswich J, Yaqoob MM, Holness MJ, Sugden MC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Diabetes, Blizard Institute, Bart's and the London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK.

AIM: AMPK activates SIRT1 in liver and skeletal muscle. Impaired circadian
function is associated with development of obesity. SIRT1 regulates circadian
function and is suppressed in white adipose tissue (WAT) of obese patients. We
examined the potential role of AMPK and SIRT1 in regulation of circadian
components in WAT of obese db/db mice and in mice fed a high-fat diet (HFD), and 
investigated whether metformin-mediated activation of AMPK opposed any
deleterious changes in the WAT clock mechanism.
METHODS: db/+ and db/db mice were administered metformin (250 mg/kg/day; 7 days).
Separately, mice were fed HFD for 16-weeks. 3T3-L1 adipocytes were incubated with
metformin, EX527 or FK866, inhibitors of SIRT1 and NAMPT, respectively. Gene and 
protein expression were measured by qRT-PCR and immunoblotting.
RESULTS: AMPK activity, NAMPT expression and SIRT1 expression were decreased in
WAT of db/db and HFD mice, in association with suppressed expression of the core 
circadian components CLOCK and BMAL1. Expression of Ppar<U+03B3> and the adipogenic
repressors Irf3 and Irf4 were also suppressed. Metformin increased AMPK activity 
in WAT of db/db mice and in metformin-treated adipocytes, with increased NAMPT,
SIRT1 and circadian component expression. Metformin-mediated induction of Clock
mRNA in adipocytes was blocked by inhibition of NAMPT and SIRT1.
CONCLUSIONS: Decreased AMPK-SIRT1 signalling in db/db and HFD mice impacts WAT
circadian function causing dysregulated lipid regulation, favouring an obese
phenotype. Metformin mediates a phenotypic shift away from lipid accretion
through AMPK-NAMPT-SIRT1 mediated changes in clock components, supporting
chronotherapeutic treatment approaches for obesity.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21733059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2011 Sep;128(3):610-7.e1-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2011.04.059. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

NEMO is a key component of NF-<U+03BA>B- and IRF-3-dependent TLR3-mediated immunity to
herpes simplex virus.

Audry M(1), Ciancanelli M, Yang K, Cobat A, Chang HH, Sancho-Shimizu V, Lorenzo
L, Niehues T, Reichenbach J, Li XX, Israel A, Abel L, Casanova JL, Zhang SY,
Jouanguy E, Puel A.

Author information: 
(1)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY10065, USA.

BACKGROUND: Children with germline mutations in Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3),
UNC93B1, TNF receptor-associated factor 3, and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 are prone to herpes simplex virus-1 encephalitis, owing to
impaired TLR3-triggered, UNC-93B-dependent, IFN-a/ß, and/or IFN-<U+03BB>-mediated signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1-dependent immunity.
OBJECTIVE: We explore here the molecular basis of the pathogenesis of herpes
simplex encephalitis in a child with a hypomorphic mutation in nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B 
(NF-<U+03BA>B) essential modulator, which encodes the regulatory subunit of the
inhibitor of the I<U+03BA>ß kinase complex.
METHODS: The TLR3 signaling pathway was investigated in the patient's fibroblasts
by analyses of IFN-ß, IFN-<U+03BB>, and IL-6 mRNA and protein levels, by quantitative
PCR and ELISA, respectively, upon TLR3 stimulation (TLR3 agonists or
TLR3-dependent viruses). NF-<U+03BA>B activation was assessed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and interferon regulatory factor 3 dimerization on native
gels after stimulation with a TLR3 agonist.
RESULTS: The patient's fibroblasts displayed impaired responses to TLR3
stimulation in terms of IFN-ß, IFN-<U+03BB>, and IL-6 production, owing to impaired
activation of both NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF-3. Moreover, vesicular stomatitis virus, a
potent IFN-inducer in human fibroblasts, and herpes simplex virus-1, induced only
low levels of IFN-ß and IFN-<U+03BB> in the patient's fibroblasts, resulting in enhanced
viral replication and cell death, as reported for UNC-93B-deficient fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Herpes simplex encephalitis may occur in patients carrying NF-<U+03BA>B
essential modulator mutations, due to the impairment of NF-<U+03BA>B- and interferon
regulatory factor 3-dependent-TLR3-mediated antiviral IFN production.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3164951
PMID: 21722947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Nov;131(11):2205-12. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.185. Epub 2011
Jun 30.

Extracellular double-stranded RNA induces TSLP via an endosomal acidification-
and NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent pathway in human keratinocytes.

Vu AT(1), Chen X, Xie Y, Kamijo S, Ushio H, Kawasaki J, Hara M, Ikeda S, Okumura 
K, Ogawa H, Takai T.

Author information: 
(1)Atopy (Allergy) Research Center, Juntendo University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) causes keratinocytes to release thymic stromal
lymphopoietin (TSLP), which plays a key role in allergic diseases. Endosomal
Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and cytosolic RIG-like receptors (RLRs) and PKR have 
been reported to recognize dsRNA. Here, we demonstrate that dsRNA induces TSLP in
keratinocytes via an endosomal acidification-dependent and NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated
pathway. After treatment with pharmacologic inhibitors or transfection with small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs), primary human keratinocytes were stimulated.
Bafilomycin A1, which inhibits endosomal acidification to block the TLR3 pathway,
blocked the dsRNA-induced expression of TSLP, IL-8, IFN-ß, and other molecules
including the dsRNA sensors, whereas it did not inhibit diacyllipopeptide-induced
expression of TSLP and IL-8. The dsRNA-induced gene expression of TSLP depended
on RelA, a component of NF-<U+03BA>B, but not IRF3, similar to IL-8 but different from
IFN-ß, which depended on both IRF3 and RelA. The results indicate that endosomal 
acidification and the subsequent activation of NF-<U+03BA>B are necessary to sense
extracellular dsRNA, suggesting the importance of the TLR3-NF-<U+03BA>B axis to trigger 
production of TSLP against the self dsRNA released from damaged cells or viral
dsRNA, in the epidermis, relating to skin inflammation including atopic
dermatitis (AD).

PMID: 21716324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 26;286(34):29492-500. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.252791. Epub
2011 Jun 24.

Altered Toll-like receptor 2-mediated endotoxin tolerance is related to
diminished interferon beta production.

Zaric SS(1), Coulter WA, Shelburne CE, Fulton CR, Zaric MS, Scott A, Lappin MJ,
Fitzgerald DC, Irwin CR, Taggart CC.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Infection and Immunity, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast,
Northern Ireland, United Kingdom. szaric01@qub.ac.uk

Induction of endotoxin tolerance leads to a reduced inflammatory response after
repeated challenge by LPS and is important for resolution of inflammation and
prevention of tissue damage. Enterobacterial LPS is recognized by the TLR4
signaling complex, whereas LPS of some non-enterobacterial organisms is capable
of signaling independently of TLR4 utilizing TLR2-mediated signal transduction
instead. In this study we report that Porphyromonas gingivalis LPS, a TLR2
agonist, fails to induce a fully endotoxin tolerant state in a human monocytic
cell line (THP-1) and mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages. In contrast to
significantly decreased production of human IL-8 and TNF-a and, in mice,
keratinocyte-derived cytokine (KC), macrophage inflammatory protein-2 (MIP-2),
and TNF-a after repeated challenge with Escherichia coli LPS, cells repeatedly
exposed to P. gingivalis LPS responded by producing less TNF-a but sustained
elevated secretion of IL-8, KC, and MIP-2. Furthermore, in endotoxin-tolerant
cells, production of IL-8 is controlled at the signaling level and correlates
well with NF-<U+03BA>B activation, whereas TNF-a expression is blocked at the gene
transcription level. Interferon ß plays an important role in attenuation of
chemokine expression in endotoxin-tolerized cells as shown in interferon
regulatory factor-3 knock-out mice. In addition, human gingival fibroblasts,
commonly known not to display LPS tolerance, were found to be tolerant to
repeated challenge by LPS if pretreated with interferon ß. The data suggest that 
the inability of the LPS-TLR2 complex to induce full endotoxin tolerance in
monocytes/macrophages is related to diminished production of interferon ß and may
partly explain the involvement of these LPS isoforms in the pathogenesis of
chronic inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC3190989
PMID: 21705332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cytokine. 2011 Sep;55(3):409-19. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.05.020. Epub 2011 Jun
22.

PPAR<U+03B3> agonist rosiglitazone ameliorates LPS-induced inflammation in vascular
smooth muscle cells via the TLR4/TRIF/IRF3/IP-10 signaling pathway.

Ji Y(1), Liu J, Wang Z, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Scientific Research Center, The Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710004, PR China.
jiyuanyuan1234@163.com

The activation of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) can
induce inflammation that are one of key etiological conditions for the
development of many chronic inflammatory diseases including atherosclerosis and
diabetes. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) agonists play a
crucial role in improving glucose and lipid homeostasis in the development of
cardiovascular diseases. Evidence is growing that benefits of PPAR<U+03B3> agonists may 
also be derived from the anti-inflammatory and anti-atherosclerotic properties of
these agents. However, the role of rosiglitazone in regulating LPS-induced
vascular inflammation has yet to be fully elucidated. The current study
demonstrated that rosiglitazone exerted a potent anti-inflammatory action via
decreasing interleukin-18 (IL-18), tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase-1
(TIMP-1), TLR4 and increasing PPAR<U+03B3> in LPS-induced VSMCs. Furthermore, treatment 
of VSMCs with the TLR4 blocker or TLR4 small-interfering RNA presented that the
regulatory effects of rosiglitazone on LPS-mediated inflammation in VSMCs were
dependent on TLR4. Interestingly, the results indicated that beneficial effects
of rosiglitazone on LPS-induced inflammation in VSMCs were mediated via
interference of TLR4 and its downstream signaling components including
Toll-interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing
interferon-ß (TRIF), interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and interferon-gamma
inducible protein 10 (IP-10). In summary, PPAR<U+03B3> agonist rosiglitazone exerts
anti-inflammatory property by antagonizing LPS-mediated inflammation in VSMCs.
More importantly, the regulation of the TRIF-dependent TLR4 signaling pathway
(TLR4/TRIF/ IRF3/IP-10) provides new insight to understand the mode of action of 
rosiglitazone for its anti-inflammatory effects.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21700474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20215. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020215. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Influenza A virus nucleoprotein exploits Hsp40 to inhibit PKR activation.

Sharma K(1), Tripathi S, Ranjan P, Kumar P, Garten R, Deyde V, Katz JM, Cox NJ,
Lal RB, Sambhara S, Lal SK.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Biotechnology, 
New Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: Double-stranded RNA dependent protein kinase (PKR) is a key regulator
of the anti-viral innate immune response in mammalian cells. PKR activity is
regulated by a 58 kilo Dalton cellular inhibitor (P58(IPK)), which is present in 
inactive state as a complex with Hsp40 under normal conditions. In case of
influenza A virus (IAV) infection, P58(IPK) is known to dissociate from Hsp40 and
inhibit PKR activation. However the influenza virus component responsible for PKR
inhibition through P58(IPK) activation was hitherto unknown.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Human heat shock 40 protein (Hsp40) was identified as an
interacting partner of Influenza A virus nucleoprotein (IAV NP) using a yeast
two-hybrid screen. This interaction was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation
studies from mammalian cells transfected with IAV NP expressing plasmid. Further,
the IAV NP-Hsp40 interaction was validated in mammalian cells infected with
various seasonal and pandemic strains of influenza viruses. Cellular localization
studies showed that NP and Hsp40 co-localize primarily in the nucleus. During IAV
infection in mammalian cells, expression of NP coincided with the dissociation of
P58(IPK) from Hsp40 and decrease PKR phosphorylation. We observed that, plasmid
based expression of NP in mammalian cells leads to decrease in PKR
phosphorylation. Furthermore, inhibition of NP expression during influenza virus 
replication led to PKR activation and concomitant increase in eIF2a
phosphorylation. Inhibition of NP expression also led to reduced IRF3
phosphorylation, enhanced IFN ß production and concomitant reduction of virus
replication. Taken together our data suggest that NP is the viral factor
responsible for P58(IPK) activation and subsequent inhibition of PKR-mediated
host response during IAV infection.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings demonstrate a novel role of IAV NP in inhibiting
PKR-mediated anti-viral host response and help us understand P58(IPK) mediated
inhibition of PKR activity during IAV infection.

PMCID: PMC3115951
PMID: 21698289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jun;7(6):e1002083. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002083. Epub 2011
Jun 16.

Induction of Noxa-mediated apoptosis by modified vaccinia virus Ankara depends on
viral recognition by cytosolic helicases, leading to IRF-3/IFN-ß-dependent
induction of pro-apoptotic Noxa.

Eitz Ferrer P(1), Potthoff S, Kirschnek S, Gasteiger G, Kastenmüller W, Ludwig H,
Paschen SA, Villunger A, Sutter G, Drexler I, Häcker G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Hygiene, Technische
Universität München, Munich, Germany.

Viral infection is a stimulus for apoptosis, and in order to sustain viral
replication many viruses are known to carry genes encoding apoptosis inhibitors. 
F1L, encoded by the orthopoxvirus modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) has a
Bcl-2-like structure. An MVA mutant lacking F1L (MVA<U+0394>F1L) induces apoptosis,
indicating that MVA infection activates and F1L functions to inhibit the
apoptotic pathway. In this study we investigated the events leading to apoptosis 
upon infection by MVA<U+0394>F1L. Apoptosis largely proceeded through the pro-apoptotic 
Bcl-2 family protein Bak with some contribution from Bax. Of the family of
pro-apoptotic BH3-only proteins, only the loss of Noxa provided substantial
protection, while the loss of Bim had a minor effect. In mice, MVA preferentially
infected macrophages and DCs in vivo. In both cell types wt MVA induced apoptosis
albeit more weakly than MVA<U+0394>F1L. The loss of Noxa had a significant protective
effect in macrophages, DC and primary lymphocytes, and the combined loss of Bim
and Noxa provided strong protection. Noxa protein was induced during infection,
and the induction of Noxa protein and apoptosis induction required transcription 
factor IRF3 and type I interferon signalling. We further observed that helicases 
RIG-I and MDA5 and their signalling adapter MAVS contribute to Noxa induction and
apoptosis in response to MVA infection. RNA isolated from MVA-infected cells
induced Noxa expression and apoptosis when transfected in the absence of viral
infection. We thus here describe a pathway leading from the detection of viral
RNA during MVA infection by the cytosolic helicase-pathway, to the up-regulation 
of Noxa and apoptosis via IRF3 and type I IFN signalling.

PMCID: PMC3116819
PMID: 21698224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Virus Res. 2011 Sep;160(1-2):143-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.06.003. Epub
2011 Jun 12.

Cytoplasmic localized infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) encoded by bovine
herpesvirus 1 inhibits ß interferon promoter activity and reduces IRF3
(interferon response factor 3) protein levels.

da Silva LF(1), Gaudreault N, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Nebraska,
Lincoln, NE 68503, United States.

Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1), an alpha-herpesvirinae subfamily member,
establishes a life-long latent infection in sensory neurons. Periodically, BHV-1 
reactivates from latency, infectious virus is spread, and consequently virus
transmission occurs. BHV-1 acute infection causes upper respiratory track
infections and conjunctivitis in infected cattle. As a result of transient
immune-suppression, BHV-1 infections can also lead to life-threatening secondary 
bacterial pneumonia that is referred to as bovine respiratory disease. The
infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) encoded by BHV-1 reduces human ß-interferon
(IFN-ß) promoter activity, in part, by inducing degradation of interferon
response factor 3 (IRF3) and interacting with IRF7. In contrast to humans, cattle
contain three IFN-ß genes. All three bovine IFN-ß proteins have anti-viral
activity: but each IFN-ß gene has a distinct transcriptional promoter. We have
recently cloned and characterized the three bovine IFN-ß promoters. Relative to
the human IFN-ß promoter, each of the three IFN-ß promoters contain differences
in the four positive regulatory domains that are required for virus-induced
activity. In this study, we demonstrate that bICP0 effectively inhibits bovine
IFN-ß promoter activity following transfection of low passage bovine cells with
interferon response factor 3 (IRF3) or IRF7. A bICP0 mutant that localizes to the
cytoplasm inhibits bovine IFN-ß promoter activity as efficiently as wt bICP0. The
cytoplasmic localized bICP0 protein also induced IRF3 degradation with similar
efficiency as wt bICP0. In summary, these studies suggested that cytoplasmic
localized bICP0 plays a role in inhibiting the IFN-ß response during productive
infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3412422
PMID: 21689696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Virol. 2011 Aug;85(16):8002-11. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00330-11. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Classical swine fever virus N(pro) limits type I interferon induction in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells by interacting with interferon regulatory factor 7.

Fiebach AR(1), Guzylack-Piriou L, Python S, Summerfield A, Ruggli N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunoprophylaxis (IVI), Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.

Viruses are detected by different classes of pattern recognition receptors that
lead to the activation of interferon regulatory factors (IRF) and consequently to
the induction of alpha/beta interferon (IFN-a/ß). In turn, efficient viral
strategies to escape the type I IFN-induced antiviral mechanisms have evolved.
Previous studies established that pestivirus N(pro) antagonizes the early innate 
immune response by targeting the transcription factor IRF3 for proteasomal
degradation. Here, we report that N(pro) of classical swine fever virus (CSFV)
interacts also with IRF7, another mediator of type I IFN induction. We
demonstrate that the Zn-binding domain of N(pro) is essential for the interaction
of N(pro) with IRF7. For IRF3 and IRF7, the DNA-binding domain, the central
region, and most of the regulatory domain are required for the interaction with
N(pro). Importantly, the induction of IRF7-dependent type I IFN responses in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) is reduced after wild-type CSFV infection
compared with infection with virus mutants unable to interact with IRF7. This is 
associated with lower levels of IRF7 in pDC. Consequently, wild-type but not
N(pro) mutant CSFV-infected pDC show reduced responses to other stimuli. Taken
together, the results of this study show that CSFV N(pro) is capable of
manipulating the function of IRF7 in pDC and provides the virus with an
additional strategy to circumvent the innate defense.

PMCID: PMC3147952
PMID: 21680532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e20681. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020681. Epub 2011 Jun 3.

Negative regulation of interferon-ß gene expression during acute and persistent
virus infections.

Ye J(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, United States of America.

The production of type I interferons (IFNs) in response to viral infections is
critical for antiviral immunity. However, IFN production is transient, and
continued expression can lead to inflammatory or autoimmune diseases. Thus,
understanding the mechanisms underlying the negative regulation of IFN expression
could lead to the development of novel therapeutic approaches to the treatment of
these diseases. We report that the transcription factor IRF3 plays a central role
in the negative regulation of interferon-ß (IFNß) expression during both acute
and persistent (chronic) virus infections. We show that the degradation of IRF3
during acute infections, rather than the activation of transcriptional
repressors, leads to the down regulation of IFNß expression. We also show that
the block to IFNß expression in mouse embryonic fibroblasts that are persistently
infected with Sendai virus (SeV) correlates with the absence of transcriptionally
active IRF3. Remarkably, ongoing protein synthesis and viral replication are
required to maintain repression of the IFNß gene in persistently infected cells, 
as the gene can be activated by the protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, or
by the antiviral drug ribavirin. Finally, we show that the SeV V protein inhibits
IRF3 activity in persistently infected cells. Thus, in conjunction with the known
interference with STAT1 by the SeV C protein, both IFN activation and its
signaling pathways are blocked in persistently infected cells. We conclude that
the transcription factor IRF3 is targeted for turnover and inactivation through
distinct mechanisms from both the host cells and virus, leading to the inhibition
of IFNß gene expression during acute and persistent viral infections. These
observations show that IRF3 plays a critical role, not only in the activation of 
the IFNß gene, but also in the controlling the duration of its expression. (284
words).

PMCID: PMC3108996
PMID: 21677781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Neurosci. 2011 Jun 8;31(23):8456-63. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0821-11.2011.

Multiple preconditioning paradigms converge on interferon regulatory
factor-dependent signaling to promote tolerance to ischemic brain injury.

Stevens SL(1), Leung PY, Vartanian KB, Gopalan B, Yang T, Simon RP, Stenzel-Poore
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

Ischemic tolerance can be induced by numerous preconditioning stimuli, including 
various Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands. We have shown previously that systemic 
administration of the TLR4 ligand LPS or the TLR9 ligand unmethylated CpG
oligodeoxynucleotide before transient brain ischemia in mice confers substantial 
protection against ischemic damage. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of
preconditioning, we compared brain genomic profiles in response to
preconditioning with these TLR ligands and with preconditioning via exposure to
brief ischemia. We found that exposure to the TLR ligands and brief ischemia
induced genomic changes in the brain characteristic of a TLR pathway-mediated
response. Interestingly, all three preconditioning stimuli resulted in a
reprogrammed response to stroke injury that converged on a shared subset of 13
genes not evident in the genomic profile from brains that were subjected to
stroke without prior preconditioning. Analysis of the promoter region of these
shared genes showed sequences required for interferon regulatory factor
(IRF)-mediated transcription. The importance of this IRF gene network was tested 
using mice deficient in IRF3 or IRF7. Our data show that both transcription
factors are required for TLR-mediated preconditioning and neuroprotection. These 
studies are the first to discover a convergent mechanism of neuroprotection
induced by preconditioning--one that potentially results in reprogramming of the 
TLR-mediated response to stroke and requires the presence of IRF3 and IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3130521
PMID: 21653850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Cell Commun Signal. 2011 Jun 2;9:16. doi: 10.1186/1478-811X-9-16.

FLIP (Flice-like inhibitory protein) suppresses cytoplasmic
double-stranded-RNA-induced apoptosis and NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3-mediated signaling.

Handa P(1), Tupper JC, Jordan KC, Harlan JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, University of Washington, Harborview Medical Center,
Box 359756, 325 Ninth Avenue, Seattle, WA 98104, USA. jharlan@u.washington.edu.

BACKGROUND: Cytoplasmic viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) is detected by a class 
of ubiquitous cytoplasmic RNA helicases, retinoic acid inducible gene-I (RIG-I)
and melanoma differentiation antigen-5 (MDA5), which initiate a signaling cascade
via their common adaptor called interferon-ß (IFN-ß) promoter stimulator-1
(IPS-1). This leads to the production of proinflammatory and antiviral cytokines,
the type I Interferons, via mainly nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and interferon 
response factor-3 (IRF3) transcription factors. Fas-associated death domain
(FADD) protein, receptor-interacting protein (RIP1), caspase-8 and tumor necrosis
factor receptor (TNFR)-associated death domain (TRADD) protein, all traditionally
associated with death receptor signaling, are also involved in RIG-I/MDA5
signaling pathway. We previously showed that FLIP (Flice-like inhibitory
protein), also designated as cflar (CASP8 and FADD-like apoptosis regulator),
negatively regulates lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)
signaling in endothelial cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and
protected against TLR4-mediated apoptosis.
RESULTS: In this study, we investigated the role of FLIP in cellular response to 
cytoplasmic polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid, poly(I:C), a synthetic analog of
dsRNA. Consistent with the previously described role of FADD in
RIG-I/MDA5-mediated apoptosis, we found that FLIP-/- MEFs were more susceptible
to killing by cytoplasmic poly(I:C). However, FLIP-/- MEFs also exhibited
markedly increased expression of NF-<U+03BA>B-and IRF3- dependent genes in response to
cytoplasmic poly(I:C). Importantly, reconstitution of FLIP in FLIP-/-MEFs
reversed the hyper-activation of IRF3- and NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated gene expression.
Further, we found that caspase-8 catalytic activity was not required for
cytoplasmic poly(I:C)-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide evidence for a crucial dual role for FLIP in
antiviral responses to cytoplasmic dsRNA: it protects from cytoplasmic
dsRNA-mediated cell death while down-regulating IRF3-and NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated gene
expression. Since the pathogenesis of several viral infections involves a
heightened and dysregulated cytokine response, a possible therapy could involve
modulating FLIP levels.

PMCID: PMC3129316
PMID: 21635783  [PubMed]


342. J Gen Virol. 2011 Sep;92(Pt 9):2153-9. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.032987-0. Epub 2011 Jun
1.

A novel mechanism for the inhibition of interferon regulatory factor-3-dependent 
gene expression by human respiratory syncytial virus NS1 protein.

Ren J(1), Liu T, Pang L, Li K, Garofalo RP, Casola A, Bao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX,
USA.

Human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), a leading cause of respiratory tract
infections in infants, inhibits type I interferon (IFN)-dependent signalling, as 
well as IFN synthesis. RSV non-structural protein NS1 plays a significant role in
this inhibition; however, the mechanism(s) responsible is not fully known. The
transcription factor interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3 is essential for
viral-induced IFN-ß synthesis. In this study, we found that NS1 protein inhibits 
IRF-3-dependent gene transcription in constitutively active IRF-3 overexpressing 
cells, demonstrating that NS1 directly targets IRF-3. Our data also demonstrate
that NS1 associates with IRF-3 and its transcriptional coactivator CBP, leading
to disrupted association of IRF-3 to CBP and subsequent reduced binding of IRF-3 
to the IFN-ß promoter without blocking viral-induced IRF-3 phosphorylation,
nuclear translocation and dimerization, thereby identifying a novel molecular
mechanism by which RSV inhibits IFN-ß synthesis.

PMCID: PMC3353388
PMID: 21632562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Gen Virol. 2011 Sep;92(Pt 9):1981-93. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.030296-0. Epub 2011
Jun 1.

Herpes simplex virus type 2 virion host shutoff protein suppresses innate dsRNA
antiviral pathways in human vaginal epithelial cells.

Yao XD(1), Rosenthal KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
ON L8S 4K1, Canada.

Viruses that establish persistent infections have evolved numerous strategies to 
evade host innate antiviral responses. We functionally assessed the role of
herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) virion host shutoff (vhs) protein on innate
immune sensing pathways in human vaginal epithelial cells (VK2 ECs). Infection of
cells with wild-type (WT) HSV-2 significantly decreased expression of innate
immune sensors of viral infection, Toll-like receptor (TLR)2, TLR3, retinoic acid
inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (Mda-5), 
relative to cells infected with a mutant that lacks vhs (vhsB) or mock-infected
cells. Transfection with HSV-2 vhs similarly decreased expression of TLR2, TLR3, 
RIG-I and Mda-5, which was also confirmed in human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293
cells. vhsB infection of VK2 cells caused robust increases in the active form of 
interferon regulatory factor (IRF)3 and its translocation to the nucleus compared
with the WT. Additionally, IRF3 activation by Sendai virus and
polyinosinic<U+200A>:<U+200A>polycytidylic acid-induced stimulation of beta interferon (IFN-ß) 
was significantly inhibited in vhs-transfected cells. Overall, our findings
provide the first evidence that HSV-2 vhs plays roles in selectively inhibiting
TLR3 and RIG-I/Mda-5, as well as TLR2-mediated antiviral pathways for sensing
dsRNA and effectively suppresses IFN-ß antiviral responses in human vaginal ECs.

PMID: 21632561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Protein Cell. 2011 May;2(5):351-7. doi: 10.1007/s13238-011-1045-y. Epub 2011 May 
28.

Retinoic acid inducible gene-I, more than a virus sensor.

Liu F(1), Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Protein Engineering and Plant Gene Engineering,
LSC, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Retinoic acid inducible gene-I (RIG-I) is a caspase recruitment domain (CARD)
containing protein that acts as an intracellular RNA receptor and senses virus
infection. After binding to double stranded RNA (dsRNA) or 5'-triphosphate single
stranded RNA (ssRNA), RIG-I transforms into an open conformation, translocates
onto mitochondria, and interacts with the downstream adaptor mitochondrial
antiviral signaling (MAVS) to induce the production of type I interferon and
inflammatory factors via IRF3/7 and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways, respectively. Recently,
accumulating evidence suggests that RIG-I could function in non-viral systems and
participate in a series of biological events, such as inflammation and
inflammation related diseases, cell proliferation, apoptosis and even senescence.
Here we review recent advances in antiviral study of RIG-I as well as the
functions of RIG-I in other fields.

PMID: 21626268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS Pathog. 2011 May;7(5):e1001345. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001345. Epub 2011
May 19.

Type I interferon production induced by Streptococcus pyogenes-derived nucleic
acids is required for host protection.

Gratz N(1), Hartweger H, Matt U, Kratochvill F, Janos M, Sigel S, Drobits B, Li
XD, Knapp S, Kovarik P.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and
Genetics, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Streptococcus pyogenes is a Gram-positive human pathogen that is recognized by
yet unknown pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). Engagement of these receptor
molecules during infection with S. pyogenes, a largely extracellular bacterium
with limited capacity for intracellular survival, causes innate immune cells to
produce inflammatory mediators such as TNF, but also type I interferon (IFN).
Here we show that signaling elicited by type I IFNs is required for successful
defense of mice against lethal subcutaneous cellulitis caused by S. pyogenes.
Type I IFN signaling was accompanied with reduced neutrophil recruitment to the
site of infection. Mechanistic analysis revealed that macrophages and
conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) employ different signaling pathways leading
to IFN-beta production. Macrophages required IRF3, STING, TBK1 and partially
MyD88, whereas in cDCs the IFN-beta production was fully dependent on IRF5 and
MyD88. Furthermore, IFN-beta production by macrophages was dependent on the
endosomal delivery of streptococcal DNA, while in cDCs streptococcal RNA was
identified as the IFN-beta inducer. Despite a role of MyD88 in both cell types,
the known IFN-inducing TLRs were individually not required for generation of the 
IFN-beta response. These results demonstrate that the innate immune system
employs several strategies to efficiently recognize S. pyogenes, a pathogenic
bacterium that succeeded in avoiding recognition by the standard arsenal of TLRs.

PMCID: PMC3098218
PMID: 21625574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Apr;51(4):610-8. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ker154.
Epub 2011 May 25.

Synoviocyte innate immune responses: TANK-binding kinase-1 as a potential
therapeutic target in rheumatoid arthritis.

Hammaker D(1), Boyle DL, Firestein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California
San Diego, School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Dr. MC0656, La Jolla, USA.
dhammaker@ucsd.edu

Comment in
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Apr;51(4):588-9.

OBJECTIVES: Innate immune responses in the rheumatoid synovium contribute to
inflammation and joint destruction in RA. Two I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK)-related kinases,
TNF receptor associated factor (TRAF) family member-associated nuclear factor
<U+03BA>-light-chain enhancer of activated B cells (NF-<U+03BA>B) activator (TANK)-binding
kinase 1 (TBK1) and IKKe, potentially regulate synovitis by activating IFN
response genes. These kinases induce the expression of inflammatory mediators
such as C-X-C motif ligand 10 (CXCL10)/IFN-<U+03B3>-induced protein 10<U+2009>kDa (IP-10) in
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS). Since IP-10 is a promising therapeutic target
in RA, we evaluated whether blocking TBK1 might be an effective way to modulate
IP-10 expression.
METHODS: Wild-type (WT) and IKKe(-/-) FLS were transfected with TBK1 or control
small interfering RNA (siRNA) and stimulated with polyinosinic
acid<U+2009>:<U+2009>polycytidylic acid [poly(I:C)]. Gene expression was assayed using
quantitative PCR. Cytokine production in culture supernatants was measured by
Luminex multiplex analysis. IFN-regulatory factor (IRF3) dimerization was
determined by native PAGE. IFN-ß and IP-10 promoter activity was measured using
luciferase reporter constructs.
RESULTS: Initial studies showed that siRNA markedly decreased TBK1 expression in 
cultured FLS. Poly(I:C)-induced IRF7 gene expression was inhibited in the absence
of TBK1, but not IKKe. IRF3 gene expression was similar to WT cells in TBK1 or
IKKe-deficient FLS. IRF3 dimerization required both TBK1 and IKKe. Surprisingly, 
IRF3-mediated gene and protein expression of IFN-ß and IP-10 was dependent on
TBK1, not IKKe. Promoter constructs showed that TBK1 decreased IP-10 gene
transcription and IP-10 mRNA stability was unaffected by TBK1 deficiency.
CONCLUSION: Based on the selective regulation of IP-10 in FLS, TBK1 appears to be
the optimal IKK-related kinase to target in RA.

PMCID: PMC3306173
PMID: 21613249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Pharmazie. 2011 Apr;66(4):293-300.

The TRIF/TBK1/IRF-3 activation pathway is the primary inhibitory target of
resveratrol, contributing to its broad-spectrum anti-inflammatory effects.

Kim MH(1), Yoo DS, Lee SY, Byeon SE, Lee YG, Min T, Rho HS, Rhee MH, Lee J, Cho
JY.

Author information: 
(1)College of Biomedical Science, Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Kangwon National University, Chuncheon, Korea.

Resveratrol, a stilbene type compound identified in wine and fruit juice, has
been found to exhibit various pharmacological activities such as anti-oxidative, 
anti-cancerous, anti-inflammatory and anti-aging effects. Although numerous
papers have explored the pharmacology of resveratrol in one particular cellular
action, how this compound can have multiple effects simultaneously has not been
fully addressed. In this study, therefore, we explored its broad-spectrum
inhibitory mechanism using lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-mediated inflammatory
responses and reporter gene assays involving overexpression of toll like receptor
(TLR) adaptor molecules. Co-transfection of adaptor molecules such as (1) myeloid
differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88), (2) Toll/4ll-1
Receptor-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-beta (TRIF), (3)
TRIF-related adaptor molecule (TRAM), or (4) TANK-binding kinase (TBK) 1 strongly
enhanced luciferase activity mediated by transcription factors including nuclear 
factor (NF)-KB, activator protein (AP)-1, and interferon regulatory factor
(IRF)-3. Of the adaptor proteins, TRIF and TBK1 but not MyD88 and IKK enhanced
luciferase activity mediated by these transcription factors. Resveratrol
dose-dependently suppressed LPS-induced NO production in macrophages. It also
blocked the increases in levels of mRNA for IFN-1, tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha, and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) that were induced by LPS.
Resveratrol diminished the translocation or activation of IRF-3 at 90min, c-Jun, 
a subunit of AP-1, and STAT-1 at 120 min, and p50, a subunit of NF-KB, at 60 and 
90 min. Resveratrol strongly suppressed the up-regulation of luciferase activity 
induced by these adaptor molecules with IC50 values of 5 to 65 microM. In
particular, higher inhibitory effects of resveratrol were when TRIF or TBK1 were 
overexpressed following cotransfection of luciferase constructs with IRF-3
binding sequences. Taken together, our data suggest that the suppression of TRIF 
and TBK1, which mediates transcriptional activation of NF-kappaB, AP-1, and
IRF-3, contributes to resveratrol's broad-spectrum inhibitory activity, and that 
this compound can be further developed as a lead anti-inflammatory compound.

PMID: 21612158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19910. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019910. Epub 2011 May 18.

The inflammatory response to double stranded DNA in endothelial cells is mediated
by NF<U+03BA>B and TNFa.

Patel SJ(1), Jindal R, King KR, Tilles AW, Yarmush ML.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Engineering in Medicine and the Department of Surgery,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Endothelial cells represent an important barrier between the intravascular
compartment and extravascular tissues, and therefore serve as key sensors,
communicators, and amplifiers of danger signals in innate immunity and
inflammation. Double stranded DNA (dsDNA) released from damaged host cells during
injury or introduced by pathogens during infection, has emerged as a potent
danger signal. While the dsDNA-mediated immune response has been extensively
studied in immune cells, little is known about the direct and indirect effects of
dsDNA on the vascular endothelium. In this study we show that direct dsDNA
stimulation of endothelial cells induces a potent proinflammatory response as
demonstrated by increased expression of ICAM1, E-selectin and VCAM1, and enhanced
leukocyte adhesion. This response was dependent on the stress kinases JNK and p38
MAPK, required the activation of proinflammatory transcription factors NF<U+03BA>B and
IRF3, and triggered the robust secretion of TNFa for sustained secondary
activation of the endothelium. DNA-induced TNFa secretion proved to be essential 
in vivo, as mice deficient in the TNF receptor were unable to mount an acute
inflammatory response to dsDNA. Our findings suggest that the endothelium plays
an active role in mediating dsDNA-induced inflammatory responses, and implicate
its importance in establishing an acute inflammatory response to sterile injury
or systemic infection, where host or pathogen derived dsDNA may serve as a danger
signal.

PMCID: PMC3097212
PMID: 21611132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 7;108(23):9554-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1017296108. Epub 2011 May 23.

Glucocorticoids target suppressor of cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1) and type 1
interferons to regulate Toll-like receptor-induced STAT1 activation.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Zhao Y, Kay TW, Muglia LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
TN 37232, USA. sandip.bhattacharyya@vanderbilt.edu

Endogenous and pharmacologic glucocorticoids (GCs) limit inflammatory cascades
initiated by Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation. A long-standing clinical
observation has been the delay between GC administration and the manifestation of
GC's anti-inflammatory actions. We hypothesized that the GCs would have
inhibitory effects that target late temporal pathways that propagate
proinflammatory signals. Here we interrogated signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 1 (STAT1) regulation by GC and its consequences for cytokine
production during activation of macrophages with TLR-specific ligands. We found
that robust STAT1 activation does not occur until 2-3 h after TLR engagement, and
that GC suppression of STAT1 phosphorylation first manifests at this time. GC
attenuates TLR4-mediated STAT1 activation only through induction of suppressor of
cytokine signaling 1 (SOCS1), which increases throughout the 6-h period after
treatment. Inhibition of TLR3-mediated STAT1 activation occurs via two
mechanisms, impairment of type I IFN secretion and induction of SOCS1. Our data
show that SOCS1 and type I interferons are critical GC targets for regulating
STAT1 activity and may account for overall GC effectiveness in inflammation
suppression in the clinically relevant time frame.

PMCID: PMC3111275
PMID: 21606371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Sep 1;39(16):7300-7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr325. Epub 2011
May 19.

Structures of apo IRF-3 and IRF-7 DNA binding domains: effect of loop L1 on DNA
binding.

De Ioannes P(1), Escalante CR, Aggarwal AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
Box 1677, 1425 Madison Avenue, NY 10029, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 are transcription factors essential
in the activation of interferon-ß (IFN-ß) gene in response to viral infections.
Although, both proteins recognize the same consensus IRF binding site AANNGAAA,
they have distinct DNA binding preferences for sites in vivo. The X-ray
structures of IRF-3 and IRF-7 DNA binding domains (DBDs) bound to IFN-ß promoter 
elements revealed flexibility in the loops (L1-L3) and the residues that make
contacts with the target sequence. To characterize the conformational changes
that occur on DNA binding and how they differ between IRF family members, we have
solved the X-ray structures of IRF-3 and IRF-7 DBDs in the absence of DNA. We
found that loop L1, carrying the conserved histidine that interacts with the DNA 
minor groove, is disordered in apo IRF-3 but is ordered in apo IRF-7. This is
reflected in differences in DNA binding affinities when the conserved histidine
in loop L1 is mutated to alanine in the two proteins. The stability of loop L1 in
IRF-7 derives from a unique combination of hydrophobic residues that pack against
the protein core. Together, our data show that differences in flexibility of loop
L1 are an important determinant of differential IRF-DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC3167601
PMID: 21596780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. MBio. 2011 May 17;2(3):e00016-11. doi: 10.1128/mBio.00016-11. Print 2011.

Streptococcus pneumoniae DNA initiates type I interferon signaling in the
respiratory tract.

Parker D(1), Martin FJ, Soong G, Harfenist BS, Aguilar JL, Ratner AJ, Fitzgerald 
KA, Schindler C, Prince A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA. dp2375@columbia.edu

The mucosal epithelium is the initial target for respiratory pathogens of all
types. While type I interferon (IFN) signaling is traditionally associated with
antiviral immunity, we demonstrate that the extracellular bacterial pathogen
Streptococcus pneumoniae activates the type I IFN cascade in airway epithelial
and dendritic cells. This response is dependent upon the pore-forming toxin
pneumolysin. Pneumococcal DNA activates IFN-ß expression through a
DAI/STING/TBK1/IRF3 cascade. Tlr4(-/-), Myd88(-/-), Trif(-/-), and Nod2(-/-)
mutant mice had no impairment of type I IFN signaling. Induction of type I IFN
signaling contributes to the eradication of pneumococcal carriage, as IFN-a/ß
receptor null mice had significantly increased nasal colonization with S.
pneumoniae compared with that of wild-type mice. These studies suggest that the
type I IFN cascade is a central component of the mucosal response to airway
bacterial pathogens and is responsive to bacterial pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns that are capable of accessing intracellular receptors.IMPORTANCE: The
bacterium Streptococcus pneumoniae is a leading cause of bacterial pneumonia,
leading to upwards of one million deaths a year worldwide and significant
economic burden. Although it is known that antibody is critical for efficient
phagocytosis, it is not known how this pathogen is sensed by the mucosal
epithelium. We demonstrate that this extracellular pathogen activates mucosal
signaling typically activated by viral pathogens via the pneumolysin pore to
activate intracellular receptors and the type I interferon (IFN) cascade. Mice
lacking the receptor to type I IFNs have a reduced ability to clear S.
pneumoniae, suggesting that the type I IFN cascade is central to the mucosal
clearance of this important pathogen.

PMCID: PMC3101776
PMID: 21586648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 8;286(27):24113-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.235275. Epub 2011
May 17.

Distinct functions of the mitogen-activated protein kinase-activated protein
(MAPKAP) kinases MK2 and MK3: MK2 mediates lipopolysaccharide-induced signal
transducers and activators of transcription 3 (STAT3) activation by preventing
negative regulatory effects of MK3.

Ehlting C(1), Ronkina N, Böhmer O, Albrecht U, Bode KA, Lang KS, Kotlyarov A,
Radzioch D, Gaestel M, Häussinger D, Bode JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious Diseases, Medical
Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University, D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

In LPS-treated macrophages, activation of STAT3 is considered to be crucial for
terminating the production of inflammatory cytokines. By analyzing the role of
MAPK-activated protein kinase (MK) 2 and MK3 for LPS-induced STAT3 activation in 
macrophages, the present study provides evidence that MK2 is crucial for STAT3
activation in response to LPS because it prevents MK3 from impeding IFNß gene
expression. Accordingly, LPS-induced IFNß gene expression is down-regulated in
MK2-deficient macrophages and can be reconstituted by additional ablation of the 
MK3 gene in MK2/3(-/-) macrophages. This is in contrast to LPS-induced IL-10
expression, which essentially requires the presence of MK2. Further analysis of
downstream signaling events involved in the transcriptional regulation of IFNß
gene expression suggests that, in the absence of MK2, MK3 impairs interferon
regulatory factor 3 protein expression and activation and inhibits nuclear
translocation of p65. This inhibition of p65 nuclear translocation coincides with
enhanced expression and delayed degradation of I<U+03BA>Bß, whereas expression of I<U+03BA>Ba
mRNA and protein is impaired in the absence of MK2. The observation that siRNA
directed against I<U+03BA>Bß is able to reconstitute I<U+03BA>Ba expression in MK2(-/-)
macrophages suggests that enhanced expression and delayed degradation of I<U+03BA>Bß and
impaired NF<U+03BA>B-dependent I<U+03BA>Ba expression are functionally linked. In summary,
evidence is provided that MK2 regulates LPS-induced IFNß expression and
downstream STAT3 activation as it restrains MK3 from mediating negative
regulatory effects on NF<U+03BA>B- and interferon regulatory factor 3-dependent LPS
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3129192
PMID: 21586572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Lupus. 2011 Aug;20(9):975-80. doi: 10.1177/0961203310394897. Epub 2011 May 16.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplant for systemic lupus erythematosus: Interferon
regulatory factor 7 activation correlates with the IFN signature and recurrent
disease.

Sweeney SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. ssweeney@ucsd.edu

The expression and activation of regulatory factors (IRF) and rinterferon (IFN)
response genes were evaluated in a patient treated with autologous hematopoietic 
stem cell transplant (HSCT) for refractory systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In
SLE patients, genetic variants of IRF5 and IRF7 have been associated with
increased serum IFNa levels, suggesting a pathogenic role in the type I IFN
response. Clinical and molecular analyses of an SLE patient treated with
high-dose immunosuppressive therapy and autologous stem cell transplant was
performed. Western blot analysis showed that induction of IRF7 protein expression
correlated with recurrent lupus disease activity. In addition, phosphorylation of
IRF3 and activation of 4<U+2009>E-BP1, a translational repressor of IRF7, preceded the
disease flare. In SLE post-transplant, recurrent disease activity and induction
of IRF7 protein expression correlated with activation of the IFN signature. This 
unique trend in regulation of IRF warrants further mechanistic investigation and 
confirmation with increased numbers of SLE patients.

PMID: 21576205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Aug 15;20(16):3129-37. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr215. Epub 2011 May
13.

Functional analysis of the RNF114 psoriasis susceptibility gene implicates innate
immune responses to double-stranded RNA in disease pathogenesis.

Bijlmakers MJ(1), Kanneganti SK, Barker JN, Trembath RC, Capon F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Infection and Inflammatory Disease, Kings College
London, School of Medicine at Guys, Kings College and St Thomas Hospitals,
London SE1 9RT, UK. marie.bijlmakers@kcl.ac.uk

Psoriasis is an immune-mediated skin disease, the aetiology of which remains
poorly understood. In recent years, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
helped to illuminate the molecular basis of this condition, by demonstrating the 
pathogenic involvement of multiple genes from the IL-23 and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways. A
GWAS carried out by our group also identified RNF114, a gene encoding a novel
ubiquitin binding protein, as a determinant for psoriasis susceptibility.
Although the function of RNF114 is unknown, its paralogue RNF125 has been shown
to regulate the RIG-I/MDA5 innate antiviral response. This signalling cascade,
which is activated by the presence of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) within the
cytoplasm, induces the production of type I interferon (IFN) through the
activation of the IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B transcription factors. Here, we explore the
hypothesis that RNF114 may also modulate RIG-I/MDA5 signalling. We show that
RNF114 associates with ubiquitinated proteins and that it is a soluble cytosolic 
protein that can be induced by interferons and synthetic dsRNA. Moreover, we
demonstrate that RNF114 over-expression enhances NF-<U+03BA>b and IRF3 reporter activity
and increases type I and type III IFN mRNA levels. These results indicate that
RNF114 regulates a positive feedback loop that enhances dsRNA induced production 
of type I IFN. Thus, our data point to a novel pathogenic pathway, where
dysregulation of RIG-I/MDA5 signalling leads to the over-production of type I
IFN, a key early mediator of epithelial inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3140818
PMID: 21571784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biochemistry. 2011 Jun 21;50(24):5419-25. doi: 10.1021/bi200303r. Epub 2011 May
31.

SARS-CoV accessory protein 3b induces AP-1 transcriptional activity through
activation of JNK and ERK pathways.

Varshney B(1), Lal SK.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Group, International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology, Aruna Asaf Ali Marg, New Delhi 110018, India.

The outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in 2003 in China,
characterized by atypical pneumonia, was associated with the emergence of a novel
coronavirus named severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV). Eight
accessory proteins of SARS coronavirus were the suspected players in the
pathogenesis of the virus. Among them, protein 3b localizes to the nucleus and
behaves as an interferon antagonist by inhibiting IRF3 activation. However, the
effect of 3b on the activity of other common host transcription factors remains
unexplored. In this work, we studied the effect of 3b on the transcriptional
activity of AP-1. Our findings elucidate augmentation of AP-1-dependent gene
expression in 3b-transfected Huh7 cells. Reporter gene and mobility shift assays 
depict an increase in the AP-1 transcriptional and DNA binding activity in the
presence of 3b. This increase in activity correlates with the activation of ERK
and JNK pathways. Furthermore, 3b expression potentiates AP-1-driven promoter
activity of proinflammatory cytokine MCP-1, suggesting a plausible role for 3b as
a virulence factor that might function by upregulating AP-1-dependent cytokine
levels in SARS-CoV infection.

PMID: 21561061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Trends Biochem Sci. 2011 Jul;36(7):347-54. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2011.03.004. Epub 
2011 May 4.

TAX1BP1, a ubiquitin-binding adaptor protein in innate immunity and beyond.

Verstrepen L(1), Verhelst K, Carpentier I, Beyaert R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Technologiepark 
927, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium; Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, Unit of
Molecular Signal Transduction in Inflammation, VIB, Technologiepark 927, B-9052
Ghent, Belgium.

The innate immune system senses and protects against invading microorganisms and 
endogenous danger signals by triggering inflammatory and antimicrobial responses.
However, dysregulation of these pathways, which involve the transcription factors
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3, can lead to
severe inflammatory diseases. Tax1-binding protein 1 (TAX1BP1) plays a key role
in the negative regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 signaling by acting in concert with 
the ubiquitin-editing enzyme A20. In addition to regulating A20 function in
anti-inflammatory and antiviral signaling pathways, TAX1BP1 also coordinates its 
antiapoptotic activities. Moreover, TAX1BP1 can also function as a
transcriptional coactivator for nuclear receptors and viral transactivators. In
this review, we discuss these findings in light of the emerging role of TAX1BP1
as a ubiquitin-binding adaptor protein.

2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21546252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Cytokine. 2011 Sep;55(3):441-5. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2011.03.023. Epub 2011 Apr
16.

Knockout of toll-like receptor-4 attenuates the pro-inflammatory state of
diabetes.

Devaraj S(1), Tobias P, Jialal I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Atherosclerosis and Metabolic Research, University of
California, Davis, Medical Center, Sacramento CA, USA.

Erratum in
    Cytokine. 2011 Dec;56(3):832.

Comment in
    Cytokine. 2011 Sep;55(3):446-7.

Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) is associated with increased vascular complications and is
a pro-inflammatory state. Recent findings have shown increased TLR2 and 4
expression, signaling, ligands, and functional activation in T1DM subjects
compared to controls and further accentuated in T1DM with microvascular
complications. Thus, the aim of this study was to examine if genetic deficiency
of TLR4 attenuates the increased inflammation associated with T1DM using the
streptozotocin-induced diabetic mouse model. C57BL/6 and TLR4(-/-) mice were
obtained and studied in the native state and following induction of diabetes
using streptozotocin. Diabetic (WT+STZ) mice had increased expression of both
TLR2 and TLR4, while TLR4(-/-) STZ mice had increased expression only of TLR2,
but not TLR4 compared to the non-diabetic mice TLR2 expression was significantly 
increased with STZ-induced diabetes and was unaffected by knockout of TLR4. Also,
levels of MyD88, IRAK-1 protein phosphorylation, Trif, IRF3, and NF-<U+03BA>B activity
were significantly reduced in TLR4(-/-) +STZ mice compared to the WT+STZ mice.
WT+STZ mice exhibited significantly increased levels of serum and macrophage
IL-1ß, IL-6, KC/IL-8, IP-10, MCP-1, IFN beta and TNF-a compared to WT mice and
this was significantly attenuated in TLR4(-/-) +STZ mice (P<0.01). Thus, TLR4
contributes to the pro-inflammatory state and TLR4KO attenuates inflammation in
diabetes.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 21498084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Mol Immunol. 2011 Jul;48(12-13):1417-23. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2011.03.017. Epub 
2011 Apr 16.

Regulation of influenza A virus induced CXCL-10 gene expression requires PI3K/Akt
pathway and IRF3 transcription factor.

Lu X(1), Masic A, Liu Q, Zhou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization, University of Saskatchewan, 120
Veterinary Road, Saskatoon, SK, S7N 5E3, Canada.

Influenza A virus infects human airway epithelial cells, and induces the CXC
chemokine gamma interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>)-inducible protein CXCL-10/IP-10 production. To
understand the regulation of CXCL-10, we investigated the role of PI3K/AKT
pathway in regulating virus induced CXCL-10 production. Previously we have shown 
that wild type (WT) influenza A virus infection activates PI3K/AKT pathway,
whereas PR8-SH3-mf-1 mutant virus is unable to activate this pathway. Here we
report that WT influenza A virus infection induced CXCL-10 production in A549
cells. PR8-SH3-mf-1 mutant virus infection led to reduced level of CXCL-10 mRNA
transcription and protein expression. To define the transcriptional regulation
factors that are important in this process, we performed studies using several
mutant CXCL-10 promoter-luciferase constructs. Mutation of either of four
Forkhead binding sites and two NF-<U+03BA>B response elements in CXCL-10 promoter did
not alter promoter activity induced by WT virus. However, mutation of ISRE
binding site markedly reduced luciferase activity. Our data suggested that
PI3K/AKT pathway contributes to influenza A virus induced CXCL-10 production.
This process is involved in binding of IRF3 to the ISRE binding site in CXCL-10
promoter region.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21497908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. FEBS Lett. 2011 May 6;585(9):1331-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.001. Epub
2011 Apr 7.

Virus-induced differential expression of nuclear receptors and coregulators in
dendritic cells: implication to interferon production.

Ng SS(1), Chang TH, Tailor P, Ozato K, Kino T.

Author information: 
(1)Unit on Molecular Hormone Action, Program in Reproductive and Adult
Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1109, USA.

We investigated mRNA expression of 49 nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) and 35
transcriptional coregulators in mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (DCs)
upon infection with Newcastle Disease virus (NDV) or murine cytomegalovirus
(MCMV). These viruses regulated mRNA expression of some NRs among which NOR1 and 
LXRa were highly induced at mRNA and protein levels. Exogenous expression of the 
latter NRs repressed IRF3- or IRF7-induced transactivation of the interferon ß
promoter and NDV infection further potentiated their repressive effect. The viral
infection also significantly regulated mRNA expression of some coregulators,
including HDAC1. Toll-like receptor ligands regulated NR and coregulator mRNA
expression similar to the viruses. Thus, NRs and coregulators are integral
components of DC-organizing anti-viral response wherein NOR1 and LXRa participate
in regulating interferon production.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3101080
PMID: 21492741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Yonsei Med J. 2011 May;52(3):379-92. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2011.52.3.429.

Intrinsic and extrinsic regulation of innate immune receptors.

Jeong E(1), Lee JY.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, Gwangju
500-712, Korea. joolee@gist.ac.kr

Pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) in innate immune cells play a pivotal role
in the first line of host defense system. PRRs recognize pathogen-associated
molecular patterns (PAMPs) or danger-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) to
initiate and regulate innate and adaptive immune responses. PRRs include
Toll-like receptors (TLRs), RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) and NOD-like receptors
(NLRs), which have their own features in ligand recognition and cellular
location. Activated PRRs deliver signals to adaptor molecules (MyD88, TRIF,
MAL/TIRAP, TRAM, IPS-1) which act as important messengers to activate downstream 
kinases (IKK complex, MAPKs, TBK1, RIP-1) and transcription factors (NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1,
IRF3), which produce effecter molecules including cytokines, chemokines,
inflammatory enzymes, and type I interferones. Since excessive PRR activation is 
closely linked to the development of chronic inflammatory diseases, the role of
intrinsic and extrinsic regulators in the prevention of over- or unnecessary
activation of PRRs has been widely studied. Intracellular regulators include
MyD88s, SOCS1, TOLLIP, A20, and CYLD. Extrinsic regulators have also been
identified with their molecular targets in PRR signaling pathways. TLR
dimerization has been suggested as an inhibitory target for small molecules such 
as curcumin, cinnamaldehyde, and sulforaphane. TBK1 kinase can be a target for
certain flavonoids such as EGCG, luteolin, quercetin, chrysin, and eriodictyol to
regulate TRIF-dependent TLR pathways. This review focuses on the features of PRR 
signaling pathways and the therapeutic targets of intrinsic and extrinsic
regulators in order to provide beneficial strategies for controlling the activity
of PRRs and the related inflammatory diseases and immune disorders.

PMCID: PMC3101043
PMID: 21488180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jun 25;397(2):202-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.085. Epub 2010 May 23.

Aberrant expression of interferon regulatory factor 3 in human lung cancer.

Tokunaga T(1), Naruke Y, Shigematsu S, Kohno T, Yasui K, Ma Y, Chua KJ, Katayama 
I, Nakamura T, Hishikawa Y, Koji T, Yatabe Y, Nagayasu T, Fujita T, Matsuyama T, 
Hayashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Signaling, Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Nagasaki University Graduate School of Biomedical Science, 1-12-4
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.

We analyzed the subcellular distributions and gene structures of interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) transcription factor in 50 cases of human primary lung
cancer. The immunohistochemical analyses revealed substantially aberrant IRF3
expression specific to the cancer lesions (2 and 6 tumors with nuclear staining, 
and 4 and 5 tumors with negative staining, in adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma, respectively), while the morphologically normal region around the
tumors exhibited only cytoplasmic staining. In addition, we determined the
sequence of the entire IRF3 coding region, and found two novel variants with the 
amino acid changes (S(175)(AGC)-->R(175)(CGC) and A(208)(GCC)-->D(208)(GAC)). The
R(175) variant was also detected in a morphologically normal region around the
nuclear staining squamous cell carcinoma, and exhibited almost the same functions
as the wild type IRF3. On the other hand, the D(208) variant, found in the
negative staining squamous cell carcinoma cases, reduced the nuclear
translocation in response to IkappaB kinase epsilon stimulation, as compared to
the wild type IRF3, but the same variant was detected in the surrounding
morphologically normal region. The aberrant expression of IRF3 and the novel
D(208) variant may provide clues to elucidate the etiology of primary lung
cancer.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20501320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mol Immunol. 2010 Jul;47(11-12):2005-14. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.04.015. Epub 
2010 May 21.

Regulation and function of interferon regulatory factors of Atlantic salmon.

Bergan V(1), Kileng Ø, Sun B, Robertsen B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tromsø, Faculty of Biosciences, Fisheries and Economics,
Norwegian College of Fishery Science, Breivika, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway.

Transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family are major 
regulators of the early immune responses against viral infections. In particular,
IRF1, IRF2, IRF3 and IRF7 of mammals are known to regulate the expression of type
I interferons (IFNs), which constitute the obligate cytokines for antiviral
defense. We therefore cloned the coding sequence of Atlantic salmon (As) IRF1,
IRF2, IRF3 and IRF7B. Expression profiles were studied in Atlantic salmon TO
cells after poly I:C (dsRNA) transfection, treatment with recombinant salmon
IFNa1 and infection with infectious salmon anemia virus (ISAV). The main findings
were that AsIRF1 was earliest up-regulated by all stimuli, while AsIRF3 and
AsIRF7 had a similar activation profile induced at a slightly later time point.
The ability to induce the Atlantic salmon IFNa1 promoter was measured in a
luciferase reporter assay. The results showed that AsIRF1, AsIRF3 and AsIRF7B
were able to induce the promoter in a dose-dependent manner. AsIRF2 repressed the
promoter, while AsIRF7A and a splicing variant (AsIRF3D) lacking the interaction 
domain had almost no effect. Combination of AsIRF1 and AsIRF3 had a synergistic
stimulatory effect on the promoter compared to each of the two IRFs alone.
Overall, our findings suggest that AsIRF3 is the main regulator of salmon IFNa1
production along with AsIRF1, which is less potent. This confirms a similar role 
for salmon IRF3 as mammalian IRF3 to be one of the main IRFs eliciting salmon
IFNa1 production. Surprisingly, AsIRF7A and AsIRF7B seemed to have a lesser role 
in salmon IFNa1 induction, which may indicate that these factors have a larger
role in activating other IFN genes or interferon stimulatory genes of Atlantic
salmon.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20494444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. EMBO J. 2010 May 19;29(10):1627-8. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.79.

IRF-3 partners Bax in a viral-induced dance macabre.

Vince JE(1), Tschopp J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2010 May 19;29(10):1762-73.

PMCID: PMC2876974
PMID: 20485298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Nat Immunol. 2010 Jun;11(6):466-8. doi: 10.1038/ni0610-466.

Catenin' on to nucleic acid sensing.

Rathinam VA, Sharma S, Fitzgerald KA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2010 Jun;11(6):487-94.

PMID: 20485273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Immunol. 2010 Jun 15;184(12):7162-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903944. Epub 2010
May 17.

Synoviocyte innate immune responses: II. Pivotal role of IFN regulatory factor 3.

Sweeney SE(1), Kimbler TB, Firestein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California
San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. ssweeney@ucsd.edu

Innate immune responses contribute to synovial inflammation in rheumatoid
arthritis. The present study was designed to investigate the contribution of IFN 
regulatory factor (IRF)3 and IRF7 to type I IFN-regulated gene expression in
synoviocytes. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes were stimulated with
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly [I-C]) after transfection with IRF3 or IRF7
small interfering RNA to knockdown transcription factor expression. Western
blots, luciferase assay after transfection with reporter constructs, quantitative
PCR, and AP-1 DNA binding ELISA were performed to evaluate the role of IRF3 and
IRF7 in poly (I-C)-induced signaling and synoviocyte gene expression. IRF3
regulates IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) promoter activity as well as
IFN-beta, IRF5, IRF7, RANTES, IFN-inducible protein-10, MCP-1, and MIP1alpha gene
expression in response to poly (I-C). IRF7 knockdown modestly decreased a subset 
of genes and ISRE activity, although the results were not statistically
significant. Surprisingly, IRF3 knockdown almost completely blocked expression of
additional genes in which the ISRE is not traditionally considered a dominant
promoter site in fibroblast-like synoviocytes, including matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)3, MMP9, IL-6, and IL-8. Transcription factor activation studies
demonstrated a role for IRF3 in regulation of c-Jun phosphorylation and AP-1
binding. IRF3 rather than IRF7 regulates poly (I-C)-induced type I IFN responses 
in human synoviocytes by increasing ISRE promoter activity. IRF3 also partially
regulates expression of other cytokines and MMP through activation of c-Jun and
the AP-1 promoter site. Targeting synoviocyte IRF3 represents a potential
approach to suppress diverse mediators while limiting suppression of
IRF7-mediated immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2913682
PMID: 20483755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Clin Exp Immunol. 2010 Aug;161(2):208-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2010.04176.x. 
Epub 2010 May 7.

Nucleic acid sensing receptors in systemic lupus erythematosus: development of
novel DNA- and/or RNA-like analogues for treating lupus.

Lenert P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Rheumatology, Carver College of
Medicine, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.
petar-lenert@uiowa.edu

Double-stranded (ds) DNA, DNA- or RNA-associated nucleoproteins are the primary
autoimmune targets in SLE, yet their relative inability to trigger similar
autoimmune responses in experimental animals has fascinated scientists for
decades. While many cellular proteins bind non-specifically negatively charged
nucleic acids, it was discovered only recently that several intracellular
proteins are involved directly in innate recognition of exogenous DNA or RNA, or 
cytosol-residing DNA or RNA viruses. Thus, endosomal Toll-like receptors (TLR)
mediate responses to double-stranded RNA (TLR-3), single-stranded RNA (TLR-7/8)
or unmethylated bacterial cytosine (phosphodiester) guanine (CpG)-DNA (TLR-9),
while DNA-dependent activator of IRFs/Z-DNA binding protein 1 (DAI/ZBP1),
haematopoietic IFN-inducible nuclear protein-200 (p202), absent in melanoma 2
(AIM2), RNA polymerase III, retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I) and melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) mediate responses to cytosolic dsDNA or 
dsRNA, respectively. TLR-induced responses are more robust than those induced by 
cytosolic DNA- or RNA- sensors, the later usually being limited to interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-dependent type I interferon (IFN) induction and
nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB activation. Interestingly, AIM2 is not capable of
inducing type I IFN, but rather plays a role in caspase I activation. DNA- or
RNA-like synthetic inhibitory oligonucleotides (INH-ODN) have been developed that
antagonize TLR-7- and/or TLR-9-induced activation in autoimmune B cells and in
type I IFN-producing dendritic cells at low nanomolar concentrations. It is not
known whether these INH-ODNs have any agonistic or antagonistic effects on
cytosolic DNA or RNA sensors. While this remains to be determined in the future, 
in vivo studies have already shown their potential for preventing spontaneous
lupus in various animal models of lupus. Several groups are exploring the
possibility of translating these INH-ODNs into human therapeutics for treating
SLE and bacterial DNA-induced sepsis.

PMCID: PMC2909403
PMID: 20456414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 29;5(4):e10428. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010428.

Cellular localization of the herpes simplex virus ICP0 protein dictates its
ability to block IRF3-mediated innate immune responses.

Paladino P(1), Collins SE, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Institute for Infectious
Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is important for innate antiviral
responses; accordingly, many viruses target and inactivate IRF3. The ability of
the Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) immediate early protein ICP0 to inhibit
IRF3 is controversial and has not been studied solely in the context of a wild
type HSV-1 infection. Discrepancies in the literature surround the mechanism by
which ICP0 antagonizes the IRF3 pathway, the cellular localization of ICP0
inhibitory activity and the ability of ICP0 to interfere with interferon and
interferon-stimulated gene induction. In this study, we set out to investigate
the role of ICP0 localization and the requirement of the proteasome during the
inhibition of IRF3 activation within the context of an HSV-1 infection.
Collectively, the results presented herein demonstrate that incoming wild type
HSV-1 activates IRF3 and that de novo produced ICP0 prevents sustained IRF3
activation following its translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. While
previous studies implicate the E3 ubiquitin ligase domain of ICP0 in mediating
its biological functions, including the inhibition of IRF3, we show that
cytoplasmic ICP0 does not require the proteasome for this activity. Instead,
proteasome function is required to localize ICP0 to the cytoplasm where it
mediates its inhibitory effect independent of E3 ubiquitin ligase activity. The
importance of these findings is discussed within the context of an HSV-1
infection.

PMCID: PMC2861674
PMID: 20454685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Nat Immunol. 2010 Jun;11(6):487-94. doi: 10.1038/ni.1876. Epub 2010 May 9.

The cytosolic nucleic acid sensor LRRFIP1 mediates the production of type I
interferon via a beta-catenin-dependent pathway.

Yang P(1), An H, Liu X, Wen M, Zheng Y, Rui Y, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2010 Jun;11(6):466-8.

Intracellular nucleic acid sensors detect microbial RNA and DNA and trigger the
production of type I interferon. However, the cytosolic nucleic acid-sensing
system remains to be fully identified. Here we show that the cytosolic nucleic
acid-binding protein LRRFIP1 contributed to the production of interferon-beta
(IFN-beta) induced by vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) and Listeria monocytogenes
in macrophages. LRRFIP1 bound exogenous nucleic acids and increased the
expression of IFN-beta induced by both double-stranded RNA and double-stranded
DNA. LRRFIP1 interacted with beta-catenin and promoted the activation of
beta-catenin, which increased IFN-beta expression by binding to the C-terminal
domain of the transcription factor IRF3 and recruiting the acetyltransferase p300
to the IFN-beta enhanceosome via IRF3. Therefore, LRRFIP1 and its downstream
partner beta-catenin constitute another coactivator pathway for IRF3-mediated
production of type I interferon.

PMID: 20453844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Gen Virol. 2010 Aug;91(Pt 8):2002-6. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.021774-0. Epub 2010 Apr
28.

The N-terminus of Bunyamwera orthobunyavirus NSs protein is essential for
interferon antagonism.

van Knippenberg I(1), Carlton-Smith C, Elliott RM.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Research Centre, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St
Andrews, Fife KY16 9ST, UK. icvk@st-andrews.ac.uk

Bunyamwera virus NSs protein is involved in the inhibition of cellular
transcription and the interferon (IFN) response, and it interacts with the Med8
component of Mediator. A spontaneous mutant of a recombinant NSs-deleted
Bunyamwera virus (rBUNdelNSs2) was identified and characterized. This mutant
virus, termed mBUNNSs22, expresses a 21 aa N-terminally truncated form of NSs.
Like rBUNdelNSs2, mBUNNSs22 is attenuated in IFN-deficient cells, and to a
greater extent in IFN-competent cells. Both rBUNdelNSs2 and mBUNNSs22 are potent 
IFN inducers and their growth can be rescued by depleting cellular IRF3.
Strikingly, despite encoding an NSs protein that contains the Med8 interaction
domain, mBUNNSs22 fails to block RNA polymerase II activity during infection.
Overall, our data suggest that both the interaction of NSs with Med8 and a novel 
unidentified function of the NSs N-terminus, seem necessary for Bunyamwera virus 
to counteract host antiviral responses.

PMCID: PMC3052537
PMID: 20427562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jun 25;285(26):20128-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.099101. Epub
2010 Apr 23.

A molecular mechanism for Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor
molecule-1-mediated IRF-3 activation.

Tatematsu M(1), Ishii A, Oshiumi H, Horiuchi M, Inagaki F, Seya T, Matsumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Hokkaido University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kita 15, Nishi 7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

The Toll-IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adaptor molecule-1 (TICAM-1, also 
called TRIF) is a signaling adaptor for TLR3 and TLR4 that activates the
transcription factors IRF-3, NF-kappaB, and AP-1, leading to induction of type I 
interferon and cytokines. The N-terminal region of TICAM-1 participates in IRF-3 
activation, although the C-terminal region is involved in NF-kappaB activation.
However, the mechanism by which TICAM-1 is activated and transmits signals is
largely unknown. In this study, we identified Leu(194) as a critical amino acid
for TICAM-1-mediated IRF-3 activation. When Leu(194) was substituted with Ala,
the mutant TICAM-1 failed to recruit the IRF-3 kinase TBK1, resulting in lack of 
IRF-3 phosphorylation, although TRAF3 and NAP1 appeared to be recruited. The
N-terminal 176 amino acids of TICAM-1 (N-terminal domain (NTD)) form a
protease-resistant structural domain. A TICAM-1 mutant lacking the N-terminal 180
amino acids showed greater interferon-beta promoter activation than wild-type
TICAM-1. Furthermore, immunoprecipitation and protein-protein interaction
analysis revealed that the NTD interacted with the N terminus of TICAM-1-TIR.
These results suggest that the NTD folds into the TIR domain structure to
maintain the naive conformation of TICAM-1. Upon stimulation of TLR3/4, TICAM-1
oligomerizes through the TIR domain and the C-terminal region, which may break
the intramolecular association and induce a conformational change that allows
TBK1 access to TICAM-1.

PMCID: PMC2888425
PMID: 20418377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Virology. 2010 Jul 5;402(2):315-26. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.03.039. Epub 2010
Apr 22.

Modulation of type I interferon induction by porcine reproductive and respiratory
syndrome virus and degradation of CREB-binding protein by non-structural protein 
1 in MARC-145 and HeLa cells.

Kim O(1), Sun Y, Lai FW, Song C, Yoo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL 61802, USA.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome (PRRS) is an emerged disease of
swine characterized by negligible response of type I IFNs and viral persistence. 
We show that the PRRSV non-structural protein 1 (Nsp1) is the viral component
responsible for modulation of IFN response. Nsp1 blocked dsRNA-induced IRF3 and
IFN promoter activities. Nsp1 did not block phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation of IRF3 but inhibited IRF3 association with CREB-binding protein
(CBP) in the nucleus. While IRF3 was stable, CBP was degraded, and CBP
degradation was proteasome-dependent, suggesting that CBP degradation is not due 
to the protease activity of Nsp1 but an intermediary is involved. Our data
suggest that the Nsp1-mediated CBP degradation inhibits the recruitment of CBP
for enhanceosome assembly, leading to the block of IFN response. CBP degradation 
is a novel strategy for viral evasion from the host response, and Nsp1 may form a
new class of viral antagonists for IFN modulation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20416917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Infect Immun. 2010 Jul;78(7):3144-53. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01070-09. Epub 2010 Apr
19.

The Lyme disease spirochete Borrelia burgdorferi utilizes multiple ligands,
including RNA, for interferon regulatory factor 3-dependent induction of type I
interferon-responsive genes.

Miller JC(1), Maylor-Hagen H, Ma Y, Weis JH, Weis JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

We recently discovered a critical role for type I interferon (IFN) in the
development of murine Lyme arthritis. Borrelia burgdorferi-mediated induction of 
IFN-responsive genes by bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMDMs) was dependent
upon a functional type I IFN receptor but independent of Toll-like receptor 2
(TLR2), TLR4, TLR9, and the adapter molecule MyD88. We now demonstrate that
induction of the IFN transcriptional profile in B. burgdorferi-stimulated BMDMs
occurs independently of the adapter TRIF and of the cytoplasmic sensor NOD2. In
contrast, B. burgdorferi-induced transcription of these genes was dependent upon 
a rapid STAT1 feedback amplification pathway. IFN profile gene transcription was 
IRF3 dependent but did not utilize B. burgdorferi-derived DNA or DNase-sensitive 
ligands. Instead, IFN-responsive gene expression could be induced by B.
burgdorferi-derived RNA. Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-dependent IFN
profile gene transcription was also induced by sonicated bacteria, by the
lipoprotein OspA, and by factors released into the BSKII medium during culture of
B. burgdorferi. The IFN-stimulatory activity of B. burgdorferi culture
supernatants was not destroyed by nuclease treatment. Nuclease digestion also had
no effect on IFN profile induction mediated by sonicated B. burgdorferi. Thus, B.
burgdorferi-derived RNA, OspA, and non-nucleic acid ligands present in both
sonicated bacteria and B. burgdorferi culture medium contribute to type I
IFN-responsive gene induction. These findings suggest that B. burgdorferi
invasion of joint tissue and the resultant type I IFN induction associated with
Lyme arthritis development may involve multiple triggering ligands.

PMCID: PMC2897372
PMID: 20404081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cell. 2010 Apr 16;141(2):315-30. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.03.029.

Reconstitution of the RIG-I pathway reveals a signaling role of unanchored
polyubiquitin chains in innate immunity.

Zeng W(1), Sun L, Jiang X, Chen X, Hou F, Adhikari A, Xu M, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2010 Apr 16;141(2):220-2.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2010 Jun;10(6):385.

RIG-I detects invading viral RNA and activates the transcription factors
NF-kappaB and IRF3 through the mitochondrial protein MAVS. Here we show that RNA 
bearing 5'-triphosphate strongly activates the RIG-I-IRF3 signaling cascade in a 
reconstituted system composed of RIG-I, mitochondria, and cytosol. Activation of 
RIG-I requires not only RNA but also polyubiquitin chains linked through lysine
63 (K63) of ubiquitin. RIG-I binds specifically to K63-polyubiquitin chains
through its tandem CARD domains in a manner that depends on RNA and ATP.
Mutations in the CARD domains that abrogate ubiquitin binding also impair RIG-I
activation. Remarkably, unanchored K63-ubiquitin chains, which are not conjugated
to any target protein, potently activate RIG-I. These ubiquitin chains function
as an endogenous ligand of RIG-I in human cells. Our results delineate the
mechanism of RIG-I activation, identify CARD domains as a ubiquitin sensor, and
demonstrate that unanchored K63-polyubiquitin chains are signaling molecules in
antiviral innate immunity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919214
PMID: 20403326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Adv Cancer Res. 2010;107:119-36. doi: 10.1016/S0065-230X(10)07004-1.

Role of EBERs in the pathogenesis of EBV infection.

Iwakiri D(1), Takada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small RNAs (EBERs) are noncoding RNAs that are
expressed abundantly in latently EBV-infected cells. Previous studies
demonstrated that EBERs (EBER1 and EBER2) play significant roles in various
EBV-infected cancer cells. EBERs are responsible for malignant phenotypes of
Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) cells including resistance to apoptosis. In addition,
EBERs induce the expression of interleukin (IL)-10 in BL cells, insulin-like
growth factor (IGF)-1 in gastric carcinoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells,
IL-9 in T cells that act as an autocrine growth factor. It was also reported that
EBERs play critical roles in the B cell growth transformation including IL-6
induction by EBER2. EBERs have been discovered to interact with cellular proteins
that play a key role in antiviral innate immunity. They bind the protein kinase
RNA-dependent (PKR) and inhibit its activation, leading to resistance to
PKR-mediated apoptosis. Recently, it was demonstrated that EBERs bind RIG-I and
activate its downstream signaling, which induces expression of type-I interferon 
(IFN)s. Furthermore, EBERs induce IL-10 through IRF3 but not NF-kappaB activation
in BL cells, suggesting that modulation of innate immune signaling by EBERs
contribute to EBV-mediated oncogenesis. Most recently, it was reported that EBERs
are secreted from EBV-infected cells and are recognized by toll-like receptor
(TLR)3, leading to induction of type-I IFNs and inflammatory cytokines, and
subsequent immune activation. Furthermore, EBER1 could be detected in the sera of
patients with active EBV infectious diseases, suggesting that activation of TLR3 
signaling by EBER1 would be account for the pathogenesis of active EBV infectious
diseases.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20399962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Immunol. 2010 May 15;184(10):5768-76. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903559. Epub 2010 
Apr 9.

High-throughput screening for TLR3-IFN regulatory factor 3 signaling pathway
modulators identifies several antipsychotic drugs as TLR inhibitors.

Zhu J(1), Smith K, Hsieh PN, Mburu YK, Chattopadhyay S, Sen GC, Sarkar SN.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

TLR3 is one of the major innate immune sensors of dsRNA. The signal transduction 
pathway activated by TLR3, upon binding to dsRNA, leads to the activation of two 
major transcription factors: NF-kappaB and IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3. In an
effort to identify specific chemical modulators of TLR3-IRF3 signal transduction 
pathway, we developed a cell-based readout system. Using the IFN-stimulated gene 
56 promoter-driven firefly luciferase gene stably integrated in a TLR3-expressing
HEK293 cell line, we were able to generate a cell line where treatment with dsRNA
resulted in a dose-dependent induction of luciferase activity. A screen of two
pharmacologically active compound libraries using this system identified a number
of TLR3-IRF3 signaling pathway modulators. Among them we focused on a subset of
inhibitors and characterized their mode of action. Several antipsychotic drugs,
such as sertraline, trifluoperazine, and fluphenazine, were found to be direct
inhibitors of the innate immune signaling pathway. These inhibitors also showed
the ability to inhibit IFN-stimulated gene 56 induction mediated by TLR4 and
TLR7/8 pathways. Interestingly, they did not show significant effects on TLR3-,
TLR7-, and TLR8-mediated NF-kappaB activation. Detailed analysis of the signaling
pathway indicated that these drugs might be exerting their inhibitory effects on 
IRF3 via PI3K signaling pathway. The data presented in this study provide
mechanistic explanation of possible anti-inflammatory roles of some antipsychotic
drugs.

PMCID: PMC2874113
PMID: 20382888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Virology. 2010 Jun 20;402(1):121-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.03.014. Epub 2010
Apr 8.

Epstein-Barr virus BRLF1 inhibits transcription of IRF3 and IRF7 and suppresses
induction of interferon-beta.

Bentz GL(1), Liu R, Hahn AM, Shackelford J, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Activation of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 3 and 7 is essential for the
induction of Type I interferons (IFN) and innate antiviral responses, and
herpesviruses have evolved mechanisms to evade such responses. We previously
reported that Epstein-Barr virus BZLF1, an immediate-early (IE) protein, inhibits
the function of IRF7, but the role of BRLF1, the other IE transactivator, in IRF 
regulation has not been examined. We now show that BRLF1 expression decreased
induction of IFN-beta, and reduced expression of IRF3 and IRF7; effects were
dependent on N- and C-terminal regions of BRLF1 and its nuclear localization
signal. Endogenous IRF3 and IRF7 RNA and protein levels were also decreased
during cytolytic EBV infection. Finally, production of IFN-beta was decreased
during lytic EBV infection and was associated with increased susceptibility to
superinfection with Sendai virus. These data suggest a new role for BRLF1 with
the ability to evade host innate immune responses.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2871977
PMID: 20381110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Gen Virol. 2010 Aug;91(Pt 8):2080-90. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.020552-0. Epub 2010
Apr 7.

Hepatitis B virus polymerase inhibits RIG-I- and Toll-like receptor 3-mediated
beta interferon induction in human hepatocytes through interference with
interferon regulatory factor 3 activation and dampening of the interaction
between TBK1/IKKepsilon and DDX3.

Yu S(1), Chen J, Wu M, Chen H, Kato N, Yuan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology, Ministry of Education and Public
Health, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, PR China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection remains one of the most serious health problems
worldwide. Whilst studies have shown that HBV impairs interferon (IFN) production
from dendritic cells in chronic hepatitis B patients, it remains unknown whether 
HBV inhibits IFN production in human hepatocytes. Using transient transfection
assays in a primary human hepatocyte cell line (PH5CH8), this study demonstrated 
that HBV polymerase inhibits IFN-beta promoter activity induced by Newcastle
disease virus, Sendai virus or poly(I : C) in a dose-dependent manner, whilst
ectopic expression of the HBV core and X proteins had no effect on IFN-beta
promoter activity. In addition, HBV polymerase blocked cellular IFN-beta
expression and consequent antiviral immunity revealed by an infection protection 
assay. Furthermore, overexpression of key molecules on the IFN-beta induction
axis, together with HBV polymerase, resulted in a block of IFN-beta promoter
activity triggered by RIG-I, IPS-1, TRIF, TBK1 and IKKepsilon, but not by an IFN 
regulatory factor 3 dominant-positive mutant (IRF3-5D), suggesting that HBV
polymerase prevents IFN-beta expression at the TBK1/IKKepsilon level. Further
studies showed that HBV polymerase inhibited phosphorylation, dimerization and
nuclear translocation of IRF3, in response to Sendai virus infection. Finally, it
was shown that HBV polymerase-mediated dampening of the interaction between
TBK1/IKKepsilon and DDX3 may be involved in the inhibitory effect on IFN-beta
induction. Taken together, these findings reveal a novel role of HBV polymerase
in HBV counteraction of IFN-beta production in human hepatocytes.

PMID: 20375222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2010 Jun 1;498(1):35-42. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2010.03.021.
Epub 2010 Apr 2.

The CagA protein of Helicobacter pylori suppresses the functions of dendritic
cell in mice.

Tanaka H(1), Yoshida M, Nishiumi S, Ohnishi N, Kobayashi K, Yamamoto K, Fujita T,
Hatakeyama M, Azuma T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Kobe University, Chu-o-ku, Hyogo, Japan.

CagA protein is the most assessed effecter molecule of Helicobacter pylori. In
this report, we demonstrate how CagA protein regulates the functions of dendritic
cells (DC) against H. pylori infection. In addition, we found that CagA protein
was tyrosine-phosphorylated in DC. The responses to cagA-positive H. pylori in DC
were reduced in comparison to those induced by cagA-negative H. pylori.
CagA-overexpressing DC also exhibited a decline in the responses against LPS
stimulation and the differentiation of CD4(+) T cells toward Th1 type cells
compared to wild type DC. In addition, the level of phosphorylated IRF3 decreased
in CagA-overexpressing DC stimulated with LPS, indicating that activated SHP-2
suppressed the enzymatic activity of TBK1 and consequently IRF3 phosphorylation. 
These data suggest that CagA protein negatively regulates the functions of DC via
CagA phosphorylation and that cagA-positive H. pylori strains suppress host
immune responses resulting in their chronic colonization of the stomach.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20363211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. EMBO J. 2010 May 19;29(10):1762-73. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2010.50. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

Viral apoptosis is induced by IRF-3-mediated activation of Bax.

Chattopadhyay S(1), Marques JT, Yamashita M, Peters KL, Smith K, Desai A,
Williams BR, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2010 May 19;29(10):1627-8.

Upon infection with many RNA viruses, the cytoplasmic retinoic acid inducible
gene-I (RIG-I) pathway activates the latent transcription factor IRF-3, causing
its nuclear translocation and the induction of many antiviral genes, including
those encoding interferons. Here, we report a novel and distinct activity of
IRF-3, in virus-infected cells, that induces apoptosis. Using genetically
defective mouse and human cell lines, we demonstrated that, although both
pathways required the presence of RIG-I, IPS1, TRAF3 and TBK1, only the apoptotic
pathway required the presence of TRAF2 and TRAF6 in addition. More importantly,
transcriptionally inactive IRF-3 mutants, such as the one missing its DNA-binding
domain, could efficiently mediate apoptosis. Apoptosis was triggered by the
direct interaction of IRF-3, through a newly identified BH3 domain, with the
pro-apoptotic protein Bax, their co-translocation to the mitochondria and the
resulting activation of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Thus, IRF-3 is a
dual-action cytoplasmic protein that, upon activation, translocates to the
nucleus or to the mitochondrion and triggers two complementary antiviral
responses of the infected cell.

PMCID: PMC2876960
PMID: 20360684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Agric Food Chem. 2010 Apr 28;58(8):4701-5. doi: 10.1021/jf100484r.

Isoliquiritigenin suppresses the Toll-interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing
adapter inducing interferon-beta (TRIF)-dependent signaling pathway of Toll-like 
receptors by targeting TBK1.

Park SJ(1), Youn HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, College of Medical Sciences, Soonchunhyang
University, Asan-Si, Chungnam, Korea.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in induction of innate immune
responses. TLRs can trigger the activation of myeloid differential factor 88
(MyD88)- and Toll-interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adapter inducing
interferon-beta (TRIF)-dependent downstream signaling pathways. Expression of
more than 70% of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced target genes is mediated
through a TRIF-dependent signaling pathway. To evaluate the therapeutic potential
of isoliquiritigenin (ILG), we examined its effect on signal transduction via the
TRIF-dependent pathway of TLRs. ILG inhibited interferon regulatory factor 3
activation induced by LPS or polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid, as well as
interferon-inducible genes, such as interferon-inducible protein-10. ILG
attenuated ligand-independent activation of IRF3 induced by TRIF or TBK1.
Furthermore, ILG inhibited TBK1 kinase activity in vitro. Together, these results
demonstrate that TBK1 is the molecular target of ILG, resulting in the
downregulation of the TRIF-dependent signaling pathways of TLRs.

PMID: 20356041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Nat Immunol. 2010 May;11(5):385-93. doi: 10.1038/ni.1859. Epub 2010 Mar 28.

The AIM2 inflammasome is critical for innate immunity to Francisella tularensis.

Fernandes-Alnemri T(1), Yu JW, Juliana C, Solorzano L, Kang S, Wu J, Datta P,
McCormick M, Huang L, McDermott E, Eisenlohr L, Landel CP, Alnemri ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Thomas Jefferson University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2010 May;11(5):367-9.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2010 May;10(5):287.

Francisella tularensis, the causative agent of tularemia, infects host
macrophages, which triggers production of the proinflammatory cytokines
interleukin 1beta (IL-1beta) and IL-18. We elucidate here how host macrophages
recognize F. tularensis and elicit this proinflammatory response. Using mice
deficient in the DNA-sensing inflammasome component AIM2, we demonstrate here
that AIM2 is required for sensing F. tularensis. AIM2-deficient mice were
extremely susceptible to F. tularensis infection, with greater mortality and
bacterial burden than that of wild-type mice. Caspase-1 activation, IL-1beta
secretion and cell death were absent in Aim2(-/-) macrophages in response to F.
tularensis infection or the presence of cytoplasmic DNA. Our study identifies
AIM2 as a crucial sensor of F. tularensis infection and provides genetic proof of
its critical role in host innate immunity to intracellular pathogens.

PMCID: PMC3111085
PMID: 20351693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 28;285(22):17011-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.068817. Epub 2010
Mar 29.

Differential gene expression downstream of Toll-like receptors (TLRs): role of
c-Src and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3).

Nguyen TT(1), Johnsen IB, Knetter CF, Drabløs F, Fitzgerald KA, Lien E, Anthonsen
MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, N-7006 Trondheim, Norway.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are crucial for transcription during innate 
immune responses. We have previously shown that the tyrosine kinase c-Src
enhances IRF-3-dependent transcription in response to viral double-stranded RNA. 
In this study, we show that c-Src has distinct roles in Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-mediated activation of IRF-5 and IRF-3. Surprisingly, c-Src inhibition
markedly enhanced IRF-5 activation after treatment with unmethylated CpG, while
suppressing IRF-3 activation. Also, CpG-elicited interleukin-6 mRNA production
was increased, whereas IP10 mRNA synthesis was reduced in cells deficient in
c-Src. Interestingly, c-Src regulated TLR-stimulated induction of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a transcriptional repressor. Depletion of ATF3 by 
small interfering RNA markedly enhanced interleukin-6 production after CpG
treatment, whereas IP10 production was reduced. These results demonstrate
functional specificity for c-Src in TLR-stimulated responses and suggest that
c-Src modulation and ATF3 activity may contribute to differential regulation of
IRF-3- versus IRF-5-mediated gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2878043
PMID: 20351107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Dev Comp Immunol. 2010 Aug;34(8):847-54. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2010.03.005. Epub
2010 Apr 1.

Molecular cloning and functional characterization of porcine stimulator of
interferon genes (STING).

Xie L(1), Liu M, Fang L, Su X, Cai K, Wang D, Chen H, Xiao S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan 430070, China.

The stimulator of interferon genes (STING) of human/mouse has been identified
recently as an adaptor that links virus-sensing receptors to interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activation. Here we report the cloning and
characterization of porcine STING (poSTING). The full-length poSTING cDNA
sequence encodes 378 amino acids and contains one endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
retention motif, RAR. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that poSTING, together with 
bovine STING, is more closely related to the human than to mouse STING. poSTING
mRNA expression was mainly detected in the spleen, lymph node and lung. Enhanced 
green fluorescence protein (EGFP)-labeled poSTING was found to reside
predominantly in the ER, and also in the mitochondrial membrane in PK-15 cells.
Over-expression of poSTING activated both IRF3 and nuclear factor kappaB
(NF-kappaB) transcription factors to induce IFN-beta production, while knockdown 
of poSTING significantly inhibited poly(I:C)- and poly(dAT:dAT)-induced IFN-beta 
promoter activation and IFN-beta mRNA production. Furthermore, the pseudorabies
virus (PRV), a dsDNA virus, has been shown to activate the IFN-beta promoter in a
poSTING-dependent way in porcine cell lines. Altogether, these results indicate
that STING is an important regulator of porcine innate immune signaling. The
results will help better understand the biological role(s) of STING in innate
immunity during evolution.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20346968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 May;30(10):2424-36. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01466-09. Epub 2010 Mar 
22.

Positive regulation of interferon regulatory factor 3 activation by Herc5 via
ISG15 modification.

Shi HX(1), Yang K, Liu X, Liu XY, Wei B, Shan YF, Zhu LH, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

Virus infection induces host antiviral responses, including induction of type I
interferons. Transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) plays a
pivotal role and is tightly regulated in this process. Here, we identify HERC5
(HECT domain and RLD 5) as a specific binding protein of IRF3 by
immunoprecipitation. Ectopic expression or knockdown of HERC5 could,
respectively, enhance or impair IRF3-mediated gene expression. Mechanistically,
HERC5 catalyzes the conjugation of ubiquitin-like protein ISG15 onto IRF3
(Lys193, -360, and -366), thus attenuating the interaction between Pin1 and IRF3,
resulting in sustained IRF3 activation. In contrast to results for wild-type
IRF3, the mutant IRF3(K193,360,366R) interacts tightly with Pin1, is highly
polyubiquitinated, and becomes less stable upon Sendai virus (SeV) infection.
Consistently, host antiviral responses are obviously boosted or crippled in the
presence or absence of HERC5, respectively. Collectively, this study
characterizes HERC5 as a positive regulator of innate antiviral responses. It
sustains IRF3 activation via a novel posttranslational modification, ISGylation.

PMCID: PMC2863703
PMID: 20308324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Jun;40(6):1738-47. doi: 10.1002/eji.200940034.

SARM inhibits both TRIF- and MyD88-mediated AP-1 activation.

Peng J(1), Yuan Q, Lin B, Panneerselvam P, Wang X, Luan XL, Lim SK, Leung BP, Ho 
B, Ding JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

SARM (sterile alpha- and armadillo-motif-containing protein), the fifth
identified TIR (Toll-interleukin 1 receptor (IL-1R)) domain-containing adaptors
in humans, downregulates NF-kappaB and IRF3 (interferon-regulatory factor
3)-mediated TLR3 and TLR4 signaling. SARM was characterized as a negative
regulator of the TRIF (TIR-domain-containing adaptor protein inducing
IFN-beta)-dependent pathway via its interaction with TRIF. However, the precise
mechanism of action of SARM remains unclear. Here, we demonstrate that SARM
inhibits MAPK activation in human embryonic kidney 293 cells, and U937 cells.
Both the TRIF- and MyD88-mediated, as well as basal MAPK activity, were
repressed, indicating that SARM-mediated inhibition may not be exclusively
directed at TRIF or MyD88, but that SARM may also directly inhibit MAPK
phosphorylation. The MAPK inhibition effect was verified by RNAi, which increased
the basal level of AP-1. Furthermore, LPS challenge upregulated SARM at both the 
mRNA and protein levels. Finally, we provide evidence to show that truncated SARM
changes its subcellular localization, suggesting the importance of the N-terminal
and sterile alpha motif domains in the autoregulation of SARM activity.

PMID: 20306472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 14;285(20):14999-5009. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.109819. Epub
2010 Mar 19.

TAX1BP1 and A20 inhibit antiviral signaling by targeting TBK1-IKKi kinases.

Parvatiyar K(1), Barber GN, Harhaj EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer
Center,University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

Induction of type I interferons by the transcription factor IRF3 is essential in 
the initiation of antiviral innate immunity. Activation of IRF3 requires
C-terminal phosphorylation by the upstream kinases TBK1-IKKi, where IRF3
phosphorylation promotes dimerization, and subsequent nuclear translocation to
the IFNbeta promoter. Recent studies have described the ubiquitin-editing enzyme 
A20 as a negative regulator of IRF3 signaling by associating with TBK1-IKKi;
however, the regulatory mechanism of A20 inhibition remains unclear. Here we
describe the adaptor protein, TAX1BP1, as a key regulator of A20 function in
terminating signaling to IRF3. Murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) deficient in
TAX1BP1 displayed increased amounts of IFNbeta production upon viral challenge
compared with WT MEFs. TAX1BP1 inhibited virus-mediated activation of IRF3 at the
level of TBK1-IKKi. TAX1BP1 and A20 blocked antiviral signaling by disrupting
Lys(63)-linked polyubiquitination of TBK1-IKKi independently of the A20
deubiquitination domain. Furthermore, TAX1BP1 was required for A20 effector
function because A20 was defective for the targeting and inactivation of TBK1 and
IKKi in Tax1bp1(-)(/)(-) MEFs. Additionally, we found the E3 ubiquitin ligase
TRAF3 to play a critical role in promoting TBK1-IKKi ubiquitination.
Collectively, our results demonstrate TBK1-IKKi to be novel substrates for A20
and further identify a novel mechanism whereby A20 and TAX1BP1 restrict antiviral
signaling by disrupting a TRAF3-TBK1-IKKi signaling complex.

PMCID: PMC2865285
PMID: 20304918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Jan;44(1):118-26. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0266OC. 
Epub 2010 Mar 11.

Cigarette smoke decreases innate responses of epithelial cells to rhinovirus
infection.

Eddleston J(1), Lee RU, Doerner AM, Herschbach J, Zuraw BL.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Medical Research Foundation, and Department of Medicine, University
of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0732, USA.
jeddleston@vapop.ucsd.edu

Exposure to cigarette smoke is associated with a significant increase in the risk
for respiratory viral infections. The airway epithelium is the primary target for
both cigarette smoke and respiratory viral infection. We investigated the effects
of cigarette smoke on the response of airway epithelial cells to rhinovirus
infection. We found that pre-exposure of BEAS-2B cells or primary normal human
bronchial epithelial cells (NHBEs) to cigarette smoke extract (CSE) reduced the
induction of mRNA of the chemokines CXCL10 and CCL5 by either the viral mimic
polyinosine-polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C) or human rhinovirus 16 (HRV-16)
infection. The HRV-16-induced release of CXCL10 and CCL5 was also significantly
suppressed by CSE. Activation of the IFN mediator STAT-1 and the activation of
JNK by poly I:C and HRV-16 were partially suppressed by pre-exposure to CSE. In
contrast, the poly I:C-induced and HRV-16-induced phosphorylation of ERK1/2 was
unaffected by CSE. HRV-16-stimulated IFN-ß mRNA was also significantly reduced by
CSE. Because suppression of the IFN response to viral infection was associated
with increased viral production, we assessed HRV-16 RNA concentrations. Exposure 
to CSE resulted in an increase in HRV-16 RNA at 48 hours after the infection of
BEAS-2B cells. These data demonstrate that exposure to CSE alters the response of
airway epithelial cells to HRV infection, leading to decreased activation of the 
IFN-STAT-1 and SAP-JNK pathways, the suppression of CXCL10 and CCL5 production,
and increased viral RNA. A diminished, early epithelial-initiated antiviral
response to rhinovirus infection could contribute to the increased susceptibility
of subjects to prolonged respiratory viral infections after exposure to cigarette
smoke.

PMCID: PMC3028255
PMID: 20224072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Autophagy. 2010 Apr;6(3):430-2. Epub 2010 Apr 25.

Regulation of dsDNA-induced innate immune responses by membrane trafficking.

Saitoh T(1), Fujita N, Yoshimori T, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Microbial nucleic acids are potent inducers of innate immune response--the first 
line of host defense against microbes. It is known that double-stranded (ds) DNA 
triggers the expression of type I interferons (IFNs) and IFN-inducible genes
resulting in the establishment of an antimicrobial environment. However, the
regulatory mechanisms underlying the signaling pathways responsible for the
induction of innate immune responses by dsDNA are still not fully understood.
Recently, we showed that the translocation and subsequent assembly of the
multispanning membrane protein, stimulator of interferon genes (STING), is
critical for dsDNA-triggered innate immune responses. Following stimulation by
dsDNA, STING translocates from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to the Golgi
apparatus where it associates with TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) on cytoplasmic
punctate structures to induce the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-dependent
transcription of type I IFNs and IFN-inducible genes. We have also shown that
dsDNA stimulation induces the colocalization of STING with the autophagy-related 
proteins Atg9a and microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3 (LC3). The
targeted disruption of Atg9a, a multispanning membrane protein essential for
autophagy, greatly promotes the dsDNA-driven assembly of STING and TBK1 leading
to the aberrant activation of the innate immune response. However, the loss of
Atg7, another essential component for autophagosome formation, does not affect
the dsDNA-stimulated translocation of STING. Hence, Atg9a is a regulator of
STING-mediated innate immune response as well as an essential autophagy protein. 
These findings indicate that dynamic membrane trafficking is triggered by dsDNA
stimulation and plays a pivotal role in the signal transduction required for
optimal activation of the innate immune response.

PMID: 20215874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Exp Mol Pathol. 2010 Jun;88(3):376-9. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2010.02.004. Epub 2010
Mar 4.

SAMe prevents the up regulation of toll-like receptor signaling in Mallory-Denk
body forming hepatocytes.

Bardag-Gorce F(1), Oliva J, Lin A, Li J, French BA, French SW.

Author information: 
(1)LABioMed at Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance CA 90502, USA.

Mallory-Denk body (MDB) formation is a component of alcoholic and non alcoholic
hepatitis. In the present study, the role of the toll-like receptor (TLR)
signaling pathway was investigated in the mechanism of MDB formation in the
DDC-fed mouse model. Microarray analysis data mining, performed on the livers of 
drug-primed mice refed DDC, showed that TLR2/4 gene expression was significantly 
up regulated by DDC refeeding. SAMe supplementation prevented this up regulation 
and prevented the formation of MDBs. qRT-PCR analysis confirmed these results.
TLR2/4 activates the adapter protein MyD88. The levels of MyD88 were increased by
DDC refeeding. The increase of MyD88 was also prevented by SAMe supplementation. 
Results showed that MyD88-independent TLR3/4-TRIF-IRF3 pathway was not up
regulated in the liver of DDC refed mice. Tumor necrosis factor
receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) is the downstream protein recruited by the
MyD88/IRAK protein complex, and is involved in the regulation of innate immune
responses. Results showed a significant increase in the levels of TRAF-6. TRAF-6 
activation leads to activation of NFkB and the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) cascade. The TRAF-6 increase was ameliorated by SAMe supplementation.
These results suggest that DDC induces MDB formation through the TLR2/4 and
MyD88-dependent signaling pathway. In conclusion, SAMe blocked the
over-expression of TLR2/4, and their downstream signaling components MyD88 and
TRAF-6. SAMe prevented the DDC-induced up regulation of the TLR signaling
pathways, probably by preventing the up regulation of INF-gamma receptors by DDC 
feeding. INFgamma stimulates the up regulation of TLR2. The ability of SAMe
feeding to prevent TLR signaling up regulation has not been previously described.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2901103
PMID: 20206621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):12543-50. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.072231. Epub
2010 Mar 3.

Analysis of a TIR-less splice variant of TRIF reveals an unexpected mechanism of 
TLR3-mediated signaling.

Han KJ(1), Yang Y, Xu LG, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.

Recognition of viral RNA by Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) triggers activation of
the transcription factors NF-kappaB and IRF3 and induction of type I interferons.
TRIF is a Toll-interleukin 1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adapter protein
critically involved in TLR3-mediated signaling. It has been shown that TRIF
interacts with TLR3 through their respective TIR domains. In this study, we
identified a splice variant of TRIF lacking the TIR domain, which is designated
as TRIS. Overexpression of TRIS activates NF-kappaB, interferon-stimulated
response element (ISRE), and the interferon-beta promoter, whereas knockdown of
TRIS inhibited TLR3-mediated signaling, suggesting that TRIS is involved in
TLR3-mediated signaling. Furthermore, we identified an N-terminal TBK1-binding
motif of TRIS or TRIF that was important for its interaction with TBK1 and
ability to activate ISRE. Activation of ISRE by TRIS also needs its dimerization 
or oligomerization mediated by its C-terminal RIP homotypic interaction motif.
Finally, we demonstrated that TRIS was associated with TRIF upon TLR3 activation 
by poly(I-C). These findings reveal an unexpected mechanism of TLR3-mediated
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2857105
PMID: 20200155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Proteomics. 2010 Apr 18;73(6):1196-203. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2010.02.009. Epub 
2010 Feb 16.

Systematic characterization by mass spectrometric analysis of phosphorylation
sites in IRF-3 regulatory domain activated by IKK-i.

Fujii K(1), Nakamura S, Takahashi K, Inagaki F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural Biology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, N-12, W-6, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0812, Japan.
fujii@pharm.hokudai.ac.jp

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) is a critical transcription factor that
regulates innate immune responses against viral infection. Upon infection, IRF-3 
is activated through phosphorylation of Ser/Thr residues in its C-terminal domain
by the kinases, IKK-i and/or TBK-1. This phosphorylation triggers IRF-3 to
interact with the co-activators to form a complex that activates target genes in 
the nucleus. However, the phosphorylation sites that determine the
active/inactive status of IRF-3, estimated using biochemical methods such as
mutagenesis and kinase assays, remain controversial. In the present study,
phosphorylated IRF-3 189-427 (IRF-3 189C) was prepared by co-expression with
IKK-i and was specifically fractionated into 3 major phosphorylation forms using 
anion-exchange chromatography. Identification of the phosphorylation sites was
performed using systematic mass spectrometry approaches as follows: intact
molecular mass analysis by nanoESI-MS, MS survey of phosphopeptides, and targeted
MS/MS analysis of LC-MS/MS-based proteomics using a high-resolution Orbitrap mass
spectrometer. Phosphorylated IRF-3 189C was clearly identified to exist as a
mono-phosphoprotein (at Ser-402), and in two di-phosphoprotein forms (at Ser-386,
-402 and Ser-396, -402). Thus, we demonstrated that Ser-386, -396 and -402 are
directly phosphorylated by IKK-i in the co-expression system. These results will 
help provide new insights into the IRF-3 activation mechanism.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20170763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 11;5(2):e9172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009172.

TRAF5 is a downstream target of MAVS in antiviral innate immune signaling.

Tang ED(1), Wang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signalling, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine,
University of California Los Angeles School of Dentistry, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America.

The recognition of nucleic acids by the innate immune system during viral
infection results in the production of type I interferons and the activation of
antiviral immune responses. The RNA helicases RIG-I and MDA-5 recognize distinct 
types of cytosolic RNA species and signal through the mitochondrial protein MAVS 
to stimulate the phosphorylation and activation of the transcription factors IRF3
and IRF7, thereby inducing type I interferon expression. Alternatively, the
activation of NF-kappaB leads to proinflammatory cytokine production. The
function of MAVS is dependent on both its C-terminal transmembrane (TM) domain
and N-terminal caspase recruitment domain (CARD). The TM domain mediates MAVS
dimerization in response to viral RNA, allowing the CARD to bind to and activate 
the downstream effector TRAF3. Notably, dimerization of the MAVS CARD alone is
sufficient to activate IRF3, IRF7, and NF-kappaB. However, TRAF3-deficient cells 
display only a partial reduction in interferon production in response to RNA
virus infection and are not defective in NF-kappaB activation. Here we find that 
the related ubiquitin ligase TRAF5 is a downstream target of MAVS that mediates
both IRF3 and NF-kappaB activation. The TM domain of MAVS allows it to dimerize
and thereby associate with TRAF5 and induce its ubiquitination in a
CARD-dependent manner. Also, NEMO is recruited to the dimerized MAVS CARD domain 
in a TRAF3 and TRAF5-dependent manner. Thus, our findings reveal a possible
function for TRAF5 in mediating the activation of IRF3 and NF-kappaB downstream
of MAVS through the recruitment of NEMO. TRAF5 may be a key molecule in the
innate response against viral infection.

PMCID: PMC2820086
PMID: 20161788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Immunol. 2010 Mar 15;184(6):3072-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902947. Epub 2010
Feb 12.

Essential role of mitochondrial antiviral signaling, IFN regulatory factor
(IRF)3, and IRF7 in Chlamydophila pneumoniae-mediated IFN-beta response and
control of bacterial replication in human endothelial cells.

Buss C(1), Opitz B, Hocke AC, Lippmann J, van Laak V, Hippenstiel S, Krüll M,
Suttorp N, Eitel J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Chlamydophila pneumoniae infection of the vascular wall as well as activation of 
the transcription factor IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3 have been linked to
development of chronic vascular lesions and atherosclerosis. The innate immune
system detects invading pathogens by use of pattern recognition receptors, some
of which are able to stimulate IRF3/7 activation and subsequent type I IFN
production (e. g., IFN-beta). In this study, we show that infection of human
endothelial cells with C. pneumoniae-induced production of IFN-beta, a cytokine
that so far has been mainly associated with antiviral immunity. Moreover, C.
pneumoniae infection led to IRF3 and IRF7 nuclear translocation in HUVECs and RNA
interference experiments showed that IRF3 and IRF7 as well as the mitochondrial
antiviral signaling (MAVS) were essential for IFN-beta induction. Finally, C.
pneumoniae replication was enhanced in endothelial cells in which IRF3, IRF7, or 
MAVS expression was inhibited by small interfering RNA and attenuated by IFN-beta
treatment. In conclusion, C. pneumoniae infection of endothelial cells activates 
an MAVS-, IRF3-, and IRF7-dependent signaling, which controls bacterial growth
and might modulate development of vascular lesions.

PMID: 20154210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Ther. 2010 Apr;18(4):775-84. doi: 10.1038/mt.2010.1. Epub 2010 Feb 9.

TLR9 and IRF3 cooperate to induce a systemic inflammatory response in mice
injected with liposome:DNA.

Walker WE(1), Booth CJ, Goldstein DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA. wendy.walker@yale.edu

Liposome:DNA is a promising gene therapy vector. However, this vector can elicit 
a systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS). Prior reports indicate that
liposome:DNA vectors activate Toll-like receptor (TLR)9. We hypothesized that
liposome:DNA vectors also activate the cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway, which
signals via interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF)3. To test this, we treated
dendritic cells (DCs) with liposome:DNA in vitro and found that IRF3 was
phosphorylated independent of TLR9. To test the contribution of this pathway in
vivo, we injected a liposome:DNA vector into wild-type (WT), TLR9-knockout (KO), 
IRF3-KO, and TLR9-IRF3-double-KO (DKO) mice. WT mice exhibited a systemic
inflammatory response, evidenced by elevations in serum cytokines, serum enzyme
changes indicating organ damage, hypothermia, and mortality. The cytokine
response was reduced in TLR9-KO, IRF3-KO, and TLR9-IRF3-DKO mice and all three
groups survived. We found that IFN-gamma-KO mice that receive liposome:DNA had a 
reduced cytokine response and 100% survival. CD11c(+) and NK1.1(+) cells produced
IFN-gamma and depleting CD11c(+) cells reduced the cytokine response in mice
injected with liposome:DNA. These findings may facilitate the development of
immunologically inert gene therapy vectors and may provide general insight into
the mechanisms of SIRS.

PMCID: PMC2862521
PMID: 20145605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Endocrinology. 2010 Mar;151(3):1097-108. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1140. Epub 2010 Feb
3.

Toll-like receptor ligands cause proinflammatory and prodiabetic activation of
adipocytes via phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase and c-Jun
N-terminal kinase but not interferon regulatory factor-3.

Kopp A(1), Buechler C, Bala M, Neumeier M, Schölmerich J, Schäffler A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Regensburg, D-93042
Regensburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Endocrinology. 2012 Feb;153(2):1000.

Here, we aim to investigate the mechanisms of Toll-like receptor (TLR)-induced
prodiabetic and proinflammatory activation of adipocytes and to detect
differences in the responsiveness of TLRs to their respective ligands between
adipocytes isolated from inflamed vs. noninflamed adipose tissue. Experiments
using specific ligands for all known TLRs were performed in murine 3T3-L1
adipocytes and in human adipocytes isolated from noninflamed and inflamed adipose
tissue. IL-6 and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) release were measured
by ELISA. The expression of the signal transduction proteins
phospho-extracellular signal-regulated kinase (P-Erk), P-c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
(JNK), and P-interferon regulatory factor-3 was investigated by Western blot
analysis. Additionally, functional inhibitors of MAPK kinase-1/-2 and JNK-1/-2
were used in the stimulation experiments. Activation of TRL4 by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and TLR1/2 by Pam(3)Cys up-regulates IL-6 and MCP-1
release in adipocytes via specific activation of Erk. Stimulation of adipocytes
by macrophage activating lipopeptide-2 (MALP-2) induces MCP-1 but has no effect
on IL-6 release. This stimulatory effect on MCP-1 release is antagonized by
inhibition of both mitogen-activated protein kinase-1/-2 and JNK-1/-2.
Phosphorylation of Erk and JNK is up-regulated after stimulation by MALP-2. In
human adipocytes isolated from noninflamed adipose tissue, LPS and Pam(3)Cys, but
not MALP-2, are potent inducers of IL-6 and MCP-1. MALP-2 is able to induce IL-6 
and MCP-1 release in adipocytes isolated from inflamed adipose tissue, whereas
these adipocytes lost their ability to respond to LPS. The present results point 
to a role of the adipose tissue in innate immunity. TLR-ligand-induced
proinflammatory and prodiabetic activation of adipocytes might couple visceral
adipose tissue dysfunction with insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 20130114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Virol. 2010 Apr;84(8):4002-12. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02220-09. Epub 2010 Feb 3.

Rabies virus nucleoprotein functions to evade activation of the RIG-I-mediated
antiviral response.

Masatani T(1), Ito N, Shimizu K, Ito Y, Nakagawa K, Sawaki Y, Koyama H, Sugiyama 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Zoonotic Diseases, Faculty of Applied Biological Sciences, Gifu 
University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1193, Japan.

The rabies virus Ni-CE strain causes nonlethal infection in adult mice after
intracerebral inoculation, whereas the parental Nishigahara (Ni) strain kills
mice. We previously reported that the chimeric CE(NiN) strain with the N gene
from the Ni strain in the genetic background of the Ni-CE strain kills adult
mice, indicating that the N gene is related to the different pathogenicities of
Ni and Ni-CE strains. In the present study, to obtain an insight into the
mechanism by which the N gene determines viral pathogenicity, we compared the
effects of Ni, Ni-CE, and CE(NiN) infections on host gene expressions using a
human neuroblastoma cell line. Microarray analysis of these infected cells
revealed that the expression levels of particular genes in Ni- and
CE(NiN)-infected cells, including beta interferon (IFN-beta) and chemokine genes 
(i.e., CXCL10 and CCL5) were lower than those in Ni-CE-infected cells. We also
demonstrated that Ni-CE infection activated the interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF-3)-dependent IFN-beta promoter and induced IRF-3 nuclear translocation more 
efficiently than did Ni or CE(NiN) infection. Furthermore, we showed that Ni-CE
infection, but not Ni or CE(NiN) infection, strongly activates the IRF-3 pathway 
through activation of RIG-I, which is known as a cellular sensor of virus
infection. These findings indicate that the N protein of rabies virus (Ni strain)
has a function to evade the activation of RIG-I. To our knowledge, this is the
first report that the Mononegavirales N protein functions to evade induction of
host IFN and chemokines.

PMCID: PMC2849511
PMID: 20130065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 26;285(13):9470-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.071043. Epub 2010 
Jan 22.

Virus-triggered ubiquitination of TRAF3/6 by cIAP1/2 is essential for induction
of interferon-beta (IFN-beta) and cellular antiviral response.

Mao AP(1), Li S, Zhong B, Li Y, Yan J, Li Q, Teng C, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.

Viral infection causes activation of transcription factors NF-kappaB and IRF3,
which collaborate to induce type I interferons (IFNs) and cellular antiviral
response. Here we show that knockdown of the E3 ubiquitin ligases cIAP1 and cIAP2
markedly inhibited virus-triggered activation of IRF3 and NF-kappaB as well as
IFN-beta induction. Knockdown of cIAP1 and cIAP2 also inhibited cytoplasmic
dsRNA-triggered cellular antiviral response. Endogenous coimmunoprecipitation
experiments indicated that viral infection caused recruitment of cIAP1 and cIAP2 
to TRAF3, TRAF6, and VISA. Furthermore, we demonstrated that cIAP1- and
cIAP2-mediated virus-triggered ubiquitination of TRAF3 and TRAF6. These findings 
suggest that virus-triggered ubiquitination of TRAF3 and TRAF6 by cIAP1 and cIAP2
is essential for type I IFN induction and cellular antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC2843197
PMID: 20097753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Jan 15;6(1):e1000722. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000722.

Type I interferon induction is detrimental during infection with the Whipple's
disease bacterium, Tropheryma whipplei.

Al Moussawi K(1), Ghigo E, Kalinke U, Alexopoulou L, Mege JL, Desnues B.

Author information: 
(1)Université de la Méditerranée, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Unité Mixte de Recherche 6236, Marseille, France.

Macrophages are the first line of defense against pathogens. Upon infection
macrophages usually produce high levels of proinflammatory mediators. However,
macrophages can undergo an alternate polarization leading to a permissive state. 
In assessing global macrophage responses to the bacterial agent of Whipple's
disease, Tropheryma whipplei, we found that T. whipplei induced M2 macrophage
polarization which was compatible with bacterial replication. Surprisingly, this 
M2 polarization of infected macrophages was associated with apoptosis induction
and a functional type I interferon (IFN) response, through IRF3 activation and
STAT1 phosphorylation. Using macrophages from mice deficient for the type I IFN
receptor, we found that this type I IFN response was required for T.
whipplei-induced macrophage apoptosis in a JNK-dependent manner and was
associated with the intracellular replication of T. whipplei independently of
JNK. This study underscores the role of macrophage polarization in host responses
and highlights the detrimental role of type I IFN during T. whipplei infection.

PMCID: PMC2798751
PMID: 20090833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 15;184(4):1784-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902005. Epub 2010
Jan 18.

Critical role of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex in TLR-mediated
IL-27p28 gene expression revealing a two-step activation process.

Molle C(1), Goldman M, Goriely S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels,
Belgium.

In myeloid dendritic cells, activation of the IL-27p28 gene is selectively
induced by ligands of TLR4 or TLR3, both coupled to the Toll/IL-1R-related
domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFN/IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3 pathway. In
response to both ligands, autocrine type 1 IFN production was required for
optimal IL-27p28 expression. Type I IFN signaling was necessary for sustained
IRF1 activation and formation of the IRF9-containing IFN-stimulated gene factor 3
complex. Indeed, we demonstrated that IRF1 and IRF9 are sequentially activated
and recruited to the IL-27p28 IFN-stimulated regulatory element site. Involvement
of IRF1 and IRF9 in the induction of IL-27p28 was confirmed in vitro and upon in 
vivo exposure to TLR ligands. Thus, in response to TLR4 or TLR3 ligation, the
initial induction of the IL-27p28 gene depends on the recruitment of IRF1 and
IRF3, whereas transcriptional amplification requires recruitment of the
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex. These results highlight the complex
molecular interplay between TLRs and type I IFNs for the control of IL-27
synthesis.

PMID: 20083668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jan 12;107(2):815-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0908967107. Epub 2009 Dec 22.

WDR5 is essential for assembly of the VISA-associated signaling complex and
virus-triggered IRF3 and NF-kappaB activation.

Wang YY(1), Liu LJ, Zhong B, Liu TT, Li Y, Yang Y, Ran Y, Li S, Tien P, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Modern Virology Center, Wuhan University, Wuhan
430072, China.

Viral infection causes activation of the transcription factors NF-kappaB and
IRF3, which collaborate to induce type I interferons (IFNs) and cellular
antiviral response. The mitochondrial outer membrane protein VISA acts as a
critical adapter for assembling a virus-induced complex that signals NF-kappaB
and IRF3 activation. Using a biochemical purification approach, we identified the
WD repeat protein WDR5 as a VISA-associated protein. WDR5 was recruited to VISA
in a viral infection dependent manner. Viral infection also caused translocation 
of WDR5 from the nucleus to mitochondria. Knockdown of WDR5 impaired the
formation of virus-induced VISA-associated complex. Consistently, knockdown of
WDR5 inhibited virus-triggered activation of IRF3 and NF-kappaB as well as
transcription of the IFNB1 gene. These findings suggest that WDR5 is essential in
assembling a virus-induced VISA-associated complex and plays an important role in
virus-triggered induction of type I IFNs.

PMCID: PMC2818949
PMID: 20080758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 5;285(10):7208-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.018838. Epub 2010 
Jan 4.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus latency-associated nuclear antigen inhibits
interferon (IFN) beta expression by competing with IFN regulatory factor-3 for
binding to IFNB promoter.

Cloutier N(1), Flamand L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Virology, Rheumatology and Immunology Research Center, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec Research Center and Faculty of Medicine,
Laval University, Québec City, Québec G1V 4G2, Canada.

Host cells respond to viral infections by synthesizing and producing antiviral
molecules such as type I interferons (IFN). The Kaposi sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV) encodes multiple proteins expressed during the lytic
replication cycle that alter the antiviral response of the host. Considering that
in Kaposi sarcoma lesions and primary effusion lymphoma cells KSHV is latent in
the vast majority of cells, we were interested in determining whether latently
expressed viral proteins have the ability to modulate IFN synthesis. The
latency-associated nuclear antigen (LANA-1) is a large nuclear protein that plays
a role in the establishment and maintenance of latent KSHV episome in the nucleus
of infected cells. LANA-1 is also described to modulate the cellular
transcription. Here, we report that LANA-1 inhibits IFN-beta transcription and
synthesis by competing with the binding of interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF3) 
to the IFNB promoter. Using mutants of LANA-1, we have identified the central
acidic repeated region as the domain essential for interfering with the binding
of IRF3 to the positive regulatory domains I-III of the IFNB promoter. In
addition, the nuclear localization of LANA-1 proved essential for IFN-beta
inhibition. Thus, LANA-1 interferes with the formation of IFN-beta enhanceosome
by competing with the fixation of IRF3 and by inhibiting the expression of the
CREB-binding protein. The ability of LANA-1 to inhibit IFNB gene expression
highlights a new role for this protein in cellular gene modulation and immune
evasion strategies.

PMCID: PMC2844170
PMID: 20048166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 26;285(9):6080-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.054486. Epub 2010 
Jan 4.

Viral induction of the zinc finger antiviral protein is IRF3-dependent but
NF-kappaB-independent.

Wang N(1), Dong Q, Li J, Jangra RK, Fan M, Brasier AR, Lemon SM, Pfeffer LM, Li
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Sciences, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA.

The zinc finger antiviral protein (ZAP) is an interferon-stimulated gene that
restricts the replication of retroviruses, alphaviruses, and filoviruses.
Relatively little is known, however, regarding the detailed mechanism of ZAP
induction during viral infections. We show that, although being inducible by
either interferon or virus, expression of ZAP is more efficiently activated by
virus than are several other classical interferon-stimulated genes and that viral
induction of ZAP occurs under the direct control of interferon regulatory factor 
3 (IRF3) independent of interferon paracrine/autocrine signaling. ZAP was
up-regulated in cells unresponsive to type I and III interferons upon engagement 
of TLR3, retinoic inducible gene I/melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5
pathways, or ectopic expression of a constitutively active IRF3 mutant.
Conversely, induction of ZAP by virus or dsRNA was severely impaired in cells
expressing a dominant-negative mutant IRF3 and completely abrogated in cells
lacking IRF3. In contrast to IRF3, ZAP induction was independent of NF-kappaB
activity. Mutational analysis of the human ZAP promoter revealed that multiple
interferon-stimulated response elements far distal to the transcription start
site serve redundantly to control IRF3-dependent induction of ZAP transcription. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that IRF3 selectively binds the
distal interferon-stimulated response elements in human ZAP promoter following
viral infection. Collectively, these data suggest that ZAP is a direct target
gene of IRF3 action in cellular antiviral responses.

PMCID: PMC2825402
PMID: 20048147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dig Dis. 2010;28(6):737-44. doi: 10.1159/000324281. Epub 2011 Apr 27.

Gut-liver axis and sensing microbes.

Szabo G(1), Bala S, Petrasek J, Gattu A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Mass., USA.
gyongyi.szabo@umassmed.edu

'Detoxification' of gut-derived toxins and microbial products from gut-derived
microbes is a major role of the liver. While the full repertoire of gut-derived
microbial products that reach the liver in health and disease is yet to be
explored, the levels of bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a component of
Gram-negative bacteria, is increased in the portal and/or systemic circulation in
several types of chronic liver diseases. Increased gut permeability and LPS play 
a role in alcoholic liver disease where alcohol impairs the gut epithelial
integrity through alterations in tight junction proteins. In addition,
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease is also associated with increased serum LPS
levels and activation of the pro-inflammatory cascade plays a central role in
disease progression. Microbial danger signals are recognized by pattern
recognition receptors such as the Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4). Increasing
evidence suggests that TLR4-mediated signaling via the MyD88-dependent or
MyD88-independent pathways may play different roles in liver diseases associated 
with increased LPS exposure of the liver as a result of gut permeability. For
example, we showed that in alcoholic liver disease, the MyD88-independent,
IRF3-dependent TLR4 cascade plays a role in steatosis and inflammation. Our
recent data demonstrate that chronic alcohol exposure in the liver leads to
sensitization of Kupffer cells to LPS via a mechanism involving upregulation of
microRNA-155 in Kupffer cells. Thus, understanding the cell-specific recognition 
and intracellular signaling events in sensing gut-derived microbes will help to
achieve an optimal balance in the gut-liver axis and ameliorate liver diseases.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3211517
PMID: 21525758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Innate Immun. 2011 Feb;17(1):97-105. doi: 10.1177/1753425909353641. Epub 2009 Dec
18.

ONO 3403, a synthetic serine protease inhibitor, inhibits
lipopolysaccharide-induced tumor necrosis factor-{alpha} and nitric oxide
production and protects mice from lethal endotoxic shock.

Tumurkhuu G(1), Koide N, Hiwasa T, Ookoshi M, Dagvadorj J, Abu Shadat Mohammod
Noman, Iftakhar-E-Khuda I, Naiki Y, Komatsu T, Yoshida T, Yokochi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi Medical University School of 
Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan.

ONO 3403, a new synthetic serine protease inhibitor, is a derivative of camostat 
mesilate and has a higher protease-inhibitory activity. The effect of ONO 3403 on
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a and nitric oxide
(NO) production in RAW 264.7 macrophage-like cells was examined. ONO 3403
significantly inhibited LPS-induced TNF-a production at a lower concentration
than camostat mesilate. It also inhibited LPS-induced NO production. Their
inhibition was responsible for the reduced mRNA expression of TNF-a and inducible
NO synthase. In LPS-stimulated cells, ONO 3403 prevented the augmentation of
MyD88 expression and inhibited the phosphorylation of I<U+03BA>B-a, stress-activated
protein kinase (SAPK) and IRF-3, and the production of interferon-ß. ONO 3403
abolished the elevation of the extracellular serine protease activity in response
to LPS. Further, it reduced the circulating TNF-a level, hepatic injury and
mortality in mice receiving an injection of D-galactosamine and LPS. ONO 3403 was
suggested to inhibit LPS-induced inflammatory responses via inactivation of
MyD88-dependent and independent pathways.

PMID: 20023007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Virol. 2010 Feb;84(4):1785-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01362-09. Epub 2009 Dec 9.

Z proteins of New World arenaviruses bind RIG-I and interfere with type I
interferon induction.

Fan L(1), Briese T, Lipkin WI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia
University, 722 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

The retinoic acid-inducible gene I product (RIG-I) is a cellular sensor of RNA
virus infection that regulates the cellular beta interferon (IFN-beta) response. 
The nucleoproteins (NP) of arenaviruses are reported to antagonize the IFN
response by inhibiting interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). Here, we
demonstrate that the Z proteins of four New World (NW) arenaviruses, Guanarito
virus (GTOV), Junin virus (JUNV), Machupo virus (MAVC), and Sabia virus (SABV),
bind to RIG-I, resulting in downregulation of the IFN-beta response. We show that
expression of the four NW arenavirus Z proteins inhibits IFN-beta mRNA induction 
in A549 cells in response to RNA bearing 5' phosphates (5'pppRNA). NW arenavirus 
Z proteins interact with RIG-I in coimmunoprecipitation studies and colocalize
with RIG-I. Furthermore, expression of Z proteins interferes with the interaction
between RIG-I and MAVS. Z expression also impedes the nuclear factor kappa light 
chain enhancer of activated B cells (NF-kappaB) and IRF-3 activation. Our results
indicate that NW arenavirus Z proteins, but not Z protein of the Old World (OW)
arenavirus lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) or Lassa virus, bind to
RIG-I and inhibit downstream activation of the RIG-I signaling pathway,
preventing the transcriptional induction of IFN-beta.

PMCID: PMC2812374
PMID: 20007272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 12;285(7):4291-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.074971. Epub 2009
Dec 7.

Regulation of virus-triggered signaling by OTUB1- and OTUB2-mediated
deubiquitination of TRAF3 and TRAF6.

Li S(1), Zheng H, Mao AP, Zhong B, Li Y, Liu Y, Gao Y, Ran Y, Tien P, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Modern Virology Center, Wuhan University, Wuhan
430072, China.

Ubiquitination and deubiquitination have emerged as critical post-translational
regulatory mechanisms for activation or attenuation of the virus-triggered type I
interferon (IFN)(2) induction pathways. In this study, we identified two
deubiquitinating enzymes, OTUB1 and OTUB2, as negative regulators of
virus-triggered type I IFN induction. Overexpression of OTUB1 and OTUB2 inhibited
virus-induced activation of IRF3 and NF-kappaB, transcription of the IFNB1 gene
as well as cellular antiviral response, whereas knockdown of OTUB1 and OTUB2 had 
opposite effects. Coimmunoprecipitations indicated OTUB1 and -2 interacted with
TRAF3 and TRAF6, two E3 ubiquitin ligases required for virus-triggered IRF3 and
NF-kappaB activation, respectively. Furthermore, we found that OTUB1 and OTUB2
mediated virus-triggered deubiquitination of TRAF3 and -6. These findings suggest
that OTUB1 and OTUB2 negatively regulate virus-triggered type I IFN induction and
cellular antiviral response by deubiquitinating TRAF3 and -6.

PMCID: PMC2836033
PMID: 19996094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Infect Immun. 2010 Feb;78(2):830-7. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00914-09. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

Morphine disrupts interleukin-23 (IL-23)/IL-17-mediated pulmonary mucosal host
defense against Streptococcus pneumoniae infection.

Ma J(1), Wang J, Wan J, Charboneau R, Chang Y, Barke RA, Roy S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic and Translational Research, Department of Surgery,
University of Minnesota, MMC 195, 420 Delaware Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, 
USA.

Streptococcus pneumoniae is a pathogen that causes serious respiratory disease
and meningitis in the immunocompromised drug abuse population. However, the
precise mechanisms by which drug abuse compromises the host immune defense to
pulmonary S. pneumoniae infection is not fully understood. Using a
well-established murine model of opiate abuse and S. pneumoniae lung infection,
we explored the influence of morphine treatment on the interleukin-23
(IL-23)/IL-17 axis and related innate immunity. Impairment of early IL-23/IL-17
production caused by morphine treatment was associated with delayed neutrophil
migration and decreased pneumococcal clearance. Furthermore, morphine treatment
impaired MyD88-dependent IL-23 production in alveolar macrophages and dendritic
cells in response to in vitro S. pneumoniae cell infection. Moreover, morphine
treatment significantly inhibited the S. pneumoniae-induced phosphorylation of
interferon response factor 3 (IRF3), ATF2, and NF-kappaBp65. T-cell receptor
delta (TCRdelta)-deficient mice showed a decrease in IL-17 production and a
severely weakened capacity to clear lung S. pneumoniae infection. Finally,
morphine treatment resulted in diminished secretion of antimicrobial proteins
S100A9 and S100A8/A9 during early stages of S. pneumoniae infection. In
conclusion, morphine treatment causes a dysfunction in IL-23-producing dendritic 
cells and macrophages and IL-17-producing gammadeltaT lymphocytes in response to 
S. pneumoniae lung infection. This leads to diminished release of antimicrobial
S100A8/A9 proteins, compromised neutrophil recruitment, and more-severe
infection.

PMCID: PMC2812200
PMID: 19995896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 26;4(11):e8079. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008079.

Expression of an IKKgamma splice variant determines IRF3 and canonical NF-kappaB 
pathway utilization in ssRNA virus infection.

Liu P(1), Lu M, Tian B, Li K, Garofalo RP, Prusak D, Wood TG, Brasier AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston, 
Texas, United States of America.

Single stranded RNA (ssRNA) virus infection activates the retinoic acid inducible
gene I (RIG-I)- mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) complex, a complex that 
coordinates the host innate immune response via the NF-kappaB and IRF3 pathways. 
Recent work has shown that the IkappaB kinase (IKK)gamma scaffolding protein is
the final common adapter protein required by RIG-I.MAVS to activate divergent
rate-limiting kinases downstream controlling the NF-kappaB and IRF3 pathways.
Previously we discovered a ubiquitous IKKgamma splice-variant, IKKgammaDelta,
that exhibits distinct signaling properties.METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We
examined the regulation and function of IKKgamma splice forms in response to
ssRNA virus infection, a condition that preferentially induces full length
IKKgamma-WT mRNA expression. In IKKgammaDelta-expressing cells, we found
increased viral translation and cytopathic effect compared to those expressing
full length IKKgamma-WT. IKKgammaDelta fails to support viral-induced IRF3
activation in response to ssRNA infections; consequently type I IFN production
and the induction of anti-viral interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) are
significantly attenuated. By contrast, ectopic RIG-I.MAVS or TNFalpha-induced
canonical NF-kappaB activation is preserved in IKKgammaDelta expressing cells.
Increasing relative levels of IKKgamma-WT to IKKgammaDelta (while keeping total
IKKgamma constant) results in increased type I IFN expression. Conversely,
overexpressing IKKgammaDelta (in a background of constant IKKgamma-WT expression)
shows IKKgammaDelta functions as a dominant-negative IRF3 signaling inhibitor.
IKKgammaDelta binds both IKK-alpha and beta, but not TANK and IKKepsilon,
indicating that exon 5 encodes an essential TANK binding domain. Finally,
IKKgammaDelta displaces IKKgammaWT from MAVS explaining its domainant negative
effect.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Relative endogenous IKKgammaDelta expression affects
cellular selection of inflammatory/anti-viral pathway responses to ssRNA viral
infection.

PMCID: PMC2778955
PMID: 19956647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 12;285(7):4441-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.031476. Epub 2009
Dec 2.

Human T cell lymphotropic virus 1 manipulates interferon regulatory signals by
controlling the TAK1-IRF3 and IRF4 pathways.

Suzuki S(1), Zhou Y, Refaat A, Takasaki I, Koizumi K, Yamaoka S, Tabuchi Y, Saiki
I, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathogenic Biochemistry, Institute of Natural Medicine, University
of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

We previously reported that human T cell lymphotropic virus 1 (HTLV-1) Tax
oncoprotein constitutively activates transforming growth factor-beta-activated
kinase 1 (TAK1). Here, we established Tax-positive HuT-102 cells stably
transfected with a short hairpin RNA vector (HuT-shTAK1 cells) and investigated
the physiological function of TAK1. Microarray analysis demonstrated that several
interferon (IFN)-inducible genes, including chemokines such as CXCL10 and CCL5,
were significantly down-regulated in HuT-shTAK1 cells. In contrast, Tax-mediated 
constitutive activation of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) was intact in
HuT-shTAK1 cells. IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a critical transcription factor
in innate immunity to viral infection, was constitutively activated in a
Tax-dependent manner. Activation of IRF3 and IRF3-dependent gene expressions was 
dependent on TAK1 and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). On the other hand, IRF4,
another member in the IRF family of transcription factors overexpressed in a
Tax-independent manner, negatively regulated TAK1-dependent IRF3 transcriptional 
activity. Together, HTLV-1 manipulates IFN signaling by regulating both positive 
and negative IRFs.

PMCID: PMC2836049
PMID: 19955181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Feb;40(2):505-15. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939391.

PKC-alpha controls MYD88-dependent TLR/IL-1R signaling and cytokine production in
mouse and human dendritic cells.

Langlet C(1), Springael C, Johnson J, Thomas S, Flamand V, Leitges M, Goldman M, 
Aksoy E, Willems F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Charleroi,
Belgium.

Conventional PKC (cPKC)-alpha regulates TRIF-dependent IFN response factor 3
(IRF3)-mediated gene transcription, but its role in MyD88-dependent TLR signaling
remains unknown. Herein, we demonstrate that PKC-alpha is induced by several
MyD88-dependent TLR/IL-1R ligands and regulates cytokine expression in human and 
murine DC. First, inhibition of cPKC activity in human DC by cPKC-specific
inhibitors, Gö6976 or HBDDe, downregulated the production of classical
inflammatory/immunomodulatory cytokines induced by TLR2, TLR5 or IL-1R but not by
TLR3 stimulation. Similarly, dominant negative PKC-alpha repressed Pam(3)CSK(4)
induced NF-kappaB- and AP-1-driven promoter activities in TLR2-expressing human
embryonic kidney 293 T cells. Dominant negative PKC-alpha inhibited NF-kappaB
reporter activity mediated by overexpression of MyD88 but not TRIF. Unexpectedly,
BM-derived DC from PKC-alpha(-/-) mice exhibited decreased TNF-alpha and IL-12p40
production induced by both MyD88- and TRIF-dependent ligands. Furthermore,
PKC-alpha is coupled to TLR2 signaling proximal to MyD88 since MAPK and IkappaB
kinase-alpha/beta phosphorylations and IkappaBalpha degradation were inhibited in
PKC-alpha(-/-) BM-derived DC. Finally, co-immunoprecipitation assays revealed
that PKC-alpha physically interacts with Pam(3)CSK(4) activated TLR2 in WT but
not in MyD88(-/-) DC. Collectively this study identifies a species-specific role 
of PKC-alpha as a key component that controls MyD88-dependent cytokine gene
expression in human and mouse but differentially regulates production of
TRIF-dependent cytokines.

PMID: 19950169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Virol. 2010 Feb;84(4):2027-37. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01595-09. Epub 2009 Nov 25.

The alpha/beta interferon receptor provides protection against influenza virus
replication but is dispensable for inflammatory response signaling.

Goodman AG(1), Zeng H, Proll SC, Peng X, Cillóniz C, Carter VS, Korth MJ, Tumpey 
TM, Katze MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Box 358070, Seattle, WA 
98195-8070, USA.

The innate immune response provides the first line of defense against foreign
pathogens by responding to molecules that are a signature of a pathogenic
infection. Certain RNA viruses, such as influenza virus, produce double-stranded 
RNA as an intermediate during the replication life cycle, which activates
pathogen recognition receptors capable of inducing interferon production. By
engaging interferon receptors, interferon activates the JAK-STAT pathway and
results in the positive feedback of interferon production, amplifying the
response to viral infection. To examine how deficiencies in interferon signaling 
affect the cellular response to infection, we performed influenza virus
infections of mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking the alpha/beta interferon
receptor, the gamma interferon receptor, or both. In the absence of the
alpha/beta interferon receptor, we observed increased viral replication but
decreased activation of PKR, Stat1, and NF-kappaB; the presence or absence of the
gamma interferon receptor did not exhibit discernible differences in these
readouts. Analysis of gene expression profiles showed that while cells lacking
the alpha/beta interferon receptor exhibited decreased levels of transcription of
antiviral genes, genes related to inflammatory and apoptotic responses were
transcribed to levels similar to those of cells containing the receptor. These
results indicate that while the alpha/beta interferon receptor is needed to curb 
viral replication, it is dispensable for the induction of certain inflammatory
and apoptotic genes. We have identified potential pathways, via interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activation or Hoxa13, Polr2a, Nr4a1, or Ing1
induction, that contribute to this redundancy. This study illustrates another way
in which the host has evolved to establish several overlapping mechanisms to
respond to viral infections.

PMCID: PMC2812385
PMID: 19939913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Virol. 2010 Feb;84(3):1574-84. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01326-09. Epub 2009 Nov 18.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus nonstructural protein 1beta
modulates host innate immune response by antagonizing IRF3 activation.

Beura LK(1), Sarkar SN, Kwon B, Subramaniam S, Jones C, Pattnaik AK, Osorio FA.

Author information: 
(1)Nebraska Center for Virology and School of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences,
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 68583, USA.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) infection of swine
leads to a serious disease characterized by a delayed and defective adaptive
immune response. It is hypothesized that a suboptimal innate immune response is
responsible for the disease pathogenesis. In the study presented here we tested
this hypothesis and identified several nonstructural proteins (NSPs) with innate 
immune evasion properties encoded by the PRRS viral genome. Four of the total ten
PRRSV NSPs tested were found to have strong to moderate inhibitory effects on
beta interferon (IFN-beta) promoter activation. The strongest inhibitory effect
was exhibited by NSP1 followed by, NSP2, NSP11, and NSP4. We focused on NSP1alpha
and NSP1beta (self-cleavage products of NSP1 during virus infection) and NSP11,
three NSPs with strong inhibitory activity. All of three proteins, when expressed
stably in cell lines, strongly inhibited double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) signaling
pathways. NSP1beta was found to inhibit both IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)- and 
NF-kappaB-dependent gene induction by dsRNA and Sendai virus. Mechanistically,
the dsRNA-induced phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF3 were strongly
inhibited by NSP1beta. Moreover, when tested in a porcine myelomonocytic cell
line, NSP1beta inhibited Sendai virus-mediated activation of porcine IFN-beta
promoter activity. We propose that this NSP1beta-mediated subversion of the host 
innate immune response plays an important role in PRRSV pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2812326
PMID: 19923190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Virol J. 2009 Nov 17;6:200. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-200.

Retinoic acid inducible gene I activates innate antiviral response against human 
parainfluenza virus type 3.

Sabbah A(1), Bose S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA. sabbah@uthscsa.edu

Human parainfluenza virus type 3 (HPIV3) is a respiratory paramyxovirus that
infects lung epithelial cells to cause high morbidity among infants and children.
To date, no effective vaccine or antiviral therapy exists for HPIV3 and
therefore, it is important to study innate immune antiviral response induced by
this virus in infected cells. Type-I interferons (IFN, interferon-alpha/beta) and
tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha activated by NFkappaB) are potent antiviral
cytokines that play an important role during innate immune antiviral response. A 
wide-spectrum of viruses utilizes pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) like
toll-like receptors (TLRs) and RLH (RIG like helicases) receptors such as RIGI
(retinoic acid inducible gene -I) and Mda5 to induce innate antiviral response.
Previously it was shown that both TNFalpha and IFNbeta are produced from HPIV3
infected cells. However, the mechanism by which infected cells activated innate
response following HPIV3 infection was not known. In the current study, we
demonstrated that RIGI serves as a PRR in HPIV3 infected cells to induce innate
antiviral response by expressing IFNbeta (via activation of interferon regulatory
factor-3 or IRF3) and TNFalpha (via activation of NF-kappaB).

PMCID: PMC2783035
PMID: 19922606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. FEBS Lett. 2010 Jan 4;584(1):33-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.11.025.

c-Abl tyrosine kinase interacts with MAVS and regulates innate immune response.

Song T(1), Wei C, Zheng Z, Xu Y, Cheng X, Yuan Y, Guan K, Zhang Y, Ma Q, Shi W,
Zhong H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Biotechnology, Haidian District, Beijing, China.

The tyrosine kinase, c-Abl, plays important roles in many aspects of cellular
function. Previous reports showed that c-Abl is involved in NF-kappaB signaling. 
However, the functions of c-Abl in innate immunity are still unknown. Here we
demonstrate that the mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) protein can be
physically associated with c-Abl in vivo and in vitro. MAVS interacted with c-Abl
through its Card and TM domain. A phosphotyrosine-specific antibody indicated
that MAVS was phosphorylated by c-Abl. Functional impairment of c-Abl attenuated 
MAVS or VSV induced type-I IFN production. Importantly, c-Abl knockdown in MCF7
cells displayed impaired MAVS-mediated NF-kappaB and IRF3 activation. Taken
together, our results suggest that c-Abl modulates innate immune response through
MAVS.

PMID: 19914245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Nature. 2009 Nov 5;462(7269):99-103. doi: 10.1038/nature08512.

HMGB proteins function as universal sentinels for nucleic-acid-mediated innate
immune responses.

Yanai H(1), Ban T, Wang Z, Choi MK, Kawamura T, Negishi H, Nakasato M, Lu Y,
Hangai S, Koshiba R, Savitsky D, Ronfani L, Akira S, Bianchi ME, Honda K, Tamura 
T, Kodama T, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The activation of innate immune responses by nucleic acids is crucial to
protective and pathological immunities and is mediated by the transmembrane
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and cytosolic receptors. However, it remains unknown
whether a mechanism exists that integrates these nucleic-acid-sensing systems.
Here we show that high-mobility group box (HMGB) proteins 1, 2 and 3 function as 
universal sentinels for nucleic acids. HMGBs bind to all immunogenic nucleic
acids examined with a correlation between affinity and immunogenic potential.
Hmgb1(-/-) and Hmgb2(-/-) mouse cells are defective in type-I interferon and
inflammatory cytokine induction by DNA or RNA targeted to activate the cytosolic 
nucleic-acid-sensing receptors; cells in which the expression of all three HMGBs 
is suppressed show a more profound defect, accompanied by impaired activation of 
the transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear
factor (NF)-kappaB. The absence of HMGBs also severely impairs the activation of 
TLR3, TLR7 and TLR9 by their cognate nucleic acids. Our results therefore
indicate a hierarchy in the nucleic-acid-mediated activation of immune responses,
wherein the selective activation of nucleic-acid-sensing receptors is contingent 
on the more promiscuous sensing of nucleic acids by HMGBs. These findings may
have implications for understanding the evolution of the innate immune system and
for the treatment of immunological disorders.

PMID: 19890330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Immunol. 2009 Dec 1;183(11):6989-97. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901386. Epub 2009
Nov 4.

Role of double-stranded RNA pattern recognition receptors in rhinovirus-induced
airway epithelial cell responses.

Wang Q(1), Nagarkar DR, Bowman ER, Schneider D, Gosangi B, Lei J, Zhao Y, McHenry
CL, Burgens RV, Miller DJ, Sajjan U, Hershenson MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology., University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

Rhinovirus (RV), a ssRNA virus of the picornavirus family, is a major cause of
the common cold as well as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
exacerbations. Viral dsRNA produced during replication may be recognized by the
host pattern recognition receptors TLR-3, retinoic acid-inducible gene (RIG)-I,
and melanoma differentiation-associated gene (MDA)-5. No study has yet identified
the receptor required for sensing RV dsRNA. To examine this, BEAS-2B human
bronchial epithelial cells were infected with intact RV-1B or
replication-deficient UV-irradiated virus, and IFN and IFN-stimulated gene
expression was determined by quantitative PCR. The separate requirements of
RIG-I, MDA5, and IFN response factor (IRF)-3 were determined using their
respective small interfering RNAs (siRNA). The requirement of TLR3 was determined
using siRNA against the TLR3 adaptor molecule Toll/IL-1R homologous
region-domain-containing adapter-inducing IFN-beta (TRIF). Intact RV-1B, but not 
UV-irradiated RV, induced IRF3 phosphorylation and dimerization, as well as mRNA 
expression of IFN-beta, IFN-lambda1, IFN-lambda2/3, IRF7, RIG-I, MDA5, 10-kDa
IFN-gamma-inducible protein/CXCL10, IL-8/CXCL8, and GM-CSF. siRNA against IRF3,
MDA5, and TRIF, but not RIG-I, decreased RV-1B-induced expression of IFN-beta,
IFN-lambda1, IFN-lambda2/3, IRF7, RIG-I, MDA5, and inflammatory protein-10/CXCL10
but had no effect on IL-8/CXCL8 and GM-CSF. siRNAs against MDA5 and TRIF also
reduced IRF3 dimerization. Finally, in primary cells, transfection with MDA5
siRNA significantly reduced IFN expression, as it did in BEAS-2B cells. These
results suggest that TLR3 and MDA5, but not RIG-I, are required for maximal
sensing of RV dsRNA and that TLR3 and MDA5 signal through a common downstream
signaling intermediate, IRF3.

PMCID: PMC2920602
PMID: 19890046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mucosal Immunol. 2010 Jan;3(1):29-39. doi: 10.1038/mi.2009.120. Epub 2009 Oct 28.

Novel signaling interactions between proteinase-activated receptor 2 and
Toll-like receptors in vitro and in vivo.

Nhu QM(1), Shirey K, Teijaro JR, Farber DL, Netzel-Arnett S, Antalis TM, Fasano
A, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, Baltimore
(UMB), School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and proteinase-activated receptors (PARs) function as 
innate immune biosensors in mucosal epithelial cells (ECs). We previously
reported the functional and physical interactions between TLR4 and PAR(2). We
have extended these findings herein by showing the cooperation between PAR(2) and
TLR2, TLR3, or TLR4 for activation of nuclear factor-kappaB-dependent signaling
in mucosal EC lines. In contrast, activation of PAR(2) negatively regulated
TLR3-dependent antiviral pathway, blunting the expression of TLR3/interferon
regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3)-driven genes, as well as activation of IRF-3 and
STAT1. Consistent with these in vitro observations, PAR(2)(-/-) and TLR4(-/-)
mice, which were refractory to footpad edema induced by PAR(2) agonist peptide,
were protected from mouse-adapted H1N1 influenza A virus-induced lethality when
compared to wild-type (WT) mice. These data support and extend our recently
described, novel model of PAR(2)-TLR4 "receptor cooperativity" and highlight the 
complexity of signaling integration between heterologous innate immune
biosensors.

PMCID: PMC2851245
PMID: 19865078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6545-53. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0900867. Epub 2009 
Oct 28.

Long double-stranded RNA induces an antiviral response independent of IFN
regulatory factor 3, IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1, and IFN.

DeWitte-Orr SJ(1), Mehta DR, Collins SE, Suthar MS, Gale M Jr, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology & Molecular Medicine, Michael DeGroote Institute for
Infectious Disease Research, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Virus infection elicits a robust innate antiviral response dominated by the
production of type 1 IFN. In nonprofessional innate immune cells such as
fibroblasts, type 1 IFN is rapidly produced following the recognition of viral
dsRNA and the subsequent activation of the constitutively expressed transcription
factor IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Although origin, localization, and length 
are factors in mediating dsRNA recognition and binding by cellular dsRNA-binding 
proteins, the biological significance of differential dsRNA binding is unclear,
since the subsequent signaling pathways converge on IRF3. In this study, we show 
a dsRNA length-dependent activation of IRFs, IFNs, and IFN-stimulated genes in
mouse fibroblasts. The length dependence was exacerbated in fibroblasts deficient
in the mitochondria-associated adaptor IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 and IRF3,
suggesting that antiviral gene induction mediated by short and long dsRNA
molecules is predominantly IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 and IRF3 dependent and 
independent, respectively. Furthermore, we provide evidence of an innate
antiviral response in fibroblasts in the absence of both IRF3 and type 1 IFN
induction. Even with these key modulators missing, a 60-90% inhibition of virus
replication was observed following 24-h treatment with short or long dsRNA
molecules, respectively. These data provide evidence of a novel antiviral pathway
that is dependent on dsRNA length, but independent of the type 1 IFN system.

PMCID: PMC2885285
PMID: 19864603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell. 2009 Oct 23;36(2):315-25. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.09.037.

Key role of Ubc5 and lysine-63 polyubiquitination in viral activation of IRF3.

Zeng W(1), Xu M, Liu S, Sun L, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

The mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS; also known as IPS-1, VISA,
and CARDIF) is essential for innate immune response against RNA viruses. MAVS
transduces signals from the cytosolic RIG-I-like receptors, which bind to viral
RNAs. But how MAVS activates downstream transcription factors such as IRF3 to
induce type-I interferons is not well understood. We have established a cell-free
system in which mitochondria derived from virus-infected cells activate IRF3 in
the cytosol. Fractionation of the cytosol led to the identification of Ubc5 as a 
ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2) required for IRF3 activation. Using an
inducible RNAi strategy, we demonstrate that catalytically active Ubc5 is
required for IRF3 activation by viral infection. The activation of IRF3 also
requires two ubiquitin-binding domains of NEMO. Furthermore, we show that
replacement of endogenous ubiquitin with its K63R mutant abolishes viral
activation of IRF3, demonstrating that K63 polyubiquitination plays a key role in
IRF3 activation.

PMCID: PMC2779157
PMID: 19854139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Comp Immunol. 2010 Mar;34(3):293-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2009.10.007. Epub 2009
Oct 28.

Molecular cloning and functional characterization of porcine DNA-dependent
activator of IFN-regulatory factors (DAI).

Xie L(1), Fang L, Wang D, Luo R, Cai K, Chen H, Xiao S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Animal Infectious Diseases, State Key Laboratory of Agricultural
Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University,
Wuhan 430070, PR China.

The DNA-dependent activator of IFN-regulatory factors (DAI) is a recently
identified DNA sensor for intracellular DNA that triggers a signal for the
production of type I IFN. Here we report the cloning and characterization of
porcine DAI (poDAI). The full-length of poDAI encodes 439 amino acids, contains
two N-terminal DNA-binding domains and shows similarity to mouse, rat, dog,
monkey, human, horse and cattle counterparts ranging from 44% to 67%. poDAI mRNA 
expression was mainly detected in spleen, lung, kidney and small intestine.
Over-expression of poDAI activated transcription factors IRF3 and NF-kappaB and
induced IFN-beta in different porcine cell lines, but to varying degrees.
Deletion mutant analysis revealed that both the DNA-binding domains and the
C-terminus are required for full activation of IFN-beta. siRNA targeting poDAI
significantly decreased poly(dAT:dAT)- or Pseudorabies virus (PRV)-induced
IFN-beta activation. These results indicate that DAI is an important
immuno-regulator of the porcine innate immune system.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19850075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Virol. 2010 Jan;84(1):585-98. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01748-09.

Human cytomegalovirus induces the interferon response via the DNA sensor ZBP1.

DeFilippis VR(1), Alvarado D, Sali T, Rothenburg S, Früh K.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Health and Science University, Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute,
Beaverton, OR 97006, USA. defilipp@ohsu.edu

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a member of the betaherpesvirus family that,
unlike other herpesviruses, triggers a strong innate immune response in infected 
cells that includes transcription of the beta interferon gene via activation of
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). IRF3 activation requires signaling from
pattern recognition receptors that is initiated by their interaction with
specific pathogen-associated molecules. However, while IRF3-activating pathways
are increasingly well characterized, the cellular molecules involved in
HCMV-mediated IRF3-dependent beta interferon transcription are virtually unknown.
We undertook a systematic examination of new and established IRF3-terminal
pathway components to identify those that are essential to HCMV-triggered IRF3
activation. We show here that IRF3 activation induced by HCMV infection involves 
the newly identified protein STING but, in contrast to infections with other
herpesviruses, occurs independently of the adaptor molecule IPS-1. We also show
that the protein DDX3 contributes to HCMV-triggered expression of beta
interferon. Moreover, we identify Z-DNA binding protein 1 (ZBP1) as being
essential for IRF3 activation and interferon beta expression triggered by HCMV,
as well as being sufficient to enhance HCMV-stimulated beta interferon
transcription and secretion. ZBP1 transcription was also found to be induced
following exposure to HCMV in a JAK/STAT-dependent manner, thus perhaps also
contributing to a positive feedback signal. Finally, we show that constitutive
overexpression of ZBP1 inhibits HCMV replication. ZBP1 was recently identified as
a cytosolic pattern recognition receptor of double-stranded DNA, and thus, we
propose a model for HCMV-mediated IRF3 activation that involves HCMV-associated
DNA as the principal innate immune-activating pathogen-associated molecular
pattern.

PMCID: PMC2798427
PMID: 19846511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Oct;37(7):3073-80. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9880-0. Epub 2009
Oct 14.

Characterization of the human IRF-3 promoter and its regulation by the
transcription factor E2F1.

Xu HG(1), Ren W, Lu C, Zhou GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, 300 Guang Zhou Road, 210029, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), an essential transcriptional regulator of
the interferon genes, has been implicated in virus and double-stranded RNA
mediated induction of IFN-a, IFN-ß and RANTES, in virus-induced apoptosis and in 
tumor suppression. Promoter plays an important role in the regulation of gene
expression, but the characterization of the human IRF-3 promoter has not been
systematically analyzed in HEK 293 cells. To characterize the human IRF-3
promoter, we have isolated a genomic clone of the human IRF-3 gene promoter
region containing 1,000 nucleotides of the 5'- flanking region. Transient
transfection of 5'-deleted promoter-reporter constructs and luciferase assay
illustrated the region -149/-93 relative to the transcription start site (TSS) is
sufficient for full promoter activity. This region contains HSF, E2F, CdxA and
c-Myb transcription factor binding sites. The E2F sites are highly conserved
among IRF-3 promoter regions of mouse, rat and human. Therefore, it was suggested
that this E2F site may be essential for basal promoter activity. Surprisingly,
mutation of this E2F site increased the promoter activity by 2-fold. Furthermore,
overexpression of E2F1 reduced the transcription activity by 80%. These results
indicated that human IRF-3 gene core promoter was located within the region
-149/-93 relative to the TSS. E2F1 transcription factor negatively regulates
human IRF-3 gene promoter.

PMID: 19826915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 18;390(3):678-83. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.10.027. Epub 2009 Oct 13.

The TRIF-dependent signaling pathway is not required for acute cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice.

Hua F(1), Wang J, Sayeed I, Ishrat T, Atif F, Stein DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Brain Research Laboratory, Emory University 
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. fhua2@emory.edu

TIR domain-containing adaptor protein (TRIF) is an adaptor protein in Toll-like
receptor (TLR) signaling pathways. Activation of TRIF leads to the activation of 
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB).
While studies have shown that TLRs are implicated in cerebral
ischemia/reperfusion (I/R) injury and in neuroprotection against ischemia
afforded by preconditioning, little is known about TRIF's role in the
pathological process following cerebral I/R. The present study investigated the
role that TRIF may play in acute cerebral I/R injury. In a mouse model of
cerebral I/R induced by transient middle cerebral artery occlusion, we examined
the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3 signaling in ischemic cerebral tissue using 
ELISA and Western blots. Neurological function and cerebral infarct size were
also evaluated 24h after cerebral I/R. NF-kappaB activity and phosphorylation of 
the inhibitor of kappa B (IkappaBalpha) increased in ischemic brains, but IRF3,
inhibitor of kappaB kinase complex-epsilon (IKKepsilon), and TANK-binding kinase1
(TBK1) were not activated after cerebral I/R in wild-type (WT) mice.
Interestingly, TRIF deficit did not inhibit NF-kappaB activity or p-IkappaBalpha 
induced by cerebral I/R. Moreover, although cerebral I/R induced neurological and
functional impairments and brain infarction in WT mice, the deficits were not
improved and brain infarct size was not reduced in TRIF knockout mice compared to
WT mice. Our results demonstrate that the TRIF-dependent signaling pathway is not
required for the activation of NF-kappaB signaling and brain injury after acute
cerebral I/R.

PMCID: PMC2787898
PMID: 19825364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Gen Virol. 2010 Jan;91(Pt 1):220-7. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.015172-0. Epub 2009 Oct 
7.

Thogoto virus ML protein is a potent inhibitor of the interferon regulatory
factor-7 transcription factor.

Buettner N(1), Vogt C, Martínez-Sobrido L, Weber F, Waibler Z, Kochs G.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Universität Freiburg, D-79008 Freiburg, Germany.

The tick-transmitted orthomyxovirus Thogoto virus (THOV) encodes the ML protein
acting as a viral suppressor of the host interferon (IFN) system. Here, we
describe that type I IFN is strongly induced in primary mouse embryo fibroblasts 
as well as plasmacytoid dendritic cells upon infection with a THOV mutant lacking
the ML gene. However, wild-type THOV encoding ML suppresses induction of IFN by
preventing the activation of members of the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family.
We found that reporter gene expression dependent on IRF3 and IRF7 was strongly
inhibited by ML. Further experiments revealed that ML interacts with IRF7 and
prevents dimerization of the transcription factor and its association with the
coactivator TRAF6. Interestingly, another IRF7 activation step, nuclear
translocation, is not affected by ML. Our data elucidate ML protein as a
virulence factor with an IRF-specific IFN-antagonistic spectrum.

PMID: 19812269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 20;106(42):17870-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909545106. Epub 2009 Oct 1.

A selective contribution of the RIG-I-like receptor pathway to type I interferon 
responses activated by cytosolic DNA.

Choi MK(1), Wang Z, Ban T, Yanai H, Lu Y, Koshiba R, Nakaima Y, Hangai S,
Savitsky D, Nakasato M, Negishi H, Takeuchi O, Honda K, Akira S, Tamura T,
Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The activation of the innate immune responses by DNA exposed within the cytosol
has gained much attention and, in this context, several cytosolic DNA sensors
have been identified. However, previous studies revealed the operation of
redundant and complex mechanisms and it still remains to be clarified how the
DNA-mediated evocation of diverse innate immune responses can be achieved. Here
we show that two RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs), RIG-I and MDA5, known as cytosolic 
RNA receptors, nonredundantly function as cytosolic DNA receptors that lead to
the selective activation of type I IFN genes. We demonstrate that overexpression 
of otherwise IFN-inducible RIG-I or MDA5 in IFN signal-deficient cells results in
a marked enhancement of type I IFN gene induction upon cytosolic DNA stimulation,
while in their absence the induction is impaired. Interestingly, the DNA-mediated
induction of other cytokine genes was barely affected by the absence of RLRs.
Indeed, unlike the RNA-RLR pathway that activates the transcription factors IRF3 
and NF-kappaB, the DNA-RLR pathway is primarily responsible for the IRF3
activation critical for type I IFN gene transcription, illustrating a deliberate 
divergence of the DNA signaling pathways. Expectedly, the RLR pathway also
contributes to intricate innate immune responses against infection by a DNA
virus. Our study may provide insights into the complexity of host defense
mechanisms that thwart immune evasion by DNA-containing pathogens.

PMCID: PMC2764914
PMID: 19805092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Exp Eye Res. 2010 Jan;90(1):130-6. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2009.09.021. Epub 2009 Sep
30.

Toll-like receptors mediate induction of peptidoglycan recognition proteins in
human corneal epithelial cells.

Ma P(1), Wang Z, Pflugfelder SC, Li DQ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun-Yat
Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

Human peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGLYRPs) are a novel family of pattern 
recognition receptors, and also act as anti-bacterial proteins. This study was to
explore the toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated regulation of PGLYRPs in human
corneal epithelial cells (HCECs). Fresh human donor corneoscleral tissues were
used to prepare cryosections. Primary HCECs, established from limbal explants,
were treated with microbial ligands to TLRs 1-9 for 4-48 h, with or without
pretreatment of TLR antibodies, NFkB inhibitor, or siRNA transfection. The mRNA
of PGLYRPs was evaluated by RT and real-time PCR, and their proteins and NFkB
activation were determined by immunostaining and Western blot. The nuclear IRF3
activity was quantified using an ELISA-based TransAM kit. PGLYRP-2, -3 and -4
were found to be expressed by human corneal epithelium while PGLYRP-1 was not
detected. In primary HCEC cultures, PGLYRP-3 and -4 were constitutively expressed
while PGLYRP-2 was largely inducible. PGLYRP-2 was induced by bacterial
components, Pam3CSK4, PGN, flagellin and FSL-1, ligands for TLR2/1, 2, 5 and 2/6,
respectively. Interestingly, PGLYRP-2 was strongest stimulated by polyI:C
representing viral dsRNA. TLR3 antibody or NFkB inhibitor blocked IRF3 and NFkB
p65 activation as well as polyI:C-stimulated PGLYRP-2. RNA interference indicates
that the polyI:C-induced PGLYRP-2 was dramatically blocked in the cells
transfected with siRNA-TRIF but neither siRNA-MyD88 nor the negative control
siRNA-F. These findings suggest that human corneal epithelium may response to
viral or bacterial infection by producing PGLYRPs through TLRs, and the induction
of PGLYRP-2 by dsRNA was through TLR3-TRIF-IRF3-NFkB signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2836933
PMID: 19799901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Dec;39(12):3469-76. doi: 10.1002/eji.200939878.

Oligomerized TICAM-1 (TRIF) in the cytoplasm recruits nuclear BS69 to enhance
NF-kappaB activation and type I IFN induction.

Takaki H(1), Oshiumi H, Sasai M, Kawanishi T, Matsumoto M, Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

Although adenovirus 5 E1A-binding protein (BS69) is a nuclear protein acting as a
transcriptional repressor, we found by an yeast two-hybrid and human cell
immunoprecipitation another cytoplasmic function for this protein. BS69 bound
Toll-interleukin 1 receptor domain (TIR)-containing adaptor molecule-1 (TICAM-1) 
(also named TRIF), an adaptor protein that couples with TLR3 around the endosome.
BS69 translocated from the nucleus to the cytoplasm when cells were stimulated
with dsRNA or transfected with TICAM-1. Confocal analysis of cells with
over-expressed TICAM-1 or those stimulated with dsRNA revealed the characteristic
"TICAM-1 speckle", which reflects signalosome formation necessary for the
activation of NF-kappaB and IFN-regulatory factor (IRF)-3. BS69 was involved in
the TICAM-1 complex, and the activation of NF-kappaB/IRF-3 followed by cytokine
production was augmented in the presence of BS69 overexpression. Knockdown of
endogenous BS69 resulted in a decrease of IFN-beta induction, suggesting that
BS69 is a positive regulator for the TLR3-TICAM-1 pathway. These results,
together with a recent report showing the negative regulatory properties of BS69 
in NF-kappaB activation by EBV-derived latent membrane protein 1, suggest that
BS69 harbors dual modes of cytoplasmic NF-kappaB regulation, positively in the
TICAM-1 pathway and negatively in the latent membrane protein 1 pathway.

PMID: 19795416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Virology. 2009 Dec 5;395(1):121-32. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.08.039. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

Characteristics of alpha/beta interferon induction after infection of murine
fibroblasts with wild-type and mutant alphaviruses.

Burke CW(1), Gardner CL, Steffan JJ, Ryman KD, Klimstra WB.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular and Tumor Virology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1501 Kings
Highway, Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.

We examined the characteristics of interferon alpha/beta (IFN-alpha/beta)
induction after alphavirus or control Sendai virus (SeV) infection of murine
fibroblasts (MEFs). As expected, SeV infection of wild-type (wt) MEFs resulted in
strong dimerization of IRF3 and the production of high levels of IFN-alpha/beta. 
In contrast, infection of MEFs with multiple alphaviruses failed to elicit
detectable IFN-alpha/beta. In more detailed studies, Sindbis virus (SINV)
infection caused dimerization and nuclear migration of IRF3, but minimal IFN-beta
promoter activity, although surprisingly, the infected cells were competent for
IFN production by other stimuli early after infection. A SINV mutant defective in
host macromolecular synthesis shutoff induced IFN-alpha/beta in the MEF cultures 
dependent upon the activities of the TBK1 IRF3 activating kinase and host pattern
recognition receptors (PRRs) PKR and MDA5 but not RIG-I. These results suggest
that wild-type alphaviruses antagonize IFN induction after IRF3 activation but
also may avoid detection by host PRRs early after infection.

PMCID: PMC4381786
PMID: 19782381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 25;4(9):e7178. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007178.

SOCS2 influences LPS induced human monocyte-derived dendritic cell maturation.

Hu J(1), Winqvist O, Flores-Morales A, Wikström AC, Norstedt G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm,
Sweden.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are highly specific antigen presenting cells, which link
innate and adaptive immune responses and participate in protecting hosts from
invading pathogens. DCs can be generated in vitro by culturing human monocytes
with GM-CSF and IL-4 followed by LPS induced DC maturation. We set out to study
the suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins during maturation and
activation of human monocyte-derived DCs from peripheral blood in vitro. We found
that the expression of SOCS2 mRNA and protein is dramatically up-regulated during
DC maturation. Silencing of SOCS2 using siRNA, inhibited DC maturation as
evidenced by a decreased expression of maturation markers such as CD83,
co-stimulatory molecules CD40, CD86 and HLA-DR. Furthermore, silencing of SOCS2
decreased LPS induced activation of MAP kinases (SAKP/JNK, p38, ERK), IRF3,
decreased the translocation of the NF-kappaB transcription factor and reduced
downstream gene mRNA expression. These results suggest a role for SOCS2 in the
MyD88-dependent and -independent TLR4 signaling pathways. In conclusion, our
results demonstrate that SOCS2 is required for appropriate TLR4 signaling in
maturating human DCs via both the MyD88-dependent and -independent signaling
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2744869
PMID: 19779605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 13;284(46):31982-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.046383. Epub
2009 Sep 15.

Selective activation of the p38 MAPK pathway by synthetic monophosphoryl lipid A.

Cekic C(1), Casella CR, Eaves CA, Matsuzawa A, Ichijo H, Mitchell TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Louisville School of 
Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.

TLR4 stimulation by lipopolysaccharide can cause both MAL/MyD88- and TRAM/TRIF
(Toll IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFNbeta)-dependent
signaling events. Monophosphoryl lipid A (MPLA), a low toxicity derivative of
endotoxic lipopolysaccharide, enhances antibody responses, T cell expansion, and 
recall responses against antigens without causing excessive inflammatory side
effects. Previously, we proposed that TRIF-biased activation of TLR4 by MPLA is
responsible for its reduced toxicity while retaining potent adjuvant effects.
However, some TRIF-associated genes, such as MCP-1, are only weakly expressed,
and some MyD88-associated inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, such as
tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-10, are strongly activated after MPLA
stimulation despite weak NF-kappaB but strong IRF3 activation. We now report that
synthetic derivatives of MPLA retained TRIF bias as compared with synthetic
diphosphoryl lipid A, indicating a change in a single phosphoryl group is
sufficient for TRIF-biased TLR4 stimulation. We extend our previous observations 
by showing that sMLA induces strong p38 MAPK but weak JNK activation, resulting
in high IP-10 (interferon-inducible protein 10), tumor necrosis factor alpha, and
interleukin-10 but low MCP-1 transcript levels. Results of this study identify a 
novel biochemical mechanism for regulation of sMLA-induced gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2797270
PMID: 19759006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Sep 15;106(37):15819-24. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0901216106. Epub 2009 Aug 31.

miR-147, a microRNA that is induced upon Toll-like receptor stimulation,
regulates murine macrophage inflammatory responses.

Liu G(1), Friggeri A, Yang Y, Park YJ, Tsuruta Y, Abraham E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are major receptors that enable inflammatory cells to 
recognize invading microbial pathogens. MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that 
play important regulatory roles in a variety of biological processes. In this
study, we found that a microRNA, miR-147, was induced upon stimulation of
multiple TLRs and functioned as a negative regulator of TLR-associated signaling 
events in murine macrophages. We first demonstrated that the NMES1 transcript was
a functional primary miR-147. miR-147 was induced in LPS-stimulated mouse
macrophages and under in vivo conditions in the lungs of LPS-treated mice.
Expression of miR-147 was greater after cellular activation by TLR4 than after
engagement of either TLR2 or TLR3, suggesting that maximal induction of miR-147
required activation of both NF-kappaB and IRF3. TLR4-induced miR-147 expression
was both MyD88- and TRIF-dependent. The miR-147 promoter was responsive to TLR4
stimulation and both NF-kappaB and STAT1alpha bound to the miR-147 promoter.
miR-147 mimics or induced expression of miR-147 decreased, whereas miR-147
knockdown increased inflammatory cytokine expression in macrophages stimulated
with ligands to TLR2, TLR3, and TLR4. These data demonstrate a negative-feedback 
loop in which TLR stimulation induces miR-147 to prevent excessive inflammatory
responses.

PMCID: PMC2747202
PMID: 19721002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Exp Med. 2009 Sep 28;206(10):2161-77. doi: 10.1084/jem.20090616. Epub 2009 Aug 
31.

Caspase-8 deficiency in epidermal keratinocytes triggers an inflammatory skin
disease.

Kovalenko A(1), Kim JC, Kang TB, Rajput A, Bogdanov K, Dittrich-Breiholz O,
Kracht M, Brenner O, Wallach D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, The Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Expression of enzymatically inactive caspase-8, or deletion of caspase-8 from
basal epidermal keratinocytes, triggers chronic skin inflammation in mice. Unlike
similar inflammation resulting from arrest of nuclear factor kappaB activation in
the epidermal cells, the effect induced by caspase-8 deficiency did not depend on
TNF, IL-1, dermal macrophage function, or expression of the toll-like receptor
adapter proteins MyD88 or TRIF. Both interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and
TANK-binding kinase were constitutively phosphorylated in the caspase-8-deficient
epidermis, and knockdown of IRF3 in the epidermis-derived cells from these mice
abolished the expression of up-regulated genes. Temporal and spatial analyses of 
the alterations in gene expression that result from caspase-8 deficiency reveal
that the changes are initiated before birth, around the time that cornification
develops, and occur mainly in the suprabasal layer. Finally, we found that
caspase-8-deficient keratinocytes display an enhanced response to gene activation
by transfected DNA. Our findings suggest that an enhanced response to endogenous 
activators of IRF3 in the epidermis, presumably generated in association with
keratinocyte differentiation, contributes to the skin inflammatory process
triggered by caspase-8 deficiency.

PMCID: PMC2757876
PMID: 19720838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Viruses. 2009 Sep;1(2):255-75. doi: 10.3390/v1020255. Epub 2009 Sep 7.

Regulation of Innate Immune Responses by Bovine Herpesvirus 1 and Infected Cell
Protein 0 (bICP0).

Jones C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Fair Street at East Campus Loop,
Lincoln, NE, 68583-0905, USA; E-mail: cjones@unlnotes.unl.edu ; Tel.: +1 (402)
472-1890;

Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) is an important
transcriptional regulatory protein that stimulates productive infection. In
transient transfection assays, bICP0 also inhibits interferon dependent
transcription. bICP0 can induce degradation of interferon stimulatory factor 3
(IRF3), a cellular transcription factor that is crucial for activating beta
interferon (IFN-ß) promoter activity. Recent studies also concluded that
interactions between bICP0 and IRF7 inhibit trans-activation of IFN-ß promoter
activity. The C3HC4 zinc RING (really important new gene) finger located near the
amino terminus of bICP0 is important for all known functions of bICP0. A
recombinant virus that contains a single amino acid change in a well conserved
cysteine residue of the C3HC4 zinc RING finger of bICP0 grows poorly in cultured 
cells, and does not reactivate from latency in cattle confirming that the C3HC4
zinc RING finger is crucial for viral growth and pathogenesis. A bICP0 deletion
mutant does not induce plaques in permissive cells, but induces autophagy in a
cell type dependent manner. In summary, the ability of bICP0 to stimulate
productive infection, and repress IFN dependent transcription plays a crucial
role in the BoHV-1 infection cycle.

PMCID: PMC3185490
PMID: 21994549  [PubMed]


54. J Virol. 2009 Nov;83(21):11330-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00763-09. Epub 2009 Aug 26.

Identification of amino acid residues critical for the anti-interferon activity
of the nucleoprotein of the prototypic arenavirus lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus.

Martínez-Sobrido L(1), Emonet S, Giannakas P, Cubitt B, García-Sastre A, de la
Torre JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy 
Place, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCVM) nucleoprotein (NP) counteracts the host
type I interferon (IFN) response by inhibiting activation of the IFN regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3). In this study, we have mapped the regions and specific amino
acid residues within NP involved in its anti-IFN activity. We identified a region
spanning residues 382 to 386 as playing a critical role in the IFN-counteracting 
activity of NP. Alanine substitutions at several positions within this region
resulted in NP mutants that lacked the IFN-counteracting activity but retained
their functions in virus RNA synthesis and assembly of infectious particles. We
used reverse genetics to rescue a recombinant LCMV strain carrying mutation D382A
in its NP [rLCMV/NP*(D382A)]. Compared to wild-type (WT) LCMV, rLCMV/NP*(D382A)
exhibited a higher level of attenuation in IFN-competent than IFN-deficient
cells. In addition, A549 cells infected with rLCMV/NP*(D382A), but not with WT
LCMV, produced IFN and failed to rescue replication of the IFN-sensitive
Newcastle disease virus.

PMCID: PMC2772779
PMID: 19710144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 23;284(43):29350-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.045146. Epub 2009
Aug 25.

RNA-specific adenosine deaminase ADAR1 suppresses measles virus-induced apoptosis
and activation of protein kinase PKR.

Toth AM(1), Li Z, Cattaneo R, Samuel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA.

ADAR1 (adenosine deaminase acting on RNA) catalyzes the conversion of adenosine
to inosine, a process known as A-to-I editing. Extensive A-to-I editing has been 
described in viral RNAs isolated from the brains of patients persistently
infected with measles virus, although the precise role of ADAR during measles
virus infection remains unknown. We generated human HeLa cells stably deficient
in ADAR1 ("ADAR1(kd) cells") through short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown, and
using these cells, we tested the effect of ADAR1 deficiency on measles virus
(MVvac strain) growth and virus-induced cell death. We found that the growth of
mutant viruses lacking expression of the viral accessory proteins V and C (V(ko) 
and C(ko), respectively) was decreased in ADAR1-deficient cells compared with
ADAR1-sufficient cells. In addition, apoptosis was enhanced in ADAR1-deficient
cells following infection with wild type and V(ko) virus but not following
infection with C(ko) virus or treatment with tumor necrosis factor-alpha or
staurosporine. Furthermore, in C(ko)-infected ADAR1-sufficient cells when ADAR1
did not protect against apoptosis, caspase cleavage of the ADAR1 p150 protein was
detected. Finally, enhanced apoptosis in ADAR1(kd) cells following infection with
wild type and V(ko) virus correlated with enhanced activation of PKR kinase and
interferon regulatory factor IRF-3. Taken together, these results demonstrate
that ADAR1 is a proviral, antiapoptotic host factor in the context of measles
virus infection and suggest that the antiapoptotic activity of ADAR1 is achieved 
through suppression of activation of proapoptotic and double-stranded
RNA-dependent activities, as exemplified by PKR and IRF-3.

PMCID: PMC2785566
PMID: 19710021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Virol. 2009 Oct;83(20):10395-405. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00849-09. Epub 2009 Aug 12.

Human immunodeficiency virus type 1 mediates global disruption of innate
antiviral signaling and immune defenses within infected cells.

Doehle BP(1), Hladik F, McNevin JP, McElrath MJ, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington School of Medicine, Department of Immunology,
Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) is essential for innate intracellular
immune defenses that limit virus replication, but these defenses fail to suppress
human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, which can ultimately associate with
opportunistic coinfections and the progression to AIDS. Here, we examined
antiviral defenses in CD4+ cells during virus infection and coinfection,
revealing that HIV type 1 (HIV-1) directs a global disruption of innate immune
signaling and supports a coinfection model through suppression of IRF-3. T cells 
responded to paramyxovirus infection to activate IRF-3 and interferon-stimulated 
gene expression, but they failed to mount a response against HIV-1. The lack of
response associated with a marked depletion of IRF-3 but not IRF-7 in
HIV-1-infected cells, which supported robust viral replication, whereas ectopic
expression of active IRF-3 suppressed HIV-1 infection. IRF-3 depletion was
dependent on a productive HIV-1 replication cycle and caused the specific
disruption of Toll-like receptor and RIG-I-like receptor innate immune signaling 
that rendered cells permissive to secondary virus infection. IRF-3 levels were
reduced in vivo within CD4+ T cells from patients with acute HIV-1 infection but 
not from long-term nonprogressors. Our results indicate that viral suppression of
IRF-3 promotes HIV-1 infection by disrupting IRF-3-dependent signaling pathways
and innate antiviral defenses of the host cell. IRF-3 may direct an innate
antiviral response that regulates HIV-1 replication and viral set point while
governing susceptibility to opportunistic virus coinfections.

PMCID: PMC2753137
PMID: 19706707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nat Immunol. 2009 Oct;10(10):1073-80. doi: 10.1038/ni.1782. Epub 2009 Aug 23.

Activation of innate immune antiviral responses by Nod2.

Sabbah A(1), Chang TH, Harnack R, Frohlich V, Tominaga K, Dube PH, Xiang Y, Bose 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2010 Oct;11(10):969.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2009 Oct;10(10):1053-4.

Pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs), including Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and
RIG-like helicase (RLH) receptors, are involved in innate immune antiviral
responses. Here we show that nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 2 (Nod2)
can also function as a cytoplasmic viral PRR by triggering activation of
interferon-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and production of interferon-beta
(IFN-beta). After recognition of a viral ssRNA genome, Nod2 used the adaptor
protein MAVS to activate IRF3. Nod2-deficient mice failed to produce interferon
efficiently and showed enhanced susceptibility to virus-induced pathogenesis.
Thus, the function of Nod2 as a viral PRR highlights the important function of
Nod2 in host antiviral defense mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2752345
PMID: 19701189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2009 Sep;29(9):559-67. doi: 10.1089/jir.2009.0072.

Rotavirus and reovirus modulation of the interferon response.

Sherry B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, USA.
barbara_sherry@ncsu.edu

The mammalian reoviruses and rotaviruses have evolved specific mechanisms to
evade the Type I interferon (IFN) antiviral response. Rotavirus likely represses 
the IFN response by at least 4 mechanisms. First, the rotavirus protein NSP1,
most likely functioning as an E3 ligase, can induce proteasome-dependent
degradation of the transcription factors IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 to prevent their
induction of IFN. Second, NSP1 can induce proteasome-dependent degradation of the
ubiquitin ligase complex protein beta-TrCP, resulting in stabilization of I
kappaB and concomitant failure of virus to activate NF-kappaB for induction of
IFN. Third, rotavirus may sequester NF-kappaB in viroplasms. And fourth,
rotavirus can prevent STAT1 and STAT2 nuclear translocation. The predominant
mechanism for rotavirus inhibition of the IFN response is likely both rotavirus
strain-specific and cell type-specific. The mammalian reoviruses also display
strain-specific differences in their modulation of the IFN response. Reovirus
activates RIG-I and IPS-1 for phosphorylation of IRF3. Reovirus-induced
activation of MDA5 also participates in induction if IFN-beta, perhaps through
activation of NF-kappaB. Reovirus likely inhibits the IFN response by at least 3 
virus strain-specific mechanisms. First, the reovirus mu2 protein can induce an
unusual nuclear accumulation of IRF9 and repress IFN-stimulated gene (ISG)
expression, most likely by disrupting IRF9 function as part of the heterotrimeric
transcription factor complex, ISGF3. Second, the reovirus sigma 3 protein can
bind dsRNA and prevent activation of the latent antiviral effector protein PKR.
And third, genetic approaches have identified the reovirus lambda 2 and sigma 2
proteins in virus strain-specific modulation of the IFN response, but the
significance remains unclear. In sum, members of the family Reoviridae have
evolved a variety of mechanisms to subvert the host's innate protective response.

PMCID: PMC2956631
PMID: 19694545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Viral Hepat. 2010 Feb 1;17(2):130-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2009.01155.x.
Epub 2009 Aug 5.

Hepatic Toll-Like Receptor 3 expression in chronic hepatitis C genotype 1
correlates with treatment response to peginterferon plus ribavirin.

Yuki N(1), Matsumoto S, Kato M, Yamaguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Osaka National Hospital, Chuo-ku, Osaka,
Japan. yuki@onh.go.jp

Recent studies have shown that enhanced hepatic expression of several innate
immune genes predicts non-response to 48 weeks of peginterferon plus ribavirin in
chronic hepatitis C genotype 1. This study aimed to further address how gene
expression of TLR3/RIG-I signalling correlates with the outcome of the 72-week
extended treatment regimen. Relative hepatic mRNA expression and copy numbers of 
positive- and negative-strand hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA were determined by
real-time PCR in 49 patients. Then, a 48-week peginterferon-alpha2b plus
ribavirin treatment was commenced and extended to 72 weeks in cases of HCV RNA
clearance after week 12. High rate of sustained virologic response was seen both 
in patients with early HCV clearance (85% [11/13]) and slow virologic responders 
(85% [11/13]) (per protocol analysis). The response was associated with low TLR3 
expression (median, 0.9; range, 0-4.2 vs median, 1.9; range, 0.4-4.9; P = 0.004) 
but had no relation to the expression of TRIF (P = 0.315), RIG-I (P = 0.953),
IPS-1 (P = 0.425), IRF3 (P = 0.329) and interferon-beta (P = 0.584). ROC curve
analysis identified TLR3 expression of <1.5 as the best cut-off for predicting
response (positive and negative predictive values, 89% [16/18] and 70% [14/20],
respectively). The expression was not affected by HCV replication but was higher 
in female patients (P = 0.043). Multivariate analysis showed TLR3 to be a single 
baseline predictor (odds ratio 18.5 [95% CI 3.2-111], P = 0.001). Low hepatic
TLR3 expression is a novel predictor of response to peginterferon plus ribavirin 
in genotype 1 patients.

PMID: 19674283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nat Immunol. 2009 Sep;10(9):965-72. doi: 10.1038/ni.1771. Epub 2009 Aug 9.

TANK is a negative regulator of Toll-like receptor signaling and is critical for 
the prevention of autoimmune nephritis.

Kawagoe T(1), Takeuchi O, Takabatake Y, Kato H, Isaka Y, Tsujimura T, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, World Premier International Immunology Frontier
Research Center, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan.

The intensity and duration of immune responses are controlled by many proteins
that modulate Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling. TANK has been linked to
positive regulation of the transcription factors IRF3 and NF-kappaB. Here we
demonstrate that TANK is not involved in interferon responses and is a negative
regulator of proinflammatory cytokine production induced by TLR signaling.
TLR-induced polyubiquitination of the ubiquitin ligase TRAF6 was upregulated in
Tank(-/-) macrophages. Notably, Tank(-/-) mice spontaneously developed fatal
glomerulonephritis owing to deposition of immune complexes. Autoantibody
production in Tank(-/-) mice was abrogated by antibiotic treatment or the absence
of interleukin 6 (IL-6) or the adaptor MyD88. Our results demonstrate that
constitutive TLR signaling by intestinal commensal microflora is suppressed by
TANK.

PMCID: PMC2910115
PMID: 19668221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. BMC Genomics. 2009 Aug 10;10:372. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-372.

Combined genome-wide expression profiling and targeted RNA interference in
primary mouse macrophages reveals perturbation of transcriptional networks
associated with interferon signalling.

Lacaze P(1), Raza S, Sing G, Page D, Forster T, Storm P, Craigon M, Awad T,
Ghazal P, Freeman TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathway Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, The Chancellor's
Building, College of Medicine, Edinburgh, UK. Paul.Lacaze@ed.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Interferons (IFNs) are potent antiviral cytokines capable of
reprogramming the macrophage phenotype through the induction of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). Here we have used targeted RNA interference
to suppress the expression of a number of key genes associated with IFN
signalling in murine macrophages prior to stimulation with interferon-gamma.
Genome-wide changes in transcript abundance caused by siRNA activity were
measured using exon-level microarrays in the presence or absence of IFNgamma.
RESULTS: Transfection of murine bone-marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs) with a
non-targeting (control) siRNA and 11 sequence-specific siRNAs was performed using
a cationic lipid transfection reagent (Lipofectamine2000) prior to stimulation
with IFNgamma. Total RNA was harvested from cells and gene expression measured on
Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Arrays. Network-based analysis of these
data revealed six siRNAs to cause a marked shift in the macrophage transcriptome 
in the presence or absence IFNgamma. These six siRNAs targeted the Ifnb1, Irf3,
Irf5, Stat1, Stat2 and Nfkb2 transcripts. The perturbation of the transcriptome
by the six siRNAs was highly similar in each case and affected the expression of 
over 600 downstream transcripts. Regulated transcripts were clustered based on
co-expression into five major groups corresponding to transcriptional networks
associated with the type I and II IFN response, cell cycle regulation, and NF-KB 
signalling. In addition we have observed a significant non-specific immune
stimulation of cells transfected with siRNA using Lipofectamine2000, suggesting
use of this reagent in BMDMs, even at low concentrations, is enough to induce a
type I IFN response.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide evidence that the type I IFN response in murine
BMDMs is dependent on Ifnb1, Irf3, Irf5, Stat1, Stat2 and Nfkb2, and that siRNAs 
targeted to these genes results in perturbation of key transcriptional networks
associated with type I and type II IFN signalling and a suppression of macrophage
M1 polarization.

PMCID: PMC2741489
PMID: 19664281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Neurosci. 2009 Aug 5;29(31):9839-49. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2496-09.2009.

Systemic lipopolysaccharide protects the brain from ischemic injury by
reprogramming the response of the brain to stroke: a critical role for IRF3.

Marsh B(1), Stevens SL, Packard AE, Gopalan B, Hunter B, Leung PY, Harrington CA,
Stenzel-Poore MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) preconditioning provides neuroprotection against
subsequent cerebral ischemic injury through activation of its receptor, Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4). Paradoxically, TLR activation by endogenous ligands after
ischemia worsens stroke damage. Here, we define a novel, protective role for TLRs
after ischemia in the context of LPS preconditioning. Microarray analysis of
brains collected 24 h after stroke revealed a unique set of upregulated genes in 
LPS-pretreated animals. Promoter analysis of the unique gene set identified an
overrepresentation of type I interferon (IFN)-associated transcriptional
regulatory elements. This finding suggested the presence of type I IFNs or
interferon regulatory factors (IRFs), which upregulate interferon-stimulated
genes. Upregulation of IFNbeta was confirmed by real-time reverse
transcription-PCR. Direct administration of IFNbeta intracerebroventricularly at 
the time of stroke was sufficient for neuroprotection. TLR4 can induce both
IFNbeta and interferon-stimulated genes through its adapter molecule
Toll/interleukin receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFNbeta (TRIF) and
the IRF3 transcription factor. We show in oxygen glucose deprivation of cortical 
neurons, an in vitro model of stroke, that activation of TRIF after stroke
reduces neuronal death. Furthermore, mice lacking IRF3 were not protected by LPS 
preconditioning in our in vivo model. Our studies constitute the first
demonstration of the neuroprotective capacity of TRIF/IRF3 signaling and suggest 
that interferon-stimulated genes, whether induced by IFNbeta or by enhanced TLR
signaling to IRF3, are a potent means of protecting the brain against ischemic
damage.

PMCID: PMC2946887
PMID: 19657036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Leukoc Biol. 2009 Oct;86(4):863-75. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0309189. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

Endotoxin tolerance dysregulates MyD88- and Toll/IL-1R domain-containing adapter 
inducing IFN-beta-dependent pathways and increases expression of negative
regulators of TLR signaling.

Piao W(1), Song C, Chen H, Diaz MA, Wahl LM, Fitzgerald KA, Li L, Medvedev AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Endotoxin tolerance reprograms cell responses to LPS by repressing expression of 
proinflammatory cytokines, while not inhibiting production of anti-inflammatory
cytokines and antimicrobial effectors. Molecular mechanisms of induction and
maintenance of endotoxin tolerance are incompletely understood, particularly with
regard to the impact of endotoxin tolerization on signalosome assembly,
activation of adaptor-kinase modules, and expression of negative regulators of
TLR signaling in human cells. In this study, we examined LPS-mediated activation 
of MyD88-dependent and Toll-IL-1R-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta
(TRIF)-dependent pathways emanating from TLR4 and expression of negative
regulators of TLR signaling in control and endotoxin-tolerant human monocytes.
Endotoxin tolerization suppressed LPS-inducible TLR4-TRIF and TRIF-TANK binding
kinase (TBK)1 associations, induction of TBK1 kinase activity, activation of IFN 
regulatory factor (IRF)-3, and expression of RANTES and IFN-beta.
Tolerance-mediated dysregulation of the TLR4-TRIF-TBK1 signaling module was
accompanied by increased levels of suppressor of IkappaB kinase-epsilon (SIKE)
and sterile alpha and Armadillo motif-containing molecule (SARM). LPS-tolerant
cells showed increased expression of negative regulators Toll-interacting protein
(Tollip), suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS)-1, IL-1R-associated kinase-M,
and SHIP-1, which correlated with reduced p38 phosphorylation, IkappaB-alpha
degradation, and inhibited expression of TNF-alpha, IL-6, and IL-8. To examine
functional consequences of increased expression of Tollip in LPS-tolerized cells,
we overexpressed Tollip in 293/TLR4/MD-2 transfectants and observed blunted
LPS-inducible activation of NF-kappaB and RANTES, while TNF-alpha responses were 
not affected. These data demonstrate dysregulation of TLR4-triggered MyD88- and
TRIF-dependent signaling pathways and increased expression of negative regulators
of TLR signaling in endotoxin-tolerant human monocytes.

PMCID: PMC2796624
PMID: 19656901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Virol. 2009 Oct;83(20):10322-35. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01186-09. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

IRF3 inhibition by rotavirus NSP1 is host cell and virus strain dependent but
independent of NSP1 proteasomal degradation.

Sen A(1), Feng N, Ettayebi K, Hardy ME, Greenberg HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA
94305-5119, USA.

Rotavirus host range restriction forms a basis for strain attenuation although
the underlying mechanisms are unclear. In mouse fibroblasts, the inability of
rotavirus NSP1 to mediate interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) degradation
correlates with IFN-dependent restricted replication of the bovine UK strain but 
not the mouse EW and simian RRV strains. We found that UK NSP1 is unable to
degrade IRF3 when expressed in murine NIH 3T3 cells in contrast to the EW and RRV
NSP1 proteins. Surprisingly, UK NSP1 expression led to IRF3 degradation in simian
COS7 cells, indicating that IRF3 degradation by NSP1 is host cell dependent, a
finding further supported using adenovirus-expressed NSP1 from NCDV bovine
rotavirus. By expressing heterologous IRF3 proteins in complementary host cells, 
we found that IRF3 is the minimal host factor constraining NSP1 IRF3-degradative 
ability. NSP1-mediated IRF3 degradation was enhanced by transfection of
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) in a host cell-specific manner, and in IRF3-dependent
positive regulatory domain III reporter assays, NSP1 inhibited IRF3 function in
response to pathway activation by dsRNA, TBK-1, IRF3, or constitutively activated
IRF3-5D. An interesting observation arising from these experiments is the ability
of transiently expressed UK NSP1 to inhibit poly(I:C)-directed IRF3 activity in
NIH 3T3 cells in the absence of detectable IRF3 degradation, an unexpected
finding since UK virus infection was unable to block IFN secretion, and UK NSP1
expression did not result in suppression of IRF3-directed activation of the
pathway. RRV and EW but not UK NSP1 was proteasomally degraded, requiring E1
ligase activity, although NSP1 degradation was not required for IRF3 degradation.
Using a chimeric RRV NSP1 protein containing the carboxyl 100 residues derived
from UK NSP1, we found that the RRV NSP1 carboxyl 100 residues are critical for
its IRF3 inhibition in murine cells but are not essential for NSP1 degradation.
Thus, NSP1's ability to degrade IRF3 is host cell dependent and is independent of
NSP1 proteasomal degradation.

PMCID: PMC2753142
PMID: 19656876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Exp Med. 2009 Aug 31;206(9):1899-911. doi: 10.1084/jem.20082874. Epub 2009 Aug 
3.

A host type I interferon response is induced by cytosolic sensing of the
bacterial second messenger cyclic-di-GMP.

McWhirter SM(1), Barbalat R, Monroe KM, Fontana MF, Hyodo M, Joncker NT, Ishii
KJ, Akira S, Colonna M, Chen ZJ, Fitzgerald KA, Hayakawa Y, Vance RE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology and Pathogenesis, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. mcwhirt@berkeley.edu

The innate immune system responds to unique molecular signatures that are widely 
conserved among microbes but that are not normally present in host cells.
Compounds that stimulate innate immune pathways may be valuable in the design of 
novel adjuvants, vaccines, and other immunotherapeutics. The cyclic dinucleotide 
cyclic-di-guanosine monophosphate (c-di-GMP) is a recently appreciated second
messenger that plays critical regulatory roles in many species of bacteria but is
not produced by eukaryotic cells. In vivo and in vitro studies have previously
suggested that c-di-GMP is a potent immunostimulatory compound recognized by
mouse and human cells. We provide evidence that c-di-GMP is sensed in the cytosol
of mammalian cells via a novel immunosurveillance pathway. The potency of
cytosolic signaling induced by c-di-GMP is comparable to that induced by
cytosolic delivery of DNA, and both nucleic acids induce a similar
transcriptional profile, including triggering of type I interferons and
coregulated genes via induction of TBK1, IRF3, nuclear factor kappaB, and MAP
kinases. However, the cytosolic pathway that senses c-di-GMP appears to be
distinct from all known nucleic acid-sensing pathways. Our results suggest a
novel mechanism by which host cells can induce an inflammatory response to a
widely produced bacterial ligand.

PMCID: PMC2737161
PMID: 19652017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2009 Aug;20(4):283-95. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2009.07.005. Epub 2009 Aug 3.

The role of differential expression of human interferon--a genes in antiviral
immunity.

Génin P(1), Vaccaro A, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, UPR 2228 - CNRS Laboratoire de Régulation
Transcriptionnelle et Maladies Génétiques UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, 45
rue des Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Immune recognition of virus-associated molecules by Toll-like receptors (TLRs)
and/or RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) triggers intracellular signaling cascades that
converge on the activation of interferon regulatory factors - particularly IRF3
and IRF7, leading to the transcriptional induction of type 1 interferon genes.
This review summarizes new data describing how these factors regulate the
temporal and quantitative differences in the expression of the multigenic IFN-A
family. The distinctive DNA-binding features of IRF3 and IRF7 affect the
selectivity and affinity of these factors for IFN-A promoters; modification of
the ratio of promoter-bound IRF3 and IRF7 during virus infection may influence
both transcriptional activation and repression of IFN-A genes. This review also
summarizes the structural differences between IFN-beta and different IFN-alpha
subtypes, their interaction with their common receptor IFNAR, and their potency
to elicit antiviral, antiproliferative and antitumoral responses. Taken together,
this information enhances our understanding of the selective advantage of the
multiplicity of IFN-alpha subtypes in the regulation of innate and adaptive
immunity.

PMID: 19651532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010 Jan;136(1):135-41. doi: 10.1007/s00432-009-0644-y.

Systems biology approach to identification of biomarkers for metastatic
progression in gastric cancer.

Wang YY(1), Ye ZY, Zhao ZS, Tao HQ, Li SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital, 310014 Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: Gastric cancer is usually diagnosed at later stages (stages III and IV) 
in China, and the overall 5-year survival rate is low at 40%. Metastases are
responsible for the majority of cancer fatalities. The molecular mechanisms
governing metastasis are poorly understood.
METHODS: We have analyzed gene expression data based on gene interaction networks
and molecular pathways rather than separate genes utilizing hierarchical cluster 
analysis, Gene ontology analysis and pathway analysis.
RESULTS: We have analyzed gene expression data from advanced gastric cancer
tissues, corresponding adjacent noncancerous gastric tissues and its peritonium
metastasis. Our studies indicated that metastatic tumor was related to changes in
apoptosis pathway and proteasome degradation pathway, TRAF2 and IRF3 are
up-regulated in apoptosis pathway, NEDD4 and UBE1 are up-regulated in proteasome 
degradation pathway.
CONCLUSION: The advent of high-throughput investigation of gene using Microarray 
technology, a systems approach relying on groups of interacting genes is
essential for understanding the processes of cancer. We have identified apoptosis
pathway and proteasome degradation pathway associated with metastasis.

PMID: 19649653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Virology. 2009 Sep 30;392(2):246-59. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.07.001. Epub 2009 
Jul 30.

TLR3 and TLR4 are innate antiviral immune receptors in human microglia: role of
IRF3 in modulating antiviral and inflammatory response in the CNS.

Suh HS(1), Zhao ML, Choi N, Belbin TJ, Brosnan CF, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461,
USA.

In the CNS, microglia are the primary targets of HIV infection. In this study, we
investigated the effect of activation of the innate antiviral receptors TLR3 and 
TLR4 on HIV infection of primary human microglia, as well as microglial cell
signaling and gene expression. Ligands for both TLR3 and TLR4 potently inhibited 
HIV replication in microglia through a pathway requiring IRF3. Surprisingly, a
remarkably similar pattern of cell signaling and gene expression was observed in 
TLR3- and TLR4-activated microglia, suggesting a relatively minor role for MyD88 
following TLR4 activation in these cells. HIV did not activate IRF3 but rather
decreased IRF3 protein, indicating that HIV does not activate TLR3 or RIG-like
helicases in microglia. Taken together, these results indicate that activation of
TLR3 or TLR4 will elicit antiviral immunity, in addition to inducing
proinflammatory responses. We suggest that a balanced expression between
inflammatory and innate immune genes might be achieved by IRF3 over-expression.

PMCID: PMC2752833
PMID: 19646728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Hepatology. 2009 Oct;50(4):1094-104. doi: 10.1002/hep.23122.

Toll-like receptor 4 is involved in the development of fructose-induced hepatic
steatosis in mice.

Spruss A(1), Kanuri G, Wagnerberger S, Haub S, Bischoff SC, Bergheim I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Medicine (180 a), University of Hohenheim,
Stuttgart, Germany.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):714-5.
    Hepatology. 2009 Oct;50(4):1004-6.
    Hepatology. 2010 Apr;51(4):1477; author reply 1477-8.

A link between dietary fructose intake, gut-derived endotoxemia, and nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has been suggested by the results of human and animal
studies. To further investigate the role of gut-derived endotoxin in the onset of
fructose-induced NAFLD, Toll-like receptor (TLR-) 4-mutant (C3H/HeJ) mice and
wildtype (C3H/HouJ) mice were either fed plain water or water enriched with 30%
fructose for 8 weeks. Hepatic steatosis, plasma alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
and markers of insulin resistance as well as portal endotoxin levels were
determined. Hepatic levels of myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88),
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and 7, and tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha) as well as markers of lipid peroxidation were assessed. Chronic intake
of 30% fructose solution caused a significant increase in hepatic steatosis and
plasma ALT levels in wildtype animals in comparison to water controls. In
fructose-fed TLR-4 mutant mice, hepatic triglyceride accumulation was
significantly reduced by approximately 40% in comparison to fructose-fed wildtype
mice and plasma ALT levels were at the level of water-fed controls. No difference
in portal endotoxin concentration between fructose-fed wildtype and TLR-4-mutant 
animals was detected. In contrast, hepatic lipid peroxidation, MyD88, and
TNFalpha levels were significantly decreased in fructose-fed TLR-4-mutant mice in
comparison to fructose-fed wildtype mice, whereas IRF3 and IRF7 expression
remained unchanged. Markers of insulin resistance (e.g., plasma TNFalpha, retinol
binding protein 4, and hepatic phospho-AKT) were only altered in fructose-fed
wildtype animals.CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data further support the
hypothesis that in mice the onset of fructose-induced NAFLD is associated with
intestinal bacterial overgrowth and increased intestinal permeability,
subsequently leading to an endotoxin-dependent activation of hepatic Kupffer
cells.

PMID: 19637282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Virus Res. 2009 Nov;145(2):260-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2009.07.014. Epub 2009 
Jul 25.

Elucidating the molecular physiopathology of acute respiratory distress syndrome 
in severe acute respiratory syndrome patients.

Kong SL(1), Chui P, Lim B, Salto-Tellez M.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and
Research), 60 Biopolis Street, Genome, #02-01, Singapore 138672, Singapore.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a severe form of acute lung injury.
It is a response to various diseases of variable etiology, including SARS-CoV
infection. To date, a comprehensive study of the genomic physiopathology of ARDS 
(and SARS) is lacking, primarily due to the difficulty of finding suitable
materials to study the disease process at a tissue level (instead of blood, sputa
or swaps). Hereby we attempt to provide such study by analyzing autopsy lung
samples from patient who died of SARS and showed different degrees of severity of
the pulmonary involvement. We performed real-time quantitative PCR analysis of
107 genes with functional roles in inflammation, coagulation, fibrosis and
apoptosis; some key genes were confirmed at a protein expression level by
immunohistochemistry and correlated to the degree of morphological severity
present in the individual samples analyzed. Significant expression levels were
identified for ANPEP (a receptor for CoV), as well as inhibition of the STAT1
pathway, IFNs production and CXCL10 (a T-cell recruiter). Other genes
unassociated to date with ARDS/SARS include C1Qb, C5R1, CASP3, CASP9, CD14, CD68,
FGF7, HLA-DRA, IGF1, IRF3, MALAT-1, MSR1, NFIL3, SLPI, USP33, CLC, GBP1 and TAC1.
As a result, we proposed to therapeutically target some of these genes with
compounds such as ANPEP inhibitors, SLPI and dexamethasone. Ultimately, this
study may serve as a model for future, tissue-based analyses of fibroinflammatory
conditions affecting the lung.

PMID: 19635508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Chem Biol Interact. 2009 Nov 10;182(1):59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2009.07.009.
Epub 2009 Jul 21.

Alteration of Toll-like receptor 4 activation by 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal mediated by 
the suppression of receptor homodimerization.

Kim YS(1), Park ZY, Kim SY, Jeong E, Lee JY.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Dynamics Research Center, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,
Gwangju 500-712, Republic of Korea.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) detect invading microbial pathogens and initiate
immune responses as part of host defense mechanisms. They also respond to
host-derived substances released from injured cells and tissues to ensure wound
healing and tissue homeostasis. Dysregulation of TLRs increases the risk of
chronic inflammatory diseases and immune disorders. Inflammatory events are often
accompanied by oxidative stress, which generates lipid peroxidation products such
as 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4-HNE). Therefore, we investigated if 4-HNE affects TLR
activation. We found that 4-HNE blocked LPS (a TLR4 agonist)-induced activation
of NFkappaB and IRF3 as well as expression of IFNbeta, IP-10, RANTES, and
TNFalpha. To investigate the mechanism of inhibition by 4-HNE, we examined its
effects on TLR4 dimerization, one of the initial steps in TLR4 activation. 4-HNE 
suppressed both ligand-induced and ligand-independent receptor dimerization. The 
thiol donors, DTT and NAC, prevented the inhibitory effects of 4-HNE on TLR4
dimerization, and LC-MS/MS analysis showed that 4-HNE formed adducts with
cysteine residues of synthetic peptides derived from TLR4. These observations
suggest that the reactivity of 4-HNE with sulfhydryl moieties is implicated in
the inhibition of TLR4 activation. Furthermore, inhibition of TLR4 activation by 
4-HNE resulted in down-regulation of the phagocytic activity of macrophages.
Collectively, these results demonstrate that 4-HNE blocks TLR4-mediated
macrophage activation, gene expression, and phagocytic functions, at least partly
by suppressing receptor dimerization. They further suggest that 4-HNE influences 
innate immune responses at sites of infection and inflammation by inhibiting TLR4
activation.

PMID: 19627980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 28;106(30):12448-52. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905702106. Epub 2009 Jul 17.

Cell type-dependent proapoptotic role of Bcl2L12 revealed by a mutation
concomitant with the disruption of the juxtaposed Irf3 gene.

Nakajima A(1), Nishimura K, Nakaima Y, Oh T, Noguchi S, Taniguchi T, Tamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The generation of mice lacking the expression of the IRF3 transcription factor
(Irf3(-/-) mice) has revealed its crucial role in the activation of the type I
IFN response. The Bcl2l12 gene, encoding Bcl2L12 protein structurally related to 
the Bcl-2 family, was found to almost overlap with the Irf3 gene, and the null
mutation previously introduced into the Irf3 allele resulted in the functional
inactivation of the Bcl2l12 gene; therefore, the mice are correctly termed
Irf3(-/-)Bcl2l12(-/-) mice. Embryonic fibroblasts from Irf3(-/-)Bcl2l12(-/-) mice
(Irf3(-/-)Bcl2l12(-/-) MEFs) showed resistance to DNA damage-induced apoptosis,
accompanied by impaired caspase cleavage. This apoptotic defect in
Irf3(-/-)Bcl2l12(-/-) MEFs was rescued by the ectopic expression of Bcl2L12, but 
not IRF3. The Bcl2L12-mediated apoptotic response depended on the cell type and
extracellular stimulus. In contrast, the previously reported defect in the
induction of type I IFN genes by nucleic acids in Irf3(-/-)Bcl2l12(-/-) MEFs was 
rescued by expressing IRF3, but not Bcl2L12. Thus, our present study revealed, on
the one hand, a cell type-dependent proapoptotic function of Bcl2L12 and, on the 
other hand, confirmed the essential role of IRF3 in type I IFN response.

PMCID: PMC2718395
PMID: 19617565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 4;106(31):12867-72. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0809292106. Epub 2009 Jul 17.

DNA-triggered innate immune responses are propagated by gap junction
communication.

Patel SJ(1), King KR, Casali M, Yarmush ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Center for Engineering in Medicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

Cells respond to infection by sensing pathogens and communicating danger signals 
to noninfected neighbors; however, little is known about this complex
spatiotemporal process. Here we show that activation of the innate immune system 
by double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) triggers intercellular communication through a gap
junction-dependent signaling pathway, recruiting colonies of cells to
collectively secrete antiviral and inflammatory cytokines for the propagation of 
danger signals across the tissue at large. By using live-cell imaging of a stable
IRF3-sensitive GFP reporter, we demonstrate that dsDNA sensing leads to
multicellular colonies of IRF3-activated cells that express the majority of
secreted cytokines, including IFNbeta and TNFalpha. Inhibiting gap junctions
decreases dsDNA-induced IRF3 activation, cytokine production, and the resulting
tissue-wide antiviral state, indicating that this immune response propagation
pathway lies upstream of the paracrine action of secreted cytokines and may
represent a host-derived mechanism for evading viral antiinterferon strategies.

PMCID: PMC2722330
PMID: 19617563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 Jun;42(6):651-60. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0345OC. 
Epub 2009 Jul 13.

Oxidative stress enhances toll-like receptor 3 response to double-stranded RNA in
airway epithelial cells.

Koarai A(1), Sugiura H, Yanagisawa S, Ichikawa T, Minakata Y, Matsunaga K, Hirano
T, Akamatsu K, Ichinose M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, School of 
Medicine, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

Virus infections are a major cause of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD) exacerbations. Recently, Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) has been demonstrated
to react to double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) and to be involved in the immune
responses after viral infections. In the present study, we examined whether
oxidative stress, which is involved in the pathogenesis of COPD, enhances the
responses of TLR3 in airway epithelial cells. The effect of hydrogen peroxide
(H(2)O(2)) on the release of IL-8 from BEAS-2B cells and primary human bronchial 
epithelial cells after stimulation with polyinosine-polycytidylic acid
[poly(I:C)], a synthetic analog of viral dsRNA and a ligand for TLR3, and the
signal transduction were examined. One hundred to 150 muM H(2)O(2) significantly 
potentiated the release of IL-8 from the epithelial cells after stimulation with 
10 microg/ml poly(I:C). The H(2)O(2)-augmented IL-8 release was inhibited by
treatment with N-acetylcysteine. One hundred micromoles of H(2)O(2) enhanced the 
translocation of nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB p65, but not that of interferon
regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3), into the nucleus and the NF-kappaB DNA binding
activity after poly(I:C) stimulation, which effect was inhibited not by the
silencing of IRF-3 but by MG132, a proteasome inhibitor, or dexamethasone. One
hundred micromoles of H(2)O(2) potentiated the TLR3 expression on the airway
epithelial cells treated with poly(I:C). These data suggest that oxidative stress
augments the response of TLR3 in airway epithelial cells via NF-kappaB and that
this effect might be partly mediated by the enhancement of TLR3 expression.
Modulation of this pathway may be a therapeutic target for viral-induced
exacerbations of COPD.

PMCID: PMC2891495
PMID: 19597128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2011;2011:920828. doi: 10.1093/ecam/nep066.
Epub 2011 Jun 16.

8-Prenylkaempferol Suppresses Influenza A Virus-Induced RANTES Production in A549
Cells via Blocking PI3K-Mediated Transcriptional Activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3.

Chiou WF(1), Chen CC, Wei BL.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Institute of Chinese Medicine, Taipei 112, Taiwan.

8-Prenylkaempferol (8-PK) is a prenylflavonoid isolated from Sophora flavescens, 
a Chinese herb with antiviral and anti-inflammatory properties. In this study, we
investigated its effect on regulated activation, normal T cell expressed and
secreted (RANTES) secretion by influenza A virus (H1N1)-infected A549 alveolar
epithelial cells. Cell inoculation with H1N1 evoked a significant induction in
RANTES accumulation accompanied with time-related increase in nuclear
translocation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF-3), but showed no effect on c-Jun phosphorylation. 8-PK could significantly 
inhibit not only RANTES production but also NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF-3 nuclear
translocation. We had proved that both NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF-3 participated in
H1N1-induced RANTES production since NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor pyrrolidinedithio carbamate 
(PDTC) and IRF-3 siRNA attenuated significantly RANTES accumulation. H1N1
inoculation also increased PI3K activity as well as Akt phosphorylation and such 
responsiveness were attenuated by 8-PK. In the presence of wortmannin, nuclear
translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 as well as RANTES production by H1N1 infection
were all reversed, demonstrating that PI3K-Akt pathway is essential for NF-<U+03BA>B-
and IRF-3-mediated RANTES production in A549 cells. Furthermore, 8-PK but not
wortmannin, prevented effectively H1N1-evoked I<U+03BA>B degradation. In conclusion,
8-PK might be an anti-inflammatory agent for suppressing influenza A
virus-induced RANTES production acts by blocking PI3K-mediated transcriptional
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF-3 and in part by interfering with I<U+03BA>B degradation
which subsequently decreases NF-<U+03BA>B translocation.

PMCID: PMC3137797
PMID: 19592477  [PubMed]


76. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2009 Jul;73(7):1474-8. Epub 2009 Jul 7.

TBK1-targeted suppression of TRIF-dependent signaling pathway of Toll-like
receptors by 6-shogaol, an active component of ginger.

Park SJ(1), Lee MY, Son BS, Youn HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Science, College of Medical Sciences, Soonchunhyang
University, Asan-Si, Chungnam, Korea.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are primary sensors that detect a wide variety of
microbial components involving induction of innate immune responses. After
recognition of microbial components, TLRs trigger the activation of myeloid
differential factor 88 (MyD88) and Toll-interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor
domain-containing adapter inducing interferon-beta (TRIF)-dependent downstream
signaling pathways. 6-Shoagol, an active ingredient of ginger, inhibits the
MyD88-dependent signaling pathway by inhibiting inhibitor-kappaB kinase activity.
Inhibitor-kappaB kinase is a key kinase in nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB)
activation. However, it is not known whether 6-shogaol inhibits the
TRIF-dependent signaling pathway. Our goal was to identify the molecular target
of 6-shogaol in the TRIF-dependent pathway of TLRs. 6-Shogaol inhibited the
activation of interferon-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) induced by lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) and by polyriboinosinic polyribocytidylic acid (poly[I:C]), overexpression 
of TRIF, TANK-binding kinase1 (TBK1), and IRF3. Furthermore, 6-shogaol inhibited 
TBK1 activity in vitro. Together, these results suggest that 6-shogaol inhibits
the TRIF-dependent signaling pathway of TLRs by targeting TBK1, and, they imply
that 6-shogaol can modulate TLR-derived immune/inflammatory target gene
expression induced by microbial infection.

PMID: 19584560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jul;5(7):e1000500. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000500. Epub 2009
Jul 3.

NOD2, RIP2 and IRF5 play a critical role in the type I interferon response to
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Pandey AK(1), Yang Y, Jiang Z, Fortune SM, Coulombe F, Behr MA, Fitzgerald KA,
Sassetti CM, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

While the recognition of microbial infection often occurs at the cell surface via
Toll-like receptors, the cytosol of the cell is also under surveillance for
microbial products that breach the cell membrane. An important outcome of
cytosolic recognition is the induction of IFNalpha and IFNbeta, which are
critical mediators of immunity against both bacteria and viruses. Like many
intracellular pathogens, a significant fraction of the transcriptional response
to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection depends on these type I interferons, but 
the recognition pathways responsible remain elusive. In this work, we demonstrate
that intraphagosomal M. tuberculosis stimulates the cytosolic Nod2 pathway that
responds to bacterial peptidoglycan, and this event requires membrane damage that
is actively inflicted by the bacterium. Unexpectedly, this recognition triggers
the expression of type I interferons in a Tbk1- and Irf5-dependent manner. This
response is only partially impaired by the loss of Irf3 and therefore, differs
fundamentally from those stimulated by bacterial DNA, which depend entirely on
this transcription factor. This difference appears to result from the unusual
peptidoglycan produced by mycobacteria, which we show is a uniquely potent
agonist of the Nod2/Rip2/Irf5 pathway. Thus, the Nod2 system is specialized to
recognize bacteria that actively perturb host membranes and is remarkably
sensitive to mycobacteria, perhaps reflecting the strong evolutionary pressure
exerted by these pathogens on the mammalian immune system.

PMCID: PMC2698121
PMID: 19578435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Jul 14;106(28):11564-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904477106. Epub 2009 Jul 1.

The role of transposable elements in the regulation of IFN-lambda1 gene
expression.

Thomson SJ(1), Goh FG, Banks H, Krausgruber T, Kotenko SV, Foxwell BM, Udalova
IA.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology Division, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College of Science, Technology, and Medicine, London W6 8LH, United Kingdom.

IFNs lambda1, lambda2, and lambda3, or type III IFNs, are recently identified
cytokines distantly related to type I IFNs. Despite an early evolutionary
divergence, the 2 types of IFNs display similar antiviral activities, and both
are produced primarily in dendritic cells. Although virus induction of the type I
IFN-beta gene had served as a paradigm of gene regulation, relatively little is
known about the regulation of IFN-lambda gene expression. Studies of virus
induction of IFN-lambda1 identified an essential role of IFN regulatory factors
(IRF) 3 and 7, which bind to a regulatory DNA sequence near the start site of
transcription. Here, we report that the proximal promoter region of the
IFN-lambda1 regulatory region is not sufficient for maximal gene induction in
response to bacterial LPS, and we identify an essential cluster of homotypic
NF-kappaB binding sites. Remarkably, these sites, which bind efficiently to
NF-kappaB and function independently of the IRF3/7 binding sites, originate as
transposable elements of the Alu and LTR families. We also show that depletion of
the NF-kappaB RelA protein significantly reduces the level of the IFN-lambda1
gene expression. We conclude that IFN-lambda1 gene expression requires NF-kappaB,
and we propose a model for IFN-lambda1 gene regulation, in which IRF and
NF-kappaB activate gene expression independently via spatially separated promoter
elements. These observations provide insights into the independent evolution of
the IFN-lambda1 and IFN-beta promoters and directly implicate transposable
elements in the regulation of the IFN-lambda1 gene by NF-kappaB.

PMCID: PMC2710658
PMID: 19570999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Virol. 2009 Sep;83(18):9411-22. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02362-08. Epub 2009 Jul 1.

Conventional bone marrow-derived dendritic cells contribute to toll-like
receptor-independent production of alpha/beta interferon in response to
inactivated parapoxvirus ovis.

Siegemund S(1), Hartl A, von Buttlar H, Dautel F, Raue R, Freudenberg MA, Fejer
G, Büttner M, Köhler G, Kirschning CJ, Sparwasser T, Alber G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Leipzig, Germany.

Parapoxvirus ovis (PPVO) is a member of the Poxviridae family and belongs to the 
genus Parapoxvirus. It displays only limited homology with orthopoxviruses and
has some molecular features such as an unusual high GC content distinct from
orthopoxviruses. Inactivated PPVO (iPPVO) displays strong immunostimulatory
capacities mediating antiviral activity in vivo. The role of dendritic cells (DC)
and the pattern recognition receptors and signaling requirements responsible for 
immunostimulation by iPPVO are unknown. We demonstrate here that bone
marrow-derived plasmacytoid DC (BM-pDC) and bone marrow-derived conventional DC
(BM-cDC) secrete alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) in response to iPPVO.
Furthermore, iPPVO induces tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and
interleukin-12/23p40 (IL-12/23p40) release and major histocompatibility complex
class II (MHC-II), MHC-I, and CD86 upregulation by bone marrow-derived DC (BMDC).
After engulfment, iPPVO is located in endosomal compartments and in the cytosol
of BMDC. iPPVO elicits IFN-alpha/beta by Toll-like receptor (TLR)-independent
pathways in BM-cDC, since IFN-alpha/beta release does not require myeloid
differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88) or TIR-domain containing adaptor
protein inducing interferon (TRIF). In contrast, iPPVO-induced TNF-alpha release 
and enhanced expression of MHC-I and CD86 but not of MHC-II by BMDC chiefly
requires MyD88 but not TLR2 or TLR4. Induction of IFN-alpha by iPPVO in BM-cDC
occurred in the absence of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) but required the
presence of IRF7, whereas iPPVO-triggered IFN-beta production required the
presence of either IRF7 or IRF3. These results provide the first evidence that
iPPVO mediates its immunostimulatory properties by TLR-independent and
TLR-dependent pathways and demonstrate an important role of cDC for
IFN-alpha/beta production.

PMCID: PMC2738253
PMID: 19570869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 28;284(35):23272-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.033290. Epub
2009 Jun 24.

Identification of caspase-mediated decay of interferon regulatory factor-3,
exploited by a Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus immunoregulatory protein.

Aresté C(1), Mutocheluh M, Blackbourn DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cancer Centre, School of Cancer Sciences, Vincent Drive,
College of Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston,
Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.

Upon virus infection, the cell mounts an innate type I interferon (IFN) response 
to limit the spread. This response is orchestrated by the constitutively
expressed IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3 protein, which becomes
post-translationally activated. Although the activation events are understood in 
detail, the negative regulation of this innate response is less well understood. 
Many viruses, including Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV), have
evolved defense strategies against this IFN response. Thus, KSHV encodes a viral 
IRF (vIRF)-2 protein, sharing homology with cellular IRFs and is a known
inhibitor of the innate IFN response. Here, we show that vIRF-2 mediates IRF-3
inactivation by a mechanism involving caspase-3, although vIRF-2 itself is not
pro-apoptotic. Importantly, we also show that caspase-3 participates in normal
IRF-3 turnover in the absence of vIRF-2, during the antiviral response induced by
poly(I:C) transfection. These data provide unprecedented insight into negative
regulation of IRF-3 following activation of the type I IFN antiviral response and
the mechanism by which KSHV vIRF-2 inhibits this innate response.

PMCID: PMC2749101
PMID: 19553679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2009 Aug 14;284(33):21797-809. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.018275. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) regulates interferon (IFN) induction by MAVS.

Vitour D(1), Dabo S, Ahmadi Pour M, Vilasco M, Vidalain PO, Jacob Y,
Mezel-Lemoine M, Paz S, Arguello M, Lin R, Tangy F, Hiscott J, Meurs EF.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Hepacivirus and Innate Immunity, Laboratory of Viral Genomics and
Vaccination, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The mitochondria-bound adapter MAVS participates in IFN induction by recruitment 
of downstream partners such as members of the TRAF family, leading to activation 
of NF-kappaB, and the IRF3 pathways. A yeast two-hybrid search for
MAVS-interacting proteins yielded the Polo-box domain (PBD) of the mitotic
Polo-like kinase PLK1. We showed that PBD associates with two different domains
of MAVS in both dependent and independent phosphorylation events. The
phosphodependent association requires the phosphopeptide binding ability of PBD. 
It takes place downstream of the proline-rich domain of MAVS, within an STP
motif, characteristic of the binding of PLK1 to its targets, where the central
Thr234 residue is phosphorylated. Its phosphoindependent association takes place 
at the C terminus of MAVS. PLK1 strongly inhibits the ability of MAVS to activate
the IRF3 and NF-kappaB pathways and to induce IFN. Reciprocally, depletion of
PLK1 can increase IFN induction in response to RIG-I/SeV or RIG-I/poly(I)-poly(C)
treatments. This inhibition is dependent on the phosphoindependent association of
PBD at the C terminus of MAVS where it disrupts the association of MAVS with its 
downstream partner TRAF3. IFN induction was strongly inhibited in cells arrested 
in G2/M by nocodazole, which provokes increased expression of endogenous PLK1.
Interestingly, depletion of PLK1 from these nocodazole-treated cells could
restore, at least partially, IFN induction. Altogether, these data demonstrate a 
new function for PLK1 as a regulator of IFN induction and provide the basis for
the development of inhibitors preventing the PLK1/MAVS association to sustain
innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC2755906
PMID: 19546225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Aug;37(15):5041-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp525. Epub 2009
Jun 18.

Activation of interferon regulatory factor-3 via toll-like receptor 3 and
immunomodulatory functions detected in A549 lung epithelial cells exposed to
misplaced U1-snRNA.

Sadik CD(1), Bachmann M, Pfeilschifter J, Mühl H.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmazentrum frankfurt/ZAFES, University Hospital Goethe-University
Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt, Germany.

U1-snRNA is an integral part of the U1 ribonucleoprotein pivotal for pre-mRNA
splicing. Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling has recently been associated with
immunoregulatory capacities of U1-snRNA. Using lung A549 epithelial/carcinoma
cells, we report for the first time on interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3
activation initiated by endosomally delivered U1-snRNA. This was associated with 
expression of the IRF3-inducible genes interferon-beta (IFN-beta), CXCL10/IP-10
and indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. Mutational analysis of the U1-snRNA-activated
IFN-beta promoter confirmed the crucial role of the PRDIII element, previously
proven pivotal for promoter activation by IRF3. Notably, expression of these
parameters was suppressed by bafilomycin A(1), an inhibitor of endosomal
acidification, implicating endosomal TLR activation. Since resiquimod, an agonist
of TLR7/8, failed to stimulate A549 cells, data suggest TLR3 to be of prime
relevance for cellular activation. To assess the overall regulatory potential of 
U1-snRNA-activated epithelial cells on cytokine production, co-cultivation with
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) was performed. Interestingly, A549
cells activated by U1-snRNA reinforced phytohemagglutinin-induced interleukin-10 
release by PBMC but suppressed that of tumor necrosis factor-alpha, indicating an
anti-inflammatory potential of U1-snRNA. Since U1-snRNA is enriched in apoptotic 
bodies and epithelial cells are capable of performing efferocytosis, the present 
data in particular connect to immunobiological aspects of apoptosis at
host/environment interfaces.

PMCID: PMC2731906
PMID: 19541850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Mol Biol. 2009 Aug 14;391(2):438-49. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2009.06.040. Epub 2009 
Jun 21.

Zinc binding in pestivirus N(pro) is required for interferon regulatory factor 3 
interaction and degradation.

Szymanski MR(1), Fiebach AR, Tratschin JD, Gut M, Ramanujam VM, Gottipati K,
Patel P, Ye M, Ruggli N, Choi KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Sealy Center for Structural 
Biology and Molecular Biophysics, The University of Texas Medical Branch at
Galveston, TX 77555-0647, USA.

Pestiviruses, such as bovine viral diarrhea virus and classical swine fever virus
(CSFV), use the viral protein N(pro) to subvert host cell antiviral responses.
N(pro) is the first protein encoded by the single large open reading frame of the
pestivirus positive-sense RNA genome and has an autoproteolytic activity,
cleaving itself off from the polyprotein. N(pro) also targets interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a transcription factor for alpha/beta interferon
genes, and promotes its proteasomal degradation, a process that is independent of
the proteolytic activity of N(pro). We determined that N(pro) contains a novel
metal-binding TRASH motif consisting of Cys-X(21)-Cys-X(3)-Cys (where X is any
amino acid) at its C-terminus. We also found that N(pro) coordinates a single
zinc atom as determined by graphite furnace-atomic absorption spectrophotometry
and inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry. Mutational and biochemical
analyses show that the cysteine residues in the TRASH motif are required for zinc
binding and protein stability. Individual substitutions of the cysteines in the
TRASH motif of CSFV N(pro) abolished the interaction of N(pro) with IRF3 and
resulted in the loss of virus-mediated IRF3 degradation in CSFV-infected cells.
Thus, the zinc-binding ability of N(pro) in pestiviruses appears to be essential 
for the virus-mediated degradation of IRF3.

PMID: 19540847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Gen Virol. 2009 Sep;90(Pt 9):2209-20. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.012203-0. Epub 2009
Jun 10.

Infection with herpes simplex type 1-based amplicon vectors results in an
IRF3/7-dependent, TLR-independent activation of the innate antiviral response in 
primary human fibroblasts.

Tsitoura E(1), Thomas J, Cuchet D, Thoinet K, Mavromara P, Epstein AL.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, F-69003, Lyon, France.

Amplicons are helper-dependent herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1)-based vectors 
that can deliver very large, foreign DNA sequences and, as such, are good
candidates for both gene delivery and vaccine development. However, many studies 
have shown that innate immune responses induced by virus vectors can play a
significant role in the control of transgenic expression and in the induction of 
inflammatory responses. Furthermore, amplicons are very interesting tools to
study innate cellular responses elicited by entry of HSV-1 particles in the
absence of any virus gene expression. For these reasons, in this study we
characterized the innate antiviral response established in human fibroblasts of
limited passage (HFFF-2) infected by amplicons. Our results indicate that
infection with amplicons triggered an interferon (IFN)-regulatory factors 3 and 7
(IRF3/7)-dependent antiviral response, rendered the cells resistant to vesicular 
stomatitis virus infection and induced significant changes in the pattern of
cellular gene expression, including the upregulation of Toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3), IRF7 and IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). In contrast, we observed only a
mild and contained type I IFN response in infected cells. Amplicon infection
induced nuclear translocation and subsequent degradation of IRF3, without
hyperphosphorylation of the protein. Inhibition of endosome-resident TLR
signalling by blocking lysosome maturation or the knockdown of TLR3 and 4 did not
abolish the cellular response to amplicons, whereas knockdown of IRF3 and 7
inhibited ISG and IFN-beta expression severely. Therefore, our results confirm
the existence of TLR-independent, IRF3/7-dependent activation pathways triggered 
by HSV-1 particles in human fibroblasts.

PMID: 19515829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Virol. 2009 Sep;83(17):8993-7. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00523-09. Epub 2009 Jun 10.

Ebola virus VP35 antagonizes PKR activity through its C-terminal interferon
inhibitory domain.

Schümann M(1), Gantke T, Mühlberger E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Philipps University Marburg, 35043 Marburg, Germany.

Ebola virus VP35 contains a C-terminal cluster of basic amino acids required for 
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) binding and inhibition of interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3). VP35 also blocks protein kinase R (PKR) activation; however, the
responsible domain has remained undefined. Here we show that the IRF inhibitory
domain of VP35 mediates the inhibition of PKR and enhances the synthesis of
coexpressed proteins. In contrast to dsRNA binding and IRF inhibition, alanine
substitutions of at least two basic amino acids are required to abrogate PKR
inhibition and enhanced protein expression. Moreover, we show that PKR activation
is not only blocked but reversed by Ebola virus infection.

PMCID: PMC2738155
PMID: 19515768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Immunol. 2009 Jun 15;182(12):7527-38. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0804121.

Gene disruption study reveals a nonredundant role for TRIM21/Ro52 in
NF-kappaB-dependent cytokine expression in fibroblasts.

Yoshimi R(1), Chang TH, Wang H, Atsumi T, Morse HC 3rd, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Comment in
    J Immunol. 2009 Dec 15;183(12):7619; author reply 720-1.

The tripartite motif (TRIM) family member, TRIM21, is an E3 ubiquitin ligase for 
IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3 and IRF8 that functions in both innate and acquired 
immunity. It is also an autoantigen known as Ro52/SS-A. The function of TRIM21 in
vivo, however, has remained elusive. We generated Trim21(-/-) mice with the
Trim21 gene replaced by an enhanced GFP (EGFP) reporter. EGFP expression analyses
showed that Trim21 was widely expressed in many tissues, with the highest levels 
in immune cells. Studies of Trim21(-/-) embryonic fibroblasts demonstrated that
TLR-mediated induction of proinflammatory cytokines, including IL-1beta, IL-6,
TNF-alpha, and CXCL10, was consistently up-regulated relative to wild-type cells.
Reporter analyses demonstrated that TLR-mediated NF-kappaB activation was higher 
in Trim21(-/-) cells than in wild-type cells, most likely accounting for their
enhanced cytokine expression. In contrast, functional analyses of immune cells
from Trim21(-/-) mice revealed no abnormalities in their composition or function,
even though ubiquitylation of IRF3 and IRF8 was impaired. These results suggested
possible redundancies in activities mediated by TRIM21. In keeping with this
concept, we found that a number of TRIM family members were up-regulated in
Trim21(-/-) cells. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that TRIM21 plays a
previously unrecognized role in the negative regulation of NF-kappaB-dependent
proinflammatory cytokine responses, and suggest that multiple TRIM proteins
contribute to the maintenance of functional equilibrium in inflammatory
responses, in part through functional redundancy.

PMCID: PMC2803686
PMID: 19494276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 1;4(6):e5760. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005760.

REUL is a novel E3 ubiquitin ligase and stimulator of retinoic-acid-inducible
gene-I.

Gao D(1), Yang YK, Wang RP, Zhou X, Diao FC, Li MD, Zhai ZH, Jiang ZF, Chen DY.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation (Ministry of
Education), College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

RIG-I and MDA5 are cytoplasmic sensors that recognize different species of viral 
RNAs, leads to activation of the transcription factors IRF3 and NF-kappaB, which 
collaborate to induce type I interferons. In this study, we identified REUL, a
RING-finger protein, as a specific RIG-I-interacting protein. REUL was associated
with RIG-I, but not MDA5, through its PRY and SPRY domains. Overexpression of
REUL potently potentiated RIG-I-, but not MDA5-mediated downstream signalling and
antiviral activity. In contrast, the RING domain deletion mutant of REUL
suppressed Sendai virus (SV)-induced, but not cytoplasmic polyI:C-induced
activation of IFN-beta promoter. Knockdown of endogenous REUL by RNAi inhibited
SV-triggered IFN-beta expression, and also increased VSV replication. Full-length
RIG-I, but not the CARD domain deletion mutant of RIG-I, underwent ubiquitination
induced by REUL. The Lys 154, 164, and 172 residues of the RIG-I CARD domain were
critical for efficient REUL-mediated ubiquitination, as well as the ability of
RIG-I to induce activation of IFN-beta promoter. These findings suggest that REUL
is an E3 ubiquitin ligase of RIG-I and specifically stimulates RIG-I-mediated
innate antiviral activity.

PMCID: PMC2684588
PMID: 19484123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Nat Immunol. 2009 Jul;10(7):744-52. doi: 10.1038/ni.1742. Epub 2009 May 31.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase Nrdp1 'preferentially' promotes TLR-mediated production
of type I interferon.

Wang C(1), Chen T, Zhang J, Yang M, Li N, Xu X, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology & Institute of Immunology,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

E3 ubiquitin ligases are important in both innate and adaptive immunity. Here we 
report that Nrdp1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase, inhibited the production of
proinflammatory cytokines but increased interferon-beta production in Toll-like
receptor-triggered macrophages by suppressing adaptor MyD88-dependent activation 
of transcription factors NF-kappaB and AP-1 while promoting activation of the
kinase TBK1 and transcription factor IRF3. Nrdp1 directly bound and
polyubiquitinated MyD88 and TBK1, which led to degradation of MyD88 and
activation of TBK1. Knockdown of Nrdp1 inhibited the degradation of MyD88 and the
activation of TBK1 and IRF3. Nrdp1-transgenic mice showed resistance to
lipopolysaccharide-induced endotoxin shock and to infection with vesicular
stomatitis virus. Our data suggest that Nrdp1 functions as both an adaptor
protein and an E3 unbiquitin ligase to regulate TLR responses in different ways.

PMID: 19483718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2009 May 25;4(5):e5674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005674.

TRAF6 establishes innate immune responses by activating NF-kappaB and IRF7 upon
sensing cytosolic viral RNA and DNA.

Konno H(1), Yamamoto T, Yamazaki K, Gohda J, Akiyama T, Semba K, Goto H, Kato A, 
Yujiri T, Imai T, Kawaguchi Y, Su B, Takeuchi O, Akira S, Tsunetsugu-Yokota Y,
Inoue J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Department of Cancer Biology,
Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In response to viral infection, the innate immune system recognizes
viral nucleic acids and then induces production of proinflammatory cytokines and 
type I interferons (IFNs). Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) and TLR9 detect viral RNA 
and DNA, respectively, in endosomal compartments, leading to the activation of
nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) and IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells. During such TLR signaling, TNF receptor-associated 
factor 6 (TRAF6) is essential for the activation of NF-kappaB and the production 
of type I IFN. In contrast, RIG-like helicases (RLHs), cytosolic RNA sensors, are
indispensable for antiviral responses in conventional dendritic cells,
macrophages, and fibroblasts. However, the contribution of TRAF6 to the detection
of cytosolic viral nucleic acids has been controversial, and the involvement of
TRAF6 in IRF activation has not been adequately addressed.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we first show that TRAF6 plays a critical role in RLH
signaling. The absence of TRAF6 resulted in enhanced viral replication and a
significant reduction in the production of IL-6 and type I IFNs after infection
with RNA virus. Activation of NF-kappaB and IRF7, but not that of IRF3, was
significantly impaired during RLH signaling in the absence of TRAF6.
TGFbeta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) and MEKK3, whose activation by TRAF6 during TLR
signaling is involved in NF-kappaB activation, were not essential for
RLH-mediated NF-kappaB activation. We also demonstrate that TRAF6-deficiency
impaired cytosolic DNA-induced antiviral responses, and this impairment was due
to defective activation of NF-kappaB and IRF7.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Thus, TRAF6 mediates antiviral responses triggered by
cytosolic viral DNA and RNA in a way that differs from that associated with TLR
signaling. Given its essential role in signaling by various receptors involved in
the acquired immune system, TRAF6 represents a key molecule in innate and
antigen-specific immune responses against viral infection.

PMCID: PMC2682567
PMID: 19479062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Virol. 2009 Aug;83(15):7629-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00679-09. Epub 2009 May 27.

Baculovirus induces type I interferon production through toll-like
receptor-dependent and -independent pathways in a cell-type-specific manner.

Abe T(1), Kaname Y, Wen X, Tani H, Moriishi K, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O, Ishii KJ,
Kawai T, Akira S, Matsuura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcNPV) is a
double-stranded-DNA virus that is pathogenic to insects. AcNPV was shown to
induce an innate immune response in mammalian immune cells and to confer
protection of mice from lethal viral infection. In this study, we have shown that
production of type I interferon (IFN) by AcNPV in murine plasmacytoid dendritic
cells (pDCs) and non-pDCs, such as peritoneal macrophages and splenic CD11c+ DCs,
was mediated by Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent pathways,
respectively. IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) was shown to play a crucial role in 
the production of type I IFN by AcNPV not only in immune cells in vitro but also 
in vivo. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), AcNPV produced IFN-beta and
IFN-inducible chemokines through TLR-independent and IRF3-dependent pathways, in 
contrast to the TLR-dependent and IRF3/IRF7-independent production of
proinflammatory cytokines. Although production of IFN-beta and IFN-inducible
chemokines was severely impaired in IFN promoter-stimulator 1 (IPS-1)-deficient
MEFs upon infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, AcNPV produced substantial
amounts of the cytokines in IPS-1-deficient MEFs. These results suggest that a
novel signaling pathway(s) other than TLR- and IPS-1-dependent pathways
participates in the production of type I IFN in response to AcNPV infection.

PMCID: PMC2708616
PMID: 19474102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2009 May;29(5):848-51.

[Liver X receptor alpha inhibits LPS-induced inflammation by down-regulating IFR3
and GRIP1 in mouse Kupffer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Ou ZB(1), Huang QY, Sun K, Wei SD, Gong JP, Tu B.

Author information: 
(1)Chongqing Key Laboratory of Hepatobliliary Surgery, Department of
Hepatobliliary Surgery, Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing Medical University,
Chongqing 400010, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the possible mechanism of the inhibitory effect of liver X 
receptor alpha (LXRalpha) on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation in
mouse Kupffer cells (KCs).
METHODS: The KCs isolated from the liver of male KM mice and cultured in RPMI
1640 containing 20% FBS for 24 h were divided into control, LPS, T0901317, and
LPS+T0901317 groups with corresponding treatments. The expressions of LXRalpha,
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and glucocorticoid receptor interacting
protein 1 (GRIP1) in the KCs were detected by Western blotting. The levels of
interferon beta (IFNbeta), tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and
interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) in the supernatant were detected by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: The level of LXRalpha protein was highest in T0901317 group and lowest
in LPS group, and was significantly higher in LPS+T0901317 group than in LPS
group but lower than in T0901317 group (P<0.05). The levels of IRF3 and GRIP1
protein were the highest in LPS group, and significantly lowered by T0901317
treatment (P<0.05). The expression of IRF3 and GRIP1 proteins in LPS group and
LPS+ T0901317 group were significantly higher than those in the control and
T0901317 groups (P<0.05). The concentration of IFN-beta was significantly higher 
in LPS group than in the control and T0901317 group (P<0.05), and decreased in
LPS+T0901317 group in comparison with that in LPS group (P<0.05). IFN-beta was
the lowest in T0901317 group. The levels of TNF-alpha and IL-1beta were the
highest in LPS group (P<0.05), and comparable between the other 3 groups
(P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Pre-treatment with T0901317 before LPS stimulation can suppress the
expressions of IRF3 and GRIP1 to inhibit the inflammation and hence Kupffer cell 
activation.

PMID: 19460690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Vis. 2009 May 8;15:937-48.

Alteration of TLR3 pathways by glucocorticoids may be responsible for
immunosusceptibility of human corneal epithelial cells to viral infections.

Hara Y(1), Shiraishi A, Kobayashi T, Kadota Y, Shirakata Y, Hashimoto K, Ohashi
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Ehime University School of Medicine, Shitsukawa, 
Japan. yukoabc@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: The toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) recognizes viral double-stranded RNA and
its synthetic analog polyriboinosinic-polyribocytidylic acid (poly(I:C)), and the
activation of TLR3 is known to induce the production of type I interferon (IFN)
and inflammatory cytokines/chemokines. The purpose of this study was to determine
the role played by innate responses to a herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) infection
of the corneal epithelial cells. In addition, we determined the effects of
immunosuppressive drugs on the innate responses.
METHODS: Cultured human corneal epithelial cells (HCECs) were exposed to
poly(I:C), and the expressions of the mRNAs of the cytokines/chemokines
macrophage-inflammatory protein 1 alpha (MIP1-alpha), macrophage-inflammatory
protein 1 beta (MIP1-beta), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-8 (IL-8), regulated
on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), Interferon-beta
(IFN-beta), and TLR3 were determined using real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The effects of dexamethasone
(DEX, 10(-6) or 10(-5) M) and cyclosporine A (CsA, 10(-6) or 10(-5) M) on the
expression of these cytokines and TLR3 were also determined using real-time
RT-PCR. Levels of MIP1-alpha, MIP1-beta, IL-6, IL-8, RANTES, and IFN-beta were
measured using the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). The activation of
nuclear factor kappa B (NFkappaB) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) in
HCECs was assessed by immunohistochemical staining. The effects of DEX and CsA on
HCECs exposed to HSV-1 (McKrae strain) were also examined.
RESULTS: The expressions of MIP1-alpha, MIP1-beta, IL-6, IL-8, RANTES, IFN-beta, 
and TLR3 were up-regulated in HCECs exposed to poly(I:C). The poly(I:C)-induced
expressions of IL-6 and IL-8 were down-regulated by both DEX and CsA, while the
expressions of IFN-beta and TLR3 were suppressed by DEX alone. Similarly, the
poly(I:C)-induced activation of NFkappaB was decreased by both DEX and CsA, and
the activation of IRF3 was reduced by DEX alone. When HCECs were inoculated with 
HSV-1, DEX led to a decrease in the expression of IL6, IFN-beta, and TLR3, and an
extension of plaque formation.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that DEX may increase the susceptibility of
HCECs to viral infections by altering the TLR3 signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2683030
PMID: 19452017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. BMC Genomics. 2009 May 11;10:216. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-216.

Comparative genomics of Toll-like receptor signalling in five species.

Jann OC(1), King A, Corrales NL, Anderson SI, Jensen K, Ait-Ali T, Tang H, Wu C, 
Cockett NE, Archibald AL, Glass EJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute and R(D)SVS, University of Edinburgh, Roslin, Midlothian,
Edinburgh EH259PS, UK. Oliver.Jann@roslin.ed.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Over the last decade, several studies have identified quantitative
trait loci (QTL) affecting variation of immune related traits in mammals. Recent 
studies in humans and mice suggest that part of this variation may be caused by
polymorphisms in genes involved in Toll-like receptor (TLR) signalling. In this
project, we used a comparative approach to investigate the importance of
TLR-related genes in comparison with other immunologically relevant genes for
resistance traits in five species by associating their genomic location with
previously published immune-related QTL regions.
RESULTS: We report the genomic localisation of TLR1-10 and ten associated
signalling molecules in sheep and pig using in-silico and/or radiation hybrid
(RH) mapping techniques and compare their positions with their annotated
homologues in the human, cattle and mouse whole genome sequences. We also report 
medium-density RH maps for porcine chromosomes 8 and 13. A comparative analysis
of the positions of previously published relevant QTLs allowed the identification
of homologous regions that are associated with similar health traits in several
species and which contain TLR related and other immunologically relevant genes.
Additional evidence was gathered by examining relevant gene expression and
association studies.
CONCLUSION: This comparative genomic approach identified eight genes as
potentially causative genes for variations of health related traits. These
include susceptibility to clinical mastitis in dairy cattle, general disease
resistance in sheep, cattle, humans and mice, and tolerance to protozoan
infection in cattle and mice. Four TLR-related genes (TLR1, 6, MyD88, IRF3)
appear to be the most likely candidate genes underlying QTL regions which control
the resistance to the same or similar pathogens in several species. Further
studies are required to investigate the potential role of polymorphisms within
these genes.

PMCID: PMC2689273
PMID: 19432955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2009 May;107(5):661-8. doi:
10.1016/j.tripleo.2009.01.039.

Expression of interferon regulatory factor 1, 3, and 7 in primary Sjögren
syndrome.

Zheng L(1), Yu C, Zhang Z, Yang C, Cai X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to investigate the level of interferon regulatory factor
(IRF) 1, 3, and 7 in peripheral blood cells from patients with primary Sjogren
syndrome (pSS) and to determine whether and where IRF1 exists in the parotid
glands of pSS.
METHODS: Peripheral blood cells and parotid gland biopsy specimens from patients 
with pSS were studied. The IRF1, IRF3, and IRF7 gene mRNA levels in peripheral
blood cells were calculated by using real-time PCR. The IRF1-positive cells in
the parotid glands with pSS were observed by using immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence. Statistical analysis was performed by Student t test.
RESULTS: Compared with 24 control samples, the IRF1 mRNA levels in peripheral
blood cells of 37 cases with pSS were up-regulated (P < .05), but the IRF3 and
IRF7 mRNA levels of pSS were not up-regulated (P > .05). Relative quantitative
levels of IRF1 mRNA were 2.17-fold higher in pSS patients than control subjects. 
The IRF1-positive cells of the pSS group were localized in the epithelial
islands, lymphocytes, and ductal epithelial cells of the parotid glands. In all
control subjects, the IRF1-positive cells were localized only to the ductal
epithelial cells of parotid glands as determined by immunohistochemical staining 
or immunofluorescence. The scores of IRF1-positive cells of pSS were
significantly higher than that of control samples (P < .05).
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that IRF1 mRNA levels are up-regulated in the
peripheral blood cells of pSS patients. Also, IRF1-positive cells exist in the
epithelial islands, lymphocytes, and ductal epithelial cells of the parotid
glands of individuals affected by pSS, but are limited to the ductal epithelial
cells of healthy control subjects.

PMID: 19426920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochem Pharmacol. 2009 Apr 15;77(8):1391-400. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.01.009.
Epub 2009 Jan 23.

Suppression of the TRIF-dependent signaling pathway of Toll-like receptors by
luteolin.

Lee JK(1), Kim SY, Kim YS, Lee WH, Hwang DH, Lee JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology,
Gwangju, 500-712, Republic of Korea.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play important roles in induction of innate immune
responses for both host defense against invading pathogens and wound healing
after tissue injury. Since dysregulation of TLR-mediated immune responses is
closely linked to many chronic diseases, modulation of TLR activation by small
molecules may have therapeutic potential against such diseases. Expression of the
majority of lipopolysaccharide-induced TLR4 target genes is mediated through a
MyD88-independent (TRIF-dependent) signaling pathway. In order to evaluate the
therapeutic potential of the flavonoid luteolin we examined its effect on
TLR-stimulated signal transduction via the TRIF-dependent pathway. Luteolin
suppressed activation of Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and NFkappaB
induced by TLR3 and TLR4 agonists resulting in the decreased expression of target
genes such as TNF-alpha, IL-6, IL-12, IP-10, IFNbeta, CXCL9, and IL-27 in
macrophages. Luteolin attenuated ligand-independent activation of IRF3 or
NFkappaB induced by TLR4, TRIF, or TBK1, while it did not inhibit TLR
oligomerization. Luteolin inhibited TBK1-kinase activity and IRF3 dimerization
and phosphorylation, leading to the reduction of TBK1-dependent gene expression. 
Structural analogs of luteolin such as quercetin, chrysin, and eriodictyol also
inhibited TBK1-kinase activity and TBK1-target gene expression. These results
demonstrate that TBK1 is a novel target of anti-inflammatory flavonoids resulting
in the down-regulation of the TRIF-dependent signaling pathway. These results
suggest that the beneficial activities of these flavonoids against inflammatory
diseases may be attributed to the modulation of TLR-mediated inflammatory
responses.

PMID: 19426678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Virol. 2009 Jul;83(14):6987-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00585-09. Epub 2009 May 6.

Variation in antagonism of the interferon response to rotavirus NSP1 results in
differential infectivity in mouse embryonic fibroblasts.

Feng N(1), Sen A, Nguyen H, Vo P, Hoshino Y, Deal EM, Greenberg HB.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

Rotavirus NSP1 has been shown to function as an E3 ubiquitin ligase that mediates
proteasome-dependent degradation of interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRF),
including IRF3, -5, and -7, and suppresses the cellular type I IFN response.
However, the effect of rotavirus NSP1 on viral replication is not well defined.
Prior studies used genetic analysis of selected reassortants to link NSP1 with
host range restriction in the mouse, suggesting that homologous and heterologous 
rotaviruses might use their different abilities to antagonize the IFN response as
the basis of their host tropisms. Using a mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF) model,
we demonstrate that heterologous bovine (UK and NCDV) and porcine (OSU)
rotaviruses fail to effectively degrade cellular IRF3, resulting in IRF3
activation and beta IFN (IFN-beta) secretion. As a consequence of this failure,
replication of these viruses is severely restricted in IFN-competent wild-type,
but not in IFN-deficient (IFN-alpha/beta/gamma receptor- or STAT1-deficient)
MEFs. On the other hand, homologous murine rotaviruses (ETD or EHP) or the
heterologous simian rotavirus (rhesus rotavirus [RRV]) efficiently degrade
cellular IRF3, diminish IRF3 activation and IFN-beta secretion and are not
replication restricted in wild-type MEFs. Genetic reassortant analysis between UK
and RRV maps the distinctive phenotypes of IFN antagonism and growth restriction 
in wild-type MEFs to NSP1. Therefore, there is a direct relationship between the 
replication efficiencies of different rotavirus strains in MEFs and
strain-related variations in NSP1-mediated antagonism of the type I IFN response.

PMCID: PMC2704795
PMID: 19420080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 10;284(28):19122-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M808233200. Epub 2009
May 6.

The tyrosine kinase c-Src enhances RIG-I (retinoic acid-inducible gene
I)-elicited antiviral signaling.

Johnsen IB(1), Nguyen TT, Bergstroem B, Fitzgerald KA, Anthonsen MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Faculty of
Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim N-7006,
Norway.

Antiviral immune responses are initiated through Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and
RIG-I (retinoic acid-inducible gene-I)-like RNA helicases that recognize nucleic 
acids from distinct viruses. In this study, we show that the tyrosine kinase
c-Src participates in antiviral responses induced by the cytoplasmic RNA helicase
RIG-I. Sendai virus (SV), which is recognized by RIG-I, induced c-Src
phosphorylation. Functional impairment of c-Src through chemical inhibition or
transient expression of a c-Src kinase-inactive mutant attenuated production of
endogenous antiviral proteins after SV infection or after expression of RIG-I or 
its adapter protein MAVS. Importantly, SV-stimulated synthesis of antiviral
proteins was significantly impaired in cells treated with c-Src small interfering
RNA and in cells from c-Src-deficient mice. In addition, we found that c-Src
interacted with components of the RIG-I pathway: RIG-I, MAVS, and TRAF3 (tumor
necrosis factor receptor-associated factor-3). The interaction between c-Src and 
TRAF3 was found to occur within the RING domain of TRAF3. Taken together, our
results suggest that c-Src enhances RIG-I-mediated signaling, acting at the level
of TRAF3.

PMCID: PMC2707193
PMID: 19419966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 May 12;106(19):7945-50. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0900818106. Epub 2009 Apr 28.

ISG56 is a negative-feedback regulator of virus-triggered signaling and cellular 
antiviral response.

Li Y(1), Li C, Xue P, Zhong B, Mao AP, Ran Y, Chen H, Wang YY, Yang F, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.

IFN-stimulated gene 56 (ISG56) is one of the first identified proteins induced by
viruses and type I IFNs. In this study, we identified ISG56 as a virus-induced
protein associated with MITA, an adapter protein involved in virus-triggered
induction of type I IFNs. Overexpression of ISG56 inhibited Sendai
virus-triggered activation of IRF3, NF-kappaB, and the IFN-beta promoter, whereas
knockdown of ISG56 had opposite effects. Consistently, overexpression of ISG56
reversed cytoplasmic poly(I:C)-induced inhibition of vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV) replication, whereas knockdown of ISG56 inhibited VSV replication.
Competitive coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicated that ISG56 disrupted the 
interactions between MITA and VISA or TBK1, two components in the virus-triggered
IFN signaling pathways. These results suggest that ISG56 is a mediator of
negative-feedback regulation of virus-triggered induction of type I IFNs and
cellular antiviral responses.

PMCID: PMC2683125
PMID: 19416887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Nat Immunol. 2009 Jun;10(6):579-86. doi: 10.1038/ni.1727. Epub 2009 May 3.

TAG, a splice variant of the adaptor TRAM, negatively regulates the adaptor
MyD88-independent TLR4 pathway.

Palsson-McDermott EM(1), Doyle SL, McGettrick AF, Hardy M, Husebye H, Banahan K, 
Gong M, Golenbock D, Espevik T, O'Neill LA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.

Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signals the induction of transcription factor
IRF3-dependent genes from the early endosome via the adaptor TRAM. Here we report
a splice variant of TRAM, TAG ('TRAM adaptor with GOLD domain'), which has a
Golgi dynamics domain coupled to TRAM's Toll-interleukin 1 receptor domain. After
stimulation with lipopolysaccharide, TRAM and TAG localized to late endosomes
positive for the GTPase Rab7a. TAG inhibited activation of IRF3 by
lipopolysaccharide. Knockdown of TAG with small interfering RNA enhanced
induction of the chemokine CCL5 (RANTES), but not of interleukin 8, by
lipopolysaccharide in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells. TAG displaced the
adaptor TRIF from TRAM. TAG is therefore an example of a specific inhibitor of
the adaptor MyD88-independent pathway activated by TLR4. Targeting TAG could be
useful in the effort to boost the immunostimulatory effect of TLR4 without
causing unwanted inflammation.

PMID: 19412184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Leukoc Biol. 2009 Aug;86(2):411-21. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1108702. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

GM-CSF- and M-CSF-dependent macrophage phenotypes display differential dependence
on type I interferon signaling.

Fleetwood AJ(1), Dinh H, Cook AD, Hertzog PJ, Hamilton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, The Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Erratum in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Feb;91(2):347.

M-CSF and GM-CSF are mediators involved in regulating the numbers and function of
macrophage lineage populations and have been shown to contribute to macrophage
heterogeneity. Type I IFN is an important mediator produced by macrophages and
can have profound regulatory effects on their properties. In this study, we
compared bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMM) and GM-CSF-induced BMM (GM-BMM)
from wild-type and IFNAR1(-/-) mice to assess the contribution of endogenous type
I IFN to the phenotypic differences between BMM and GM-BMM. BMM were capable of
higher constitutive IFN-beta production, which contributed significantly to their
basal transcriptome. Microarray analysis found that of the endogenous type I
IFN-regulated genes specific to either BMM or GM-BMM, 488 of these gene
alterations were unique to BMM, while only 50 were unique to GM-BMM. Moreover,
BMM displayed enhanced basal mRNA levels, relative to GM-BMM, of a number of
genes identified as being dependent on type I IFN signaling, including Stat1,
Stat2, Irf7, Ccl5, Ccl12, and Cxcl10. As a result of prior type I IFN "priming," 
upon LPS stimulation BMM displayed increased activation of the MyD88-independent 
IRF-3/STAT1 pathways compared with GM-BMM, which correlated with the distinct
cytokine/chemokine profiles of the two macrophage subsets. Furthermore, the
autocrine type I IFN signaling loop regulated the production of the M1 and M2
signature cytokines, IL-12p70 and IL-10. Collectively, these findings demonstrate
that constitutive and LPS-induced type I IFN play significant roles in regulating
the differences in phenotype and function between BMM and GM-BMM.

PMID: 19406830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. PLoS One. 2009;4(5):e5466. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005466. Epub 2009 Mar 7.

MAVS-mediated apoptosis and its inhibition by viral proteins.

Lei Y(1), Moore CB, Liesman RM, O'Connor BP, Bergstralh DT, Chen ZJ, Pickles RJ, 
Ting JP.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, USA.

BACKGROUND: Host responses to viral infection include both immune activation and 
programmed cell death. The mitochondrial antiviral signaling adaptor, MAVS
(IPS-1, VISA or Cardif) is critical for host defenses to viral infection by
inducing type-1 interferons (IFN-I), however its role in virus-induced apoptotic 
responses has not been elucidated.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We show that MAVS causes apoptosis independent of its
function in initiating IFN-I production. MAVS-induced cell death requires
mitochondrial localization, is caspase dependent, and displays hallmarks of
apoptosis. Furthermore, MAVS(-/-) fibroblasts are resistant to Sendai
virus-induced apoptosis. A functional screen identifies the hepatitis C virus
NS3/4A and the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV)
nonstructural protein (NSP15) as inhibitors of MAVS-induced apoptosis, possibly
as a method of immune evasion.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study describes a novel role for MAVS in controlling viral
infections through the induction of apoptosis, and identifies viral proteins
which inhibit this host response.

PMCID: PMC2674933
PMID: 19404494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Virol. 2009 Jul;83(13):6849-62. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02323-08. Epub 2009 Apr 29.

The NS1 protein of a human influenza virus inhibits type I interferon production 
and the induction of antiviral responses in primary human dendritic and
respiratory epithelial cells.

Haye K(1), Burmakina S, Moran T, García-Sastre A, Fernandez-Sesma A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L.
Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The NS1 protein of the influenza A virus is a potent virulence factor that
inhibits type I interferon (IFN) synthesis, allowing the virus to overcome host
defenses and replicate efficiently. However, limited studies have been conducted 
on NS1 function using human virus strains and primary human cells. We used NS1
truncated mutant influenza viruses derived from the human isolate influenza
A/TX/91 (TX WT, where WT is wild type) to study the functions of NS1 in infected 
primary cells. Infection of primary differentiated human tracheo-bronchial
epithelial cells with an NS1 truncated mutant demonstrated limited viral
replication and enhanced type I IFN induction. Additionally, human dendritic
cells (DCs) infected with human NS1 mutant viruses showed higher levels of
activation and stimulated naïve T-cells better than TX WT virus-infected DCs. We 
also compared infections of DCs with TX WT and our previously characterized
laboratory strain A/PR/8/34 (PR8) and its NS1 knockout strain, deltaNS1. TX
WT-infected DCs displayed higher viral replication than PR8 but had decreased
antiviral gene expression at late time points and reduced naïve T-cell
stimulation compared to PR8 infections, suggesting an augmented inhibition of IFN
production and human DC activation. Our findings show that human-derived
influenza A viruses have a high capacity to inhibit the antiviral state in a
human system, and here we have evaluated the possible mechanism of this
inhibition. Lastly, C-terminal truncations in the NS1 protein of human influenza 
virus are sufficient to make the virus attenuated and more immunogenic,
supporting its use as a live attenuated influenza vaccine in humans.

PMCID: PMC2698524
PMID: 19403682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Exp Med. 2009 May 11;206(5):1167-79. doi: 10.1084/jem.20081582. Epub 2009 Apr
27.

Myeloid heme oxygenase-1 regulates innate immunity and autoimmunity by modulating
IFN-beta production.

Tzima S(1), Victoratos P, Kranidioti K, Alexiou M, Kollias G.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Research Center Alexander Fleming, Vari 166-72, Greece.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is a key cytoprotective, antioxidant, and
antiinflammatory molecule. The pathophysiological functions of HO-1 have been
associated with its enzymatic activities in heme catabolism. We have examined the
immune functions of HO-1 by its conditional ablation in myeloid cells (HO-1(M-KO)
mice). We demonstrate that myeloid HO-1 is required for the activation of
interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF) 3 after Toll-like receptor 3 or 4
stimulation, or viral infection. HO-1-deficient macrophages show reduced
expression of IFN-beta and of primary IRF3 target genes encoding RANTES, IP-10
and MCP-1. In the presence of polyI:C, myeloid HO-1 knockout mice infected with
Listeria monocytogenes, a model dependent on IFN-beta production, showed enhanced
bacterial clearance and survival, whereas control mice succumbed to infection.
Moreover, after induction of experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, mice with
myeloid-specific HO-1 deficiency developed a higher incidence and an exacerbated,
nonremitting clinical disease correlating with persistent activation of
antigen-presenting cells, enhanced infiltration of Th17 cells, and a
nonregressing myelin-specific T cell reactivity. Notably, these defects were
rectified by exogenous administration of IFN-beta, confirming that HO-1 functions
directly upstream of this critical immune pathway. These results uncover a novel 
direct function for myeloid HO-1 in the regulation of IFN-beta production,
establishing HO-1 as a critical early mediator of the innate immune response.

PMCID: PMC2715044
PMID: 19398754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 12;284(24):16202-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.008227. Epub 2009
Apr 20.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus M protein inhibits type I
interferon production by impeding the formation of TRAF3.TANK.TBK1/IKKepsilon
complex.

Siu KL(1), Kok KH, Ng MH, Poon VK, Yuen KY, Zheng BJ, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus is highly pathogenic in
humans and evades innate immunity at multiple levels. It has evolved various
strategies to counteract the production and action of type I interferons, which
mobilize the front-line defense against viral infection. In this study we
demonstrate that SARS coronavirus M protein inhibits gene transcription of type I
interferons. M protein potently antagonizes the activation of
interferon-stimulated response element-dependent transcription by double-stranded
RNA, RIG-I, MDA5, TBK1, IKKepsilon, and virus-induced signaling adaptor (VISA)
but has no influence on the transcriptional activity of this element when IRF3 or
IRF7 is overexpressed. M protein physically associates with RIG-I, TBK1,
IKKepsilon, and TRAF3 and likely sequesters some of them in membrane-associated
cytoplasmic compartments. Consequently, the expression of M protein prevents the 
formation of TRAF3.TANK.TBK1/IKKepsilon complex and thereby inhibits
TBK1/IKKepsilon-dependent activation of IRF3/IRF7 transcription factors. Taken
together, our findings reveal a new mechanism by which SARS coronavirus
circumvents the production of type I interferons.

PMCID: PMC2713514
PMID: 19380580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Gene Ther. 2009 Jun;16(6):709-15. doi: 10.1038/gt.2009.42. Epub 2009 Apr 16.

Progress and prospects: biological properties and technological advances of
herpes simplex virus type 1-based amplicon vectors.

Epstein AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, Lyon, France. epstein@cgmc.univ-lyon1.fr

The last two years have seen significant advances in our understanding of the
cellular innate responses elicited or activated by the entry of amplicon
particles, which may, in part, explain the transient nature of transgene
expression often observed in cells infected with helper-free amplicon stocks. At 
the technological level, the most consistent progress has been in strategies to
enhance the stability of transgene cassettes, either through integration into
host chromosomes or through the conversion of the amplicon genome into a
replication-competent extrachromosomal element.

PMID: 19369969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Virol. 2009 Jul;83(13):6757-68. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02570-08. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

Vaccinia virus E3 suppresses expression of diverse cytokines through inhibition
of the PKR, NF-kappaB, and IRF3 pathways.

Myskiw C(1), Arsenio J, van Bruggen R, Deschambault Y, Cao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB,
Canada R3T 2N2.

The vaccinia virus double-stranded RNA binding protein E3 has been demonstrated
to inhibit the expression of cytokines, including beta interferon (IFN-beta) and 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). However, few details regarding the
molecular mechanisms of this inhibition have been described. Using real-time PCR 
arrays, we found that E3 suppressed the induction of a diverse array of cytokines
representing members of the IFN, interleukin (IL), TNF, and transforming growth
factor cytokine families. We discovered that the factor(s) responsible for the
induction of IL-6, TNF-alpha, and inhibin beta A (INHBA) was associated with the 
early and late phases of virus infection. In contrast, the factor(s) which
regulates IFN-beta induction was associated with the late phase of replication.
We have found that expression of these cytokines can be induced by transfection
of cells with RNA isolated from vaccinia virus-infected cells. Moreover, we
provide evidence that E3 antagonizes both PKR-dependent and PKR-independent
pathways to regulate cytokine expression. PKR-dependent activation of p38 and
NF-kappaB was required for vaccinia virus-induced INHBA expression, whereas
induction of TNF-alpha required only PKR-dependent NF-kappaB activation. In
contrast, induction of IL-6 and IFN-beta was largely PKR independent. IL-6
induction is regulated by NF-kappaB, while IFN-beta induction is mediated by
IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 and IFN regulatory factor 3/NF-kappaB.
Collectively, these results indicate that E3 suppresses distinct but interlinked 
host signaling pathways to inhibit the expression of a diverse array of
cytokines.

PMCID: PMC2698532
PMID: 19369349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Virol. 2009 Jul;83(13):6689-705. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02220-08. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus papain-like protease ubiquitin-like
domain and catalytic domain regulate antagonism of IRF3 and NF-kappaB signaling.

Frieman M(1), Ratia K, Johnston RE, Mesecar AD, Baric RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599, USA.

The outcome of a viral infection is regulated in part by the complex coordination
of viral and host interactions that compete for the control and optimization of
virus replication. Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV)
intimately engages and regulates the host innate immune responses during
infection. Using a novel interferon (IFN) antagonism screen, we show that the
SARS-CoV proteome contains several replicase, structural, and accessory proteins 
that antagonize the IFN pathway. In this study, we focus on the SARS-CoV
papain-like protease (PLP), which engages and antagonizes the IFN induction and
NF-kappaB signaling pathways. PLP blocks these pathways by affecting activation
of the important signaling proteins in each pathway, IRF3 and NF-kappaB. We also 
show that the ubiquitin-like domain of PLP is necessary for pathway antagonism
but not sufficient by itself to block these pathways regardless of the enzymatic 
activity of the protease. The potential mechanism of PLP antagonism and its role 
in pathogenesis are discussed.

PMCID: PMC2698564
PMID: 19369340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Vaccine. 2009 Mar 26;27(15):2144-9. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.01.134. Epub 2009
Feb 10.

Contribution of IRF-3 mediated IFNbeta production to DNA vaccine dependent
cellular immune responses.

Shirota H(1), Petrenko L, Hattori T, Klinman DM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
MD, 21702, United States.

The mechanism(s) by which DNA vaccines activate Ag-specific cellular immune
responses is incompletely understood. Current findings indicate that IRF-3 plays 
an important role in this process. The IRF-3 dependent signaling pathway is
triggered by the presence of intracytoplasmic DNA, and culminates in the
production of type I IFNs. DNA vaccination of IRF-3 KO mice elicits a strong
Ag-specific humoral response, yet CD4 and CD8 T cell responses (including the
production of Th1, Th2 and Th 17 cytokines) are severely impaired. Although
expression of the immunogenic protein encoded by the DNA vaccine was similar in
IRF-3 KO vs wild type mice, antigen presentation was severely impaired in the KO 
animals. This defect was remedied by the co-delivery of an IFNbeta encoding
plasmid. These findings suggest that the IRF-3/IFNbeta pathways are key to the
induction of cellular immunity following DNA vaccination.

PMCID: PMC2667800
PMID: 19356618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;29(12):3435-50. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01805-08. Epub 2009 Apr 
6.

Differential regulation of human interferon A gene expression by interferon
regulatory factors 3 and 7.

Génin P(1), Lin R, Hiscott J, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228-CNRS, Laboratoire de Régulation Transcriptionnelle et Maladies
Génétiques, UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue 
des Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Differential expression of the human interferon A (IFN-A) gene cluster is
modulated following paramyxovirus infection by the relative amounts of active
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and IRF-7. IRF-3 expression activates
predominantly IFN-A1 and IFN-B, while IRF-7 expression induces multiple IFN-A
genes. IFN-A1 gene expression is dependent on three promoter proximal IRF
elements (B, C, and D modules, located at positions -98 to -45 relative to the
mRNA start site). IRF-3 binds the C module of IFN-A1, while other IFN-A gene
promoters are responsive to the binding of IRF-7 to the B and D modules. Maximal 
expression of IFN-A1 is observed with complete occupancy of the three modules in 
the presence of IRF-7. Nucleotide substitutions in the C modules of other IFN-A
genes disrupt IRF-3-mediated transcription, whereas a G/A substitution in the D
modules enhances IRF7-mediated expression. IRF-3 exerts dual effects on IFN-A
gene expression, as follows: a synergistic effect with IRF-7 on IFN-A1 expression
and an inhibitory effect on other IFN-A gene promoters. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments reveal that transient binding of both IRF-3 and
IRF-7, accompanied by CBP/p300 recruitment to the endogenous IFN-A gene
promoters, is associated with transcriptional activation, whereas a biphasic
recruitment of IRF-3 and CBP/p300 represses IFN-A gene expression. This
regulatory mechanism contributes to differential expression of IFN-A genes and
may be critical for alpha interferon production in different cell types by
RIG-I-dependent signals, leading to innate antiviral immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2698742
PMID: 19349300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Infect Immun. 2009 Jun;77(6):2499-507. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01562-08. Epub 2009 Mar
30.

Campylobacter jejuni-induced activation of dendritic cells involves cooperative
signaling through Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-MyD88 and TLR4-TRIF axes.

Rathinam VA(1), Appledorn DM, Hoag KA, Amalfitano A, Mansfield LS.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Enteric Diseases Laboratory, National Food Safety and Toxicology
Center, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

Campylobacter jejuni is an important cause of human enteritis and has been linked
to the development of autoimmune diseases. Recently we showed that infection of
murine dendritic cells (DCs) with C. jejuni resulted in DC activation and
induction of Campylobacter-specific Th1-effector responses. Toll-like receptor
(TLR) signaling through myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) and/or
Toll-interleukin 1 (IL-1) receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing beta
interferon (IFN-beta) (TRIF) is critical in inducing immunity against pathogens. 
In this study, we investigated the role of TLR2, TLR4, MyD88, and TRIF signaling 
in C. jejuni-induced inflammatory activation of DCs. DC upregulation of major
histocompatibility complex class II and costimulatory molecules after C. jejuni
challenge was profoundly impaired by TLR2, TLR4, MyD88, and TRIF deficiencies.
Similarly, C. jejuni-induced secretion of IL-12, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor 
alpha was significantly inhibited in TLR2(-/-), TLR4(-/-), MyD88(-/-), and
TRIF(-/-) DCs compared to that in wild-type DCs; however, the magnitude of
inhibition was greater in MyD88(-/-), TRIF(-/-), and TLR4(-/-) DCs than in
TLR2(-/-) DCs. Furthermore, C. jejuni induced interferon regulatory factor 3
phosphorylation and IFN-beta secretion by DCs in a TLR4-TRIF-dependent fashion,
further demonstrating activation of this pathway by C. jejuni. Importantly, TLR2,
TLR4, MyD88, and TRIF deficiencies all markedly impaired the Th1-priming ability 
of C. jejuni-infected DCs. Thus, our results show that cooperative signaling
through the TLR4-MyD88 and TLR4-TRIF axes represents a novel mechanism mediating 
C. jejuni-induced inflammatory responses of DCs. To our knowledge, such a
mechanism has not been demonstrated previously for an intact bacterium.

PMCID: PMC2687361
PMID: 19332531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Int J Oncol. 2009 Apr;34(4):971-82.

Expression of RIG-I, IRF3, IFN-beta and IRF7 determines resistance or
susceptibility of cells to infection by Newcastle Disease Virus.

Wilden H(1), Fournier P, Zawatzky R, Schirrmacher V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) is an avian paramyxovirus with anti-neoplastic and 
immune-stimulatory properties which has raised considerable interest for cancer
therapy. To better understand the molecular nature of the tumor selective
replication of NDV, we investigated the cellular responses of murine normal and
tumor cells after infection by NDV. To this end, we compared the basal expression
of different antiviral proteins as well as the expression induced by the addition
of NDV to the cells in vitro and in vivo. Primary macrophages were found to be
resistant to NDV infection and exhibited a high basal and induced expression of
various antiviral genes. In contrast, macrophage-derived RAW tumor cells were
highly susceptible to NDV infection and displayed a low expression of several
antiviral genes. Macrophage-derived J774 tumor cells were intermediate with
regard to NDV replication and antiviral gene expression. The responsiveness to
exogenously added IFN-alpha was found highest in normal macrophages, lowest in
the RAW cells, and intermediate in the J774 cells. We also analysed dendritic
cells as well as additional normal and tumor cell types. A strong inverse
correlation was obeserved between the susceptibility to infection and the basal
expression of the antiviral genes RIG-I, IRF3, IRF7 and IFN-beta. A strong
expression of these genes can explain the resistance of normal cells to NDV
infection and a weak antiviral gene expression the broad susceptibility of tumor 
cells.

PMID: 19287954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Immunity. 2009 Mar 20;30(3):397-407. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.01.008. Epub 2009
Mar 12.

The ubiquitin ligase RNF5 regulates antiviral responses by mediating degradation 
of the adaptor protein MITA.

Zhong B(1), Zhang L, Lei C, Li Y, Mao AP, Yang Y, Wang YY, Zhang XL, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.

Viral infection activates transcription factors NF-kappaB and IRF3, which
collaborate to induce type I interferons (IFNs) and elicit innate antiviral
response. MITA (also known as STING) has recently been identified as an adaptor
that links virus-sensing receptors to IRF3 activation. Here, we showed that the
E3 ubiquitin ligase RNF5 interacted with MITA in a viral-infection-dependent
manner. Overexpression of RNF5 inhibited virus-triggered IRF3 activation, IFNB1
expression, and cellular antiviral response, whereas knockdown of RNF5 had
opposite effects. RNF5 targeted MITA at Lys150 for ubiquitination and degradation
after viral infection. Both MITA and RNF5 were located at the mitochondria and
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and viral infection caused their redistribution to the
ER and mitochondria, respectively. We further found that virus-induced
ubiquitination and degradation of MITA by RNF5 occurred at the mitochondria.
These findings suggest that RNF5 negatively regulates virus-triggered signaling
by targeting MITA for ubiquitination and degradation at the mitochondria.

PMID: 19285439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Apr;39(4):1007-18. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838814.

The IFN regulatory factor 7-dependent type I IFN response is not essential for
early resistance against murine cytomegalovirus infection.

Steinberg C(1), Eisenächer K, Gross O, Reindl W, Schmitz F, Ruland J, Krug A.

Author information: 
(1)II. Medizinische Klinik, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technical University
Munich, Munich, Germany.

IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) has been described as the master regulator of type
I IFN responses and has been shown to be critical for innate antiviral immunity
in vivo. In addition to type I IFN, NK cell responses are involved in the control
of viral replication during acute viral infection. To investigate the role of
IRF7 in the context of a viral infection that induces a strong NK cell response, 
the murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) infection model was used. WT, IRF7-deficient
and IRF3/IRF7-double deficient mice were infected with MCMV. The systemic
IFN-alpha response to MCMV was entirely dependent on IRF7, but independent of
IRF3. However, peak IFN-beta production during MCMV infection was not affected by
the lack of IRF7 or both IRF7 and IRF3. Despite the complete lack of IFN-alpha
production IRF7- and IRF3/IRF7-deficient mice were surprisingly efficient in
controlling MCMV replication and were only modestly more susceptible to MCMV
infection than WT mice. NK cell cytotoxicity was unimpaired and NK cell IFN-gamma
production was enhanced in IRF7-deficient mice correlating with increased levels 
of bioactive IL-12. Owing to these compensatory mechanisms IRF7-dependent
antiviral immune responses were not essential for resistance against acute MCMV
infection in vivo.

PMID: 19283778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Immunol. 2009 Mar 15;182(6):3782-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0803126.

TRIM21 is essential to sustain IFN regulatory factor 3 activation during
antiviral response.

Yang K(1), Shi HX, Liu XY, Shan YF, Wei B, Chen S, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Virus infection induces host antiviral responses including induction of type I
IFNs. Transcription factor IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) plays an essential role
and is tightly regulated in this process. Herein we report that TRIM21
(tripartite motif-containing 21) is significantly induced and interacts with IRF3
upon RNA virus infection. Ectopic expression or knockdown of TRIM21 could
respectively enhance or impair IRF3-mediated gene expression. Mechanistically,
TRIM21 interferes with the interaction between Pin1 (peptidyl-prolyl cis/trans
isomerase, NIMA-interacting 1) and IRF3, thus preventing IRF3 ubiquitination and 
degradation. A conserved motif in the B 30.2 domain of TRIM21 is critical for its
modulation of IRF3 function, while the RING finger is dispensable. Host antiviral
responses are significantly boosted or crippled in the presence or absence of
TRIM21. Our results identify TRIM21 as an essential modulator of IRF3 stability
and demonstrate that it positively regulates the strength and duration of primary
antiviral response, thus further strengthening the notion that the TRIM family is
evolutionarily integrated with innate immunity.

PMID: 19265157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Virol. 2009 May;83(10):4978-83. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02595-08. Epub 2009 Mar 4.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 regulatory protein ICP0 aids infection in cells with 
a preinduced interferon response but does not impede interferon-induced gene
induction.

Everett RD(1), Orr A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, Church Street, Glasgow G11 5JR,
Scotland, United Kingdom. r.everett@mrcvu.gla.ac.uk

Several independent lines of evidence indicate that interferon-mediated innate
responses are involved in controlling herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1)
infection and that the viral immediate-early regulatory protein ICP0 augments
HSV-1 replication in interferon-treated cells. However, this is a complex
situation in which the experimental outcome is determined by the choice of
multiplicity of infection and cell type and by whether cultured cells or animal
models are used. It is now known that neither STAT1 nor interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF-3) play essential roles in the replication defect of ICP0-null
mutant HSV-1 in cultured cells. This study set out to investigate the specific
role of ICP0 in HSV-1 resistance to the interferon defense. We have used a cell
line in which ICP0 expression can be induced at levels similar to those during
the early stages of a normal infection to determine whether ICP0 by itself can
interfere with interferon or IRF-3-dependent signaling and whether ICP0 enables
the virus to circumvent the effects of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). We
found that the presence of ICP0 was unable to compromise ISG induction by either 
interferon or double-stranded RNA. On the other hand, ICP0 preexpression reduced 
but did not eliminate the inhibitory effects of ISGs on HSV-1 infection, with the
extent of the relief being highly dependent on multiplicity of infection. The
results are discussed in terms of the relationships between ICP0 and intrinsic
and innate antiviral resistance mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2682097
PMID: 19264774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. APMIS. 2009 Feb;117(2):124-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2008.00024.x.

Role of mitogen-activated protein kinases, nuclear factor-kappaB, and interferon 
regulatory factor 3 in Toll-like receptor 4-mediated activation of HIV long
terminal repeat.

Berg RS(1), Aggerholm A, Bertelsen LS, Østergaard L, Paludan SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Skejby Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

Monocytes/macrophages are known to represent a potential reservoir of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1), which ensures continuous replication of
the virus in patients on highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). Infected
macrophages are a highly productive source of HIV-1 during infections with common
opportunistic pathogens. Previous studies report that toll like receptors (TLR)s 
play a role in HIV-1 replication in macrophages. Here, we investigate the three
main pathways activated through TLR4 and the interactions with the HIV-1 long
terminal repeat (LTR), using human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293 cells expressing
TLR4 and transfected with a luciferase reporter under the control of the HIV-1
LTR. Here, we demonstrate, that TLR4-mediated activation of HIV-LTR is largely
governed by the nuclear factor-kappaB pathway. Neither of the mitogen-activated
protein kinases ERK1/2, JNK, or p38 nor the transcription factor interferon
regulatory factor 3 were involved in the direct transactivation of HIV-LTR
through stimulation of TLR4.

PMID: 19239434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Lupus. 2009 Mar;18(3):230-4. doi: 10.1177/0961203308096256.

No evidence for genetic association of interferon regulatory factor 3 in systemic
lupus erythematosus.

Sánchez E(1), González-Gay MA, Callejas-Rubio JL, Ortego-Centeno N, Sabio JM,
Jiménez-Alonso J, Micó L, Suarez A, Gutierrez C, de Ramón E, Camps M,
Garcia-Portales R, Tolosa C, López-Nevot MA, Sánchez-Román J, Hernández FJ,
González-Escribano MF, Martín J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain.
elena@ipb.csic.es

The aim of this study was to determine the potential role of three IRF3 gene
polymorphisms (rs2304204, rs7251 and rs2304207) with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). Our study population consisted of 610 patients with SLE and 730 healthy
controls. All individual were of Spanish Caucasian origin. The IRF3 polymorphisms
were genotyped using a PCR system with pre-developed TaqMan allelic
discrimination assay. No statistically significant differences were found when
allele and genotype distribution of rs2304204, rs7251 and rs2304207 polymorphisms
were compared between patients with SLE and controls [overall P values: rs7251, P
= 0.06; rs2304204, P = 0.26 and rs2304207, P = 0.36, by chi-squared test on a 3 x
2 contingency table. Overall allelic P values: rs7251, P = 0.8, OR (95%CI) = 1.03
(0.87-1.22); rs2304204, P = 0.2, OR (95%CI) = 1.12 (0.93-1.34) and rs2304207, P =
0.8, OR (95%CI) = 1.02 (0.82-1.26)]. In addition, no evidence of association with
haplotypes and clinical features of SLE was found. Our data suggest that the IRF3
polymorphisms do not appear to play a major role in the susceptibility or
severity of SLE in a Spanish population.

PMID: 19213861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Virol. 2009 May;83(9):4081-91. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02591-08. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Adenovirus induction of IRF3 occurs through a binary trigger targeting Jun
N-terminal kinase and TBK1 kinase cascades and type I interferon autocrine
signaling.

Nociari M(1), Ocheretina O, Murphy M, Falck-Pedersen E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Weill Medical College, Cornell University, New York,
New York 10021, USA.

Pathogen recognition is a critical function of immune sentinel cells. Naïve
macrophages or dendritic cells (DCs) undergo pathogen-directed activation and
maturation, and as mature antigen-presenting cells (APCs), they contribute
essential functions to both innate and adaptive immunity. Using recombinant
adenovirus (rAdV) as a model for murine APC activation by DNA viruses, we
demonstrate a critical role for stress kinase activation in cell intrinsic and
extrinsic antiviral signaling cascades. We propose two viral triggers, viral
capsid and viral DNA, are required for APC activation. Endosomal escape and
presentation of cytosolic rAdV DNA induces phosphorylation of TANK-binding kinase
1 (TBK1) at serine 172 but does not induce IkappaB kinase epsilon activity as
determined by in vitro kinase assays. However, induction of TBK1 alone is not
sufficient for interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) phosphorylation. We show
that capsid-dependent activation of Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) stress kinase is 
a necessary step, licensing TBK1 phosphorylation of IRF3 at Ser 396. A second
later phase of JNK activity is required to coordinate phosphorylation of
JNK-dependent transcription factors (c-Jun/ATF2) with activated IRF3 in the
induction of primary IRF3-responsive transcripts. Finally, we demonstrate that
maximal JNK/TBK1/IRF3 stimulation by rAdV depends on an intact type I interferon 
(IFN) signaling cascade. By requiring multiple viral triggers and type I IFN
autocrine regulation, APCs have an inherent fail-safe mechanism against
inappropriate activation and maturation.

PMCID: PMC2668477
PMID: 19211767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Virol. 2009 May;83(9):4013-22. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02069-08. Epub 2009 Feb 11.

Differential modification of interferon regulatory factor 3 following virus
particle entry.

Noyce RS(1), Collins SE, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, Michael DeGroote Centre
for Learning and Discovery, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Viral infection elicits the activation of numerous cellular signal transduction
pathways, leading to the induction of both innate and adaptive immune responses
in the host. In particular, interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) has been shown 
to be essential for the induction of an antiviral response. Current models
suggest that virus replication causes phosphorylation of C-terminal serine and
threonine residues on IRF3, leading to its dimerization and translocation to the 
nucleus, where it activates interferon. Upon entry of replication-deficient
Newcastle disease virus (NDV) particles, however, we failed to detect IRF3
dimerization or hyperphosphorylation, despite robust interferon-stimulated gene
(ISG) and antiviral state induction and confirmation by small interfering RNA
knockdown that IRF3 is essential for this response. To further compare the
effects of various viruses and their replication status on IRF3 activation and to
determine the minimal posttranslational modification required for IRF3
activation, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and native polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis were employed. However, we failed to identify a minimal
posttranslational modification of IRF3 that correlated with downstream biological
activity, and the extent of posttranslational modification observed on IRF3 did
not correlate with the degree of subsequent ISG induction. Thus, current
techniques used to detect IRF3 activation are insufficient to infer its role in
mediating downstream biological response induction and should be utilized with
caution.

PMCID: PMC2668492
PMID: 19211751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Immunol. 2009 Feb 15;182(4):1877-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0802436.

Carbon monoxide inhibits TLR-induced dendritic cell immunogenicity.

Rémy S(1), Blancou P, Tesson L, Tardif V, Brion R, Royer PJ, Motterlini R,
Foresti R, Painchaut M, Pogu S, Gregoire M, Bach JM, Anegon I, Chauveau C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de Santé et de Recherche Médicale, Unité 643, Nantes,
France.

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) exerts its functions via the catabolism of heme into
carbon monoxide (CO), Fe(2+), and biliverdin, as well as by depletion of free
heme. We have recently described that overexpression of HO-1 is associated with
the tolerogenic capacity to dendritic cells (DCs) stimulated by LPS. In this
study, we demonstrate that treatment of human monocyte-derived DCs with CO blocks
TLR3 and 4-induced phenotypic maturation, secretion of proinflammatory cytokines,
and alloreactive T cell proliferation, while preserving IL-10 production.
Treatment of DCs with biliverdin, bilirubin, and deferoxamine or replenishing
intracellular heme stores had no effect on DC maturation. HO-1 and CO inhibited
LPS-induced activation of the IFN regulatory factor 3 pathway and their effects
were independent of p38, ERK, and JNK MAPK. HO-1 and CO treatment also inhibited 
mouse DC maturation in vitro and mouse DC immunogenic properties in vivo, as
shown by adoptive cell transfer in a transgenic model of induced diabetes. Thus, 
for the first time, our data show that CO treatment inhibits DC immunogenicity
induced by TLR ligands and that blockade of IFN regulatory factor 3 is associated
with this effect.

PMID: 19201840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Virol. 2009 Apr;83(8):3734-42. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02434-08. Epub 2009 Feb 4.

Human respiratory syncytial virus nonstructural protein NS2 antagonizes the
activation of beta interferon transcription by interacting with RIG-I.

Ling Z(1), Tran KC, Teng MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University, 406 Althouse, University Park, PA 16802, USA. MNT2@psu.edu

A wide variety of RNA viruses have been shown to produce proteins that inhibit
interferon (IFN) production and signaling. For human respiratory syncytial virus 
(RSV), the nonstructural NS1 and NS2 proteins have been shown to block IFN
signaling by causing the proteasomal degradation of STAT2. In addition,
recombinant RSVs lacking either NS1 or NS2 induce more IFN production than
wild-type (wt) RSV in infected cells. However, the mechanisms by which the NS
proteins perform this function are unknown. In this study, we focused on defining
the mechanism by which NS2 inhibits the induction of IFN transcription. We find
that NS2 is required for the early inhibition of IFN transcription since the
infection of cells with NS2-deletion RSV resulted in a higher level of IRF3
activation at early time points postinfection compared with that of wt or
NS1-deletion RSV infection. In addition, NS2 expression inhibits IFN
transcription induced by both the RIG-I and TLR3 pathways. Furthermore, we show
that NS2 inhibits RIG-I-mediated IFN promoter activation by binding to the
N-terminal CARD of RIG-I and inhibiting its interaction with the downstream
component MAVS (IPS-1, VISA, Cardif). Thus, the RSV NS2 protein is a
multifunctional IFN antagonist that targets specific components of both the IFN
induction and IFN signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2663251
PMID: 19193793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Virol. 2009 Apr;83(8):3420-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02623-08. Epub 2009 Feb 4.

MAVS self-association mediates antiviral innate immune signaling.

Tang ED(1), Wang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, UCLA
School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The innate immune system recognizes nucleic acids during viral infection and
stimulates cellular antiviral responses. Intracellular detection of RNA virus
infection is mediated by the RNA helicases RIG-I (retinoic acid inducible gene I)
and MDA-5, which recognize viral RNA and signal through the adaptor molecule MAVS
(mitochondrial antiviral signaling) to stimulate the phosphorylation and
activation of the transcription factors IRF3 (interferon regulatory factor 3) and
IRF7. Once activated, IRF3 and IRF7 turn on the expression of type I interferons,
such as beta interferon. Interestingly, unlike other signaling molecules
identified in this pathway, MAVS contains a C-terminal transmembrane (TM) domain 
that is essential for both type I interferon induction and localization of MAVS
to the mitochondrial outer membrane. However, the role the MAVS TM domain plays
in signaling remains unclear. Here we report the identification of a function for
the TM domain in mediating MAVS self-association. The activation of RIG-I/MDA-5
leads to the TM-dependent dimerization of the MAVS N-terminal caspase recruitment
domain, thereby providing an interface for direct binding to and activation of
the downstream effector TRAF3 (tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor
3). Our results reveal a role for MAVS self-association in antiviral innate
immunity signaling and provide a molecular mechanism for downstream signal
transduction.

PMCID: PMC2663242
PMID: 19193783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Glia. 2009 Aug 15;57(11):1216-26. doi: 10.1002/glia.20843.

Theiler's virus infection induces TLR3-dependent upregulation of TLR2 critical
for proinflammatory cytokine production.

So EY(1), Kim BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University Medical
School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) infection directly induces many
proinflammatory genes, including type I interferon (IFN) and a variety of
cytokine genes. These virus-induced cytokines are a critical factor in developing
TMEV-induced demyelinating disease. We have previously reported that the major
activation signal for the cytokine genes is mediated via TLR3. In this study, we 
describe that TLR2 is upregulated via TLR3 signal and cooperatively participates 
in the expression of IL-6, IL-1beta, CCL2, and CCL5 genes following TMEV
infection. The expression of these genes was significantly impaired in both
TLR2-deficient and TLR3-deficient primary astrocytes. However, the induction of
type I IFNs was not affected by TLR2 deficiency in the primary cells. TMEV
infection led to TLR2-mediated NF-kappaB activation, but not IRF3 or IRF7
activation, critical for type I IFN production. More importantly, TLR3 was
required for TMEV-induced early TLR2 upregulation in primary astrocytes leading
to the production of TLR2-dependent cytokines such as IL-6. Interestingly,
soluble factor(s) produced via TLR2/3-dependent signals appears to be partially
associated with the downstream cytokine production. These results indicate that
TMEV utilizes TLR3-induced TLR2 to induce inflammatory cytokines, which are
critical to the development of immune-mediated demyelinating disease.

PMCID: PMC2706926
PMID: 19191335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jan;5(1):e1000280. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000280. Epub 2009
Jan 30.

Rotavirus NSP1 inhibits NFkappaB activation by inducing proteasome-dependent
degradation of beta-TrCP: a novel mechanism of IFN antagonism.

Graff JW(1), Ettayebi K, Hardy ME.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Molecular Biology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana,
United States of America.

Mechanisms by which viruses counter innate host defense responses generally
involve inhibition of one or more components of the interferon (IFN) system.
Multiple steps in the induction and amplification of IFN signaling are targeted
for inhibition by viral proteins, and many of the IFN antagonists have direct or 
indirect effects on activation of latent cytoplasmic transcription factors.
Rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP1 blocks transcription of type I IFNalpha/beta
by inducing proteasome-dependent degradation of IFN-regulatory factors 3 (IRF3), 
IRF5, and IRF7. In this study, we show that rotavirus NSP1 also inhibits
activation of NFkappaB and does so by a novel mechanism. Proteasome-mediated
degradation of inhibitor of kappaB (IkappaBalpha) is required for NFkappaB
activation. Phosphorylated IkappaBalpha is a substrate for polyubiquitination by 
a multisubunit E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, Skp1/Cul1/F-box, in which the F-box
substrate recognition protein is beta-transducin repeat containing protein
(beta-TrCP). The data presented show that phosphorylated IkappaBalpha is stable
in rotavirus-infected cells because infection induces proteasome-dependent
degradation of beta-TrCP. NSP1 expressed in isolation in transiently transfected 
cells is sufficient to induce this effect. Targeted degradation of an F-box
protein of an E3 ligase complex with a prominent role in modulation of innate
immune signaling and cell proliferation pathways is a unique mechanism of IFN
antagonism and defines a second strategy of immune evasion used by rotaviruses.

PMCID: PMC2627925
PMID: 19180189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Virol. 2009 Apr;83(8):3977-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02400-08. Epub 2009 Jan 28.

The infected cell protein 0 encoded by bovine herpesvirus 1 (bICP0) associates
with interferon regulatory factor 7 and consequently inhibits beta interferon
promoter activity.

Saira K(1), Zhou Y, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68503, USA.

The bICP0 protein encoded by bovine herpesvirus 1 stimulates productive infection
and viral gene expression but inhibits interferon (IFN)-dependent transcription. 
bICP0 inhibits beta IFN (IFN-beta) promoter activity and induces degradation of
IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Although bICP0 inhibits the trans-activation
activity of IRF7, IRF7 protein levels are not reduced. In this study, we
demonstrate that bICP0 is associated with IRF7. Furthermore, bICP0 inhibits the
ability of IRF7 to trans-activate the IFN-beta promoter in the absence of IRF3
expression. The interaction between bICP0 and IRF7 correlates with reduced
trans-activation of the IFN-beta promoter by IRF7.

PMCID: PMC2663255
PMID: 19176627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nature. 2009 Mar 26;458(7237):514-8. doi: 10.1038/nature07725. Epub 2009 Jan 21.

AIM2 recognizes cytosolic dsDNA and forms a caspase-1-activating inflammasome
with ASC.

Hornung V(1), Ablasser A, Charrel-Dennis M, Bauernfeind F, Horvath G, Caffrey DR,
Latz E, Fitzgerald KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA. 
veit.hornung@uni-bonn.de

The innate immune system senses nucleic acids by germline-encoded pattern
recognition receptors. RNA is sensed by Toll-like receptor members TLR3, TLR7 and
TLR8, or by the RNA helicases RIG-I (also known as DDX58) and MDA-5 (IFIH1).
Little is known about sensors for cytoplasmic DNA that trigger antiviral and/or
inflammatory responses. The best characterized of these responses involves
activation of the TANK-binding kinase (TBK1)-interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) signalling axis to trigger transcriptional induction of type I interferon 
genes. A second, less well-defined pathway leads to the activation of an
'inflammasome' that, via caspase-1, controls the catalytic cleavage of the
pro-forms of the cytokines IL1beta and IL18 (refs 6, 7). Using mouse and human
cells, here we identify the PYHIN (pyrin and HIN domain-containing protein)
family member absent in melanoma 2 (AIM2) as a receptor for cytosolic DNA, which 
regulates caspase-1. The HIN200 domain of AIM2 binds to DNA, whereas the pyrin
domain (but not that of the other PYHIN family members) associates with the
adaptor molecule ASC (apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a
caspase activation and recruitment domain) to activate both NF-kappaB and
caspase-1. Knockdown of Aim2 abrogates caspase-1 activation in response to
cytoplasmic double-stranded DNA and the double-stranded DNA vaccinia virus.
Collectively, these observations identify AIM2 as a new receptor for cytoplasmic 
DNA, which forms an inflammasome with the ligand and ASC to activate caspase-1.

PMCID: PMC2726264
PMID: 19158675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cell Res. 2009 Apr;19(4):412-28. doi: 10.1038/cr.2009.8.

The TAK1-JNK cascade is required for IRF3 function in the innate immune response.

Zhang B(1), Li M, Chen L, Yang K, Shan Y, Zhu L, Sun S, Li L, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai 200031, China.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)3 is critical for the transcriptional induction
of chemokines and cytokines during viral or bacterial invasion. The kinases Tank 
binding kinase (TBK)1 and Ikappa B kinase (IKK)epsilon can phosphorylate the
C-terminal part of IRF3 and play important roles in IRF3 activation. In this
study, we show that another kinase, c-Jun-NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK),
phosphorylates IRF3 on its N-terminal serine 173 residue, and TAK1 can stimulate 
IRF3 phosphorylation via JNK. JNK specific inhibitor SP600125 inhibits the
N-terminal phosphorylation without affecting the C-terminal phosphorylation. In
addition, IRF3-mediated gene expressions on lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or
polyinosinic-cytidylic acid (polyI:C) treatment are severely impaired by
SP600125, as well as for reporter gene assay of IRF3 activation. Knockdown of
TAK1 further confirmed these observations. Interestingly, constitutive active
IRF3(5D) can be inhibited by SP600125; JNK1 can synergize the action of IRF3(5D),
but not the S173A-IRF3(5D) mutant. More importantly, polyI:C failed to induce the
phosphorylation of mutant S173A and SP600125 dramatically abrogated IRF3
phosphorylation and dimerization that was stimulated by polyI:C. Thus, this study
demonstrates that the TAK1-JNK cascade is required for IRF3 function, in addition
to TBK1/IKKvarepsilon, uncovering a new mechanism for mitogen-activated protein
(MAP) kinase to regulate the innate immunity.

PMID: 19153595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Ethnopharmacol. 2009 Feb 25;122(1):149-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2008.12.011. Epub
2008 Dec 25.

Anti-inflammatory activity of a water extract of Acorus calamus L. leaves on
keratinocyte HaCaT cells.

Kim H(1), Han TH, Lee SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, BK21 Graduate Program for Biotechnology, Chonnam 
National University, 300 Yongbong-Dong, Buk-Gu, Gwangju 500-757, Republic of
Korea.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Acorus calamus L., sweet flag, is a well-known
medicinal plant that grows worldwide wildly along swamps, rivers, and lakes.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The aim of this study was to evaluate the anti-inflammatory
activity of Acorus calamus leaf (ACL) extract and to explore its mechanism of
action on human keratinocyte HaCaT cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: HaCaT cells treated with polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid
(polyI:C) and peptidoglycan (PGN) induced the inflammatory reactions. The
anti-inflammatory activities of ACL were investigated using RT-PCR, ELISA assay, 
immunoblotting, and immunofluorescence staining.
RESULTS: HaCaT cells induced the pro-inflammatory cytokines, interleukin-8 (IL-8)
and/or interleukin-6 (IL-6) expressions after treatment with polyI:C or PGN. ACL 
inhibited the expression of IL-8 and IL-6 RNA and protein levels, and attenuated 
the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3 after polyI:C treatment. ACL also inhibited 
expression of IL-8 and activation of NF-kappaB following PGN induction.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that ACL inhibits the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines through multiple mechanisms and may be a novel and
effective anti-inflammatory agent for the treatment of skin diseases.

PMID: 19146941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cell Res. 2009 Jan;19(1):3-4. doi: 10.1038/cr.2009.1.

Inhibition of IRF3-dependent antiviral responses by cellular and viral proteins.

Tsuchida T(1), Kawai T, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, and
Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Japan.

PMID: 19125153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):1088-98.

Induction of proinflammatory cytokines in primary human macrophages by influenza 
A virus (H5N1) is selectively regulated by IFN regulatory factor 3 and p38 MAPK.

Hui KP(1), Lee SM, Cheung CY, Ng IH, Poon LL, Guan Y, Ip NY, Lau AS, Peiris JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.

The hyperinduction of proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines such as TNF-alpha,
IFN-beta, and CCL2/MCP-1 in primary human macrophages and respiratory epithelial 
cells by the highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 is believed to contribute to 
the unusual severity of human H5N1 disease. Here we show that TNF-alpha,
IFN-beta, and IFN-lambda1 are the key mediators directly induced by the H5N1
virus in primary human macrophages. In comparison with human influenza (H1N1),
the H5N1 virus more strongly activated IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). IRF3
knockdown and p38 kinase inhibition separately and in combination led to a
substantial reduction of IFN-beta, IFN-lambda1, and MCP-1 but only to a partial
reduction of TNF-alpha. IRF3 translocation was independent of p38 kinase
activity, indicating that IRF3 and p38 kinase are distinct pathways leading to
cytokine production by H5N1 virus. We conclude that IRF3 and p38 kinase
separately and predominantly contribute to H5N1-mediated induction of IFN-beta,
IFN-lambda1, and MCP-1 but only partly control TNF-alpha induction. A more
precise identification of the differences in the regulation of TNF-alpha and
IFN-beta could provide novel targets for the design of therapeutic strategies for
severe human H5N1 influenza and also for treating other causes of acute
respiratory distress syndrome.

PMID: 19124752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):820-8.

TLR4 ligands induce IFN-alpha production by mouse conventional dendritic cells
and human monocytes after IFN-beta priming.

Richez C(1), Yasuda K, Watkins AA, Akira S, Lafyatis R, van Seventer JM, Rifkin
IR.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Exacerbation of disease in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is associated with 
bacterial infection. In conventional dendritic cells (cDCs), the TLR4 ligand
bacterial LPS induces IFN-beta gene expression but does not induce IFN-alpha. We 
hypothesized that when cDCs are primed by cytokines, as may frequently be the
case in SLE, LPS would then induce the production of IFN-alpha, a cytokine
believed to be important in lupus pathogenesis. In this study we show that mouse 
cDCs and human monocytes produce abundant IFN-alpha following TLR4 engagement
whether the cells have been pretreated either with IFN-beta or with a supernatant
from DCs activated by RNA-containing immune complexes from lupus patients. This
TLR4-induced IFN-alpha induction is mediated by both an initial TRIF-dependent
pathway and a subsequent MyD88-dependent pathway, in contrast to TLR3-induced
IFN-alpha production, which is entirely TRIF-dependent. There is also a distinct 
requirement for IFN regulatory factors (IRFs), with LPS-induced IFN-alpha
induction being entirely IRF7- and partially IRF5-dependent, in contrast to
LPS-induced IFN-beta gene induction which is known to be IRF3-dependent but
largely IRF7-independent. This data demonstrates a novel pathway for IFN-alpha
production by cDCs and provides one possible explanation for how bacterial
infection might precipitate disease flares in SLE.

PMCID: PMC2858919
PMID: 19124725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Cell Host Microbe. 2008 Dec 11;4(6):543-54. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2008.11.002.

TLR-independent type I interferon induction in response to an extracellular
bacterial pathogen via intracellular recognition of its DNA.

Charrel-Dennis M(1), Latz E, Halmen KA, Trieu-Cuot P, Fitzgerald KA, Kasper DL,
Golenbock DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Type I interferon (IFN) is an important host defense cytokine against
intracellular pathogens, mainly viruses. In assessing IFN production in response 
to group B streptococcus (GBS), we find that IFN-beta was produced by macrophages
upon stimulation with both heat-killed and live GBS. Exposure of macrophages to
heat-killed GBS activated a Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent pathway, whereas
live GBS activated a TLR/NOD/RIG-like receptor (RLR)-independent pathway. This
latter pathway required bacterial phagocytosis, proteolytic bacterial
degradation, and phagolysosomal membrane destruction by GBS pore-forming toxins, 
leading to the release of bacterial DNA into the cytosol. GBS DNA in the cytosol 
induced IFN-beta production via a pathway dependent on the activation of the
serine-threonine kinase TBK1 and phosphorylation of the transcription factor
IRF3. Thus, activation of IFN-alpha/-beta production during infection with GBS,
commonly considered an extracellular pathogen, appears to result from the
interaction of GBS DNA with a putative intracellular DNA sensor or receptor.

PMCID: PMC3727391
PMID: 19064255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Dec;4(12):e1000233. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000233. Epub
2008 Dec 5.

FimH adhesin of type 1 fimbriae is a potent inducer of innate antimicrobial
responses which requires TLR4 and type 1 interferon signalling.

Ashkar AA(1), Mossman KL, Coombes BK, Gyles CL, Mackenzie R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Centre for Gene Therapeutics, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Components of bacteria have been shown to induce innate antiviral immunity via
Toll-like receptors (TLRs). We have recently shown that FimH, the adhesin portion
of type 1 fimbria, can induce the innate immune system via TLR4. Here we report
that FimH induces potent in vitro and in vivo innate antimicrobial responses.
FimH induced an innate antiviral state in murine macrophage and primary MEFs
which was correlated with IFN-beta production. Moreover, FimH induced the innate 
antiviral responses in cells from wild type, but not from MyD88(-/-), Trif(-/-), 
IFN-alpha/betaR(-/-) or IRF3(-/-) mice. Vaginal delivery of FimH, but not LPS,
completely protected wild type, but not MyD88(-/-), IFN-alpha/betaR(-/-),
IRF3(-/-) or TLR4(-/-) mice from subsequent genital HSV-2 challenge. The
FimH-induced innate antiviral immunity correlated with the production of
IFN-beta, but not IFN-alpha or IFN-gamma. To examine whether FimH plays a role in
innate immune induction in the context of a natural infection, the innate immune 
responses to wild type uropathogenic E. coli (UPEC) and a FimH null mutant were
examined in the urinary tract of C57Bl/6 (B6) mice and TLR4-deficient mice. While
UPEC expressing FimH induced a robust polymorphonuclear response in B6, but not
TLR4(-/-) mice, mutant bacteria lacking FimH did not. In addition, the presence
of TLR4 was essential for innate control of and protection against UPEC. Our
results demonstrate that FimH is a potent inducer of innate antimicrobial
responses and signals differently, from that of LPS, via TLR4 at mucosal
surfaces. Our studies suggest that FimH can potentially be used as an innate
microbicide against mucosal pathogens.

PMCID: PMC2585055
PMID: 19057665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Virol. 2009 Feb;83(4):1856-69. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01099-08. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

Epstein-Barr virus BGLF4 kinase suppresses the interferon regulatory factor 3
signaling pathway.

Wang JT(1), Doong SL, Teng SC, Lee CP, Tsai CH, Chen MR.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute and Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

The BGLF4 protein kinase of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a member of the conserved
family of herpesvirus protein kinases which, to some extent, have a function
similar to that of the cellular cyclin-dependent kinase in regulating multiple
cellular and viral substrates. In a yeast two-hybrid screening assay, a splicing 
variant of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) was found to interact with
the BGLF4 protein. This interaction was defined further by coimmunoprecipitation 
in transfected cells and glutathione S-transferase (GST) pull-down in vitro.
Using reporter assays, we show that BGLF4 effectively suppresses the activities
of the poly(I:C)-stimulated IFN-beta promoter and IRF3-responsive element.
Moreover, BGLF4 represses the poly(I:C)-stimulated expression of endogenous
IFN-beta mRNA and the phosphorylation of STAT1 at Tyr701. In searching for a
possible mechanism, BGLF4 was shown not to affect the dimerization, nuclear
translocation, or CBP recruitment of IRF3 upon poly(I:C) treatment. Notably,
BGLF4 reduces the amount of active IRF3 recruited to the IRF3-responsive element 
containing the IFN-beta promoter region in a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay.
BGLF4 phosphorylates GST-IRF3 in vitro, but Ser339-Pro340
phosphorylation-dependent, Pin1-mediated downregulation is not responsible for
the repression. Most importantly, we found that three proline-dependent
phosphorylation sites at Ser123, Ser173, and Thr180, which cluster in a region
between the DNA binding and IRF association domains of IRF3, contribute
additively to the BGLF4-mediated repression of IRF3(5D) transactivation activity.
IRF3 signaling is activated in reactivated EBV-positive NA cells, and the
knockdown of BGLF4 further stimulates IRF3-responsive reporter activity. The data
presented here thus suggest a novel mechanism by which herpesviral protein
kinases suppress host innate immune responses and facilitate virus replication.

PMCID: PMC2643756
PMID: 19052084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Immunol. 2009 Jan;46(3):393-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.10.010. Epub 2008
Nov 26.

Characterization of the interferon regulatory factor 3-mediated antiviral
response in a cell line deficient for IFN production.

Chew T(1), Noyce R, Collins SE, Hancock MH, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada.

The innate cellular response to virus particle entry in non-immune cells requires
the transcriptional activity of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), but not
production of type I interferon (IFN). Here, we characterize the IFN-independent 
innate cellular response to virus-derived stimuli in Vero cells, a monkey kidney 
epithelial cell line deficient for IFN production. We provide evidence that Vero 
cells are deficient in their ability to mount an IRF-3-dependent, IFN-independent
antiviral response against either incoming virus particles or
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (pIC), a dsRNA mimetic. We further demonstrate
that abundance of IRF-3 protein is a determinant in the pIC-mediated antiviral
signalling pathway. These observations further characterize the permissive nature
of Vero cells to viral infection, and highlight the crucial involvement of IRF-3 
in the innate antiviral response.

PMID: 19038458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Virol. 2009 Feb;83(3):1299-311. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01659-08. Epub 2008 Nov 26.

MAVS dimer is a crucial signaling component of innate immunity and the target of 
hepatitis C virus NS3/4A protease.

Baril M(1), Racine ME, Penin F, Lamarre D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et en Cancérologie (IRIC), Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

The mitochondrial antiviral signaling (MAVS) protein plays a central role in
innate antiviral immunity. Upon recognition of a virus, intracellular receptors
of the RIG-I-like helicase family interact with MAVS to trigger a signaling
cascade. In this study, we investigate the requirement of the MAVS structure for 
enabling its signaling by structure-function analyses and resonance energy
transfer approaches in live cells. We now report the essential role of the MAVS
oligomer in signal transduction and map the transmembrane domain as the main
determinant of dimerization. A combination of mutagenesis and computational
methods identified a cluster of residues making favorable van der Waals
interactions at the MAVS dimer interface. We also correlated the activation of
IRF3 and NF-kappaB with MAVS oligomerization rather than its mitochondrial
localization. Finally, we demonstrated that MAVS oligomerization is disrupted
upon expression of HCV NS3/4A protease, suggesting a mechanism for the loss of
antiviral signaling. Altogether, our data suggest that the MAVS oligomer is
essential in the formation of a multiprotein membrane-associated signaling
complex and enables downstream activation of IRF3 and NF-kappaB in antiviral
innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC2620913
PMID: 19036819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 16;284(3):1644-51. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807888200. Epub 2008
Nov 20.

The RNA-activated protein kinase enhances the induction of interferon-beta and
apoptosis mediated by cytoplasmic RNA sensors.

McAllister CS(1), Samuel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara, California 93106, USA.

Detection of foreign RNA by the innate immune system can trigger the induction of
type I interferon (IFN) and apoptosis. Important antiviral defense pathways that 
result in type I IFN production following the recognition of foreign
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) include the RIG-I family helicases and IPS-1 adaptor 
cytosolic pathway and the Toll-like receptor 3 and TIR domain-containing
adaptor-inducing IFN-beta (TRIF) adaptor membrane-associated pathway, both of
which activate IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). In addition to triggering an
innate immune response, dsRNAs are widely used to mediate gene-selective
silencing in mammalian cells by the RNA interference pathway. We investigated the
ability of short interfering RNAs, including T7 phage polymerase-synthesized RNA 
(PRNA), which like some viral RNAs contains a 5'-triphosphate, to selectively
silence gene expression and to cause induction of IFN-beta and apoptosis. We
found that PRNA-mediated gene silencing and associated nonspecific pro-apoptotic 
and IFN-inducing effects were dependent on the cell line and RNA length.
Double-stranded PRNAs 50 nucleotides long as well as polyinosinic-polycytidylic
acid activated the RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) and induced significant
levels of IFN-beta and apoptosis, whereas shorter PRNAs and chemically
synthesized dsRNAs did not. Effector caspase activation and apoptosis following
RNA transfection was enhanced by pretreatment with IFN, and removal of the
5'-phosphate from PRNAs decreased induction of both IFN-beta and apoptosis. PKR, 
in addition to IPS-1 and IRF3 but not TRIF, was required for maximal type I
IFN-beta induction and the induction of apoptosis by both transfected PRNAs and
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid.

PMCID: PMC2615529
PMID: 19028691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 1;181(11):8018-26.

SOCS1 regulates the IFN but not NFkappaB pathway in TLR-stimulated human
monocytes and macrophages.

Prêle CM(1), Woodward EA, Bisley J, Keith-Magee A, Nicholson SE, Hart PH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biotechnology, Telethon Institute for Child Health
Research and Centre for Child Health Research, University of Western Australia,
Perth, Australia.

SOCS1 can regulate TLR-mediated signal transduction, yet mechanistic studies in
murine macrophages have been confusing and contradictory. This study has used an 
adenoviral transfection system to determine the role of SOCS1 in the regulation
of TNF-alpha production by activated human monocytes. Monocytes were infected
with AdV-SOCS1 or with an empty vector control, AdV-GFP, for 24 h before
activation with the TLR4 ligand, LPS. SOCS1 did not regulate TNF-alpha mRNA or
protein production within the first two hours of TLR4 activation. However, SOCS1 
suppressed the sustained production of TNF-alpha by primary human monocytes and
synovial fluid macrophages ex vivo. In addition, SOCS1 regulated the production
of IL-6, but not IL-10, by monocytes. Analysis of the early signaling pathway
downstream of TLR4 demonstrated that SOCS1 had no regulatory effect on the
activation or on the DNA binding capacity of NFkappaB. The late effects of LPS
are mediated in part through the MyD88-independent pathway activating IRF3 and
initiating the production of IFN-beta. In response to adenoviral infection and
before LPS exposure, monocytes expressed enhanced levels of IFN-beta and
Myxovirus A mRNA, an anti-viral molecule characterizing IFN-beta activity. These 
two genes were reduced in AdV-SOCS1-infected cells. Further, SOCS1 regulated
IFN-dependent pathways in LPS-activated cells as evidenced by reduced IFN-beta
production and STAT1 phosphorylation. Using AdV-infection to dissect SOCS1
control of IFN-dependent pathways, this study suggests that SOCS1-regulation of
the IFN-dependent component of the LPS-induced TLR4 signaling pathway may
contribute to the down-regulation of inflammatory cytokine production by
AdV-SOCS1-infected human monocytes.

PMCID: PMC3430718
PMID: 19017994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Immunol. 2008 Dec 1;181(11):7917-24.

A novel IFN regulatory factor 3-dependent pathway activated by trypanosomes
triggers IFN-beta in macrophages and fibroblasts.

Chessler AD(1), Ferreira LR, Chang TH, Fitzgerald KA, Burleigh BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Infectious Diseases, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Innate immune recognition of intracellular pathogens involves both extracellular 
and cytosolic surveillance mechanisms. The intracellular protozoan parasite
Trypanosoma cruzi triggers a robust type I IFN response in both immune and
nonimmune cell types. In this study, we report that signaling through TBK1 and
IFN regulatory factor 3 is required for T. cruzi-mediated expression of IFN-beta.
The TLR adaptors MyD88 and TRIF, as well as TLR4 and TLR3, were found to be
dispensable, demonstrating that T. cruzi induces IFN-beta expression in a
TLR-independent manner. The potential role for cytosolic dsRNA sensing pathways
acting through RIG-I and MDA5 was ruled out because T. cruzi was shown to trigger
robust expression of IFN-beta in macrophages lacking the MAVS/IPS1/VISA/CARDif
adaptor protein. The failure of T. cruzi to activate HEK293-IFN-beta-luciferase
cells, which are highly sensitive to cytosolic triggers of IFN-beta expression
including Listeria, Sendai virus, and transfected dsRNA and dsDNA, further
indicates that the parasite does not engage currently recognized cytosolic
surveillance pathways. Together, these findings identify the existence of a novel
TLR-independent pathogen-sensing mechanism in immune and nonimmune cells that
converges on TBK1 and IFN regulatory factor 3 for activation of IFN-beta gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC2597000
PMID: 19017982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Infect Dis. 2009 Jan 1;199(1):20-30. doi: 10.1086/595563.

Common variants in immune and DNA repair genes and risk for human papillomavirus 
persistence and progression to cervical cancer.

Wang SS(1), Bratti MC, Rodríguez AC, Herrero R, Burk RD, Porras C, González P,
Sherman ME, Wacholder S, Lan ZE, Schiffman M, Chanock SJ, Hildesheim A.

Author information: 
(1)Hormonal and Reproductive Epidemiology Branch, Division of Cancer Epidemiology
and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, 6120 Executive Blvd., Rm. 5104,
Rockville, MD 20852-7234, USA. wangso@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: We examined host genetic factors to identify those more common in
individuals whose human papillomavirus (HPV) infections were most likely to
persist and progress to cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 3 (CIN3) and
cancer.
METHODS: We genotyped 92 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from 49 candidate
immune response and DNA repair genes obtained from 469 women with CIN3 or cancer,
390 women with persistent HPV infections (median duration, 25 months), and 452
random control subjects from the 10,049-woman Guanacaste Costa Rica Natural
History Study. We calculated odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for
the association of SNP and haplotypes in women with CIN3 or cancer and HPV
persistence, compared with random control subjects.
RESULTS: A SNP in the Fanconi anemia complementation group A gene (FANCA) (G501S)
was associated with increased risk of CIN3 or cancer. The AG and GG genotypes had
a 1.3-fold (95% CI, 0.95-1.8-fold) and 1.7-fold (95% CI, 1.1-2.6-fold) increased 
risk for CIN3 or cancer, respectively (P(trend) = .008; referent, AA). The FANCA 
haplotype that included G501S also conferred increased risk of CIN3 or cancer, as
did a different haplotype that included 2 other FANCA SNPs (G809A and T266A). A
SNP in the innate immune gene IRF3 (S427T) was associated with increased risk for
HPV persistence (P(trend) = .009).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results require replication but support the role of FANCA
variants in cervical cancer susceptibility and of IRF3 in HPV persistence.

PMCID: PMC3690375
PMID: 19012493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 9;284(2):1097-105. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805905200. Epub 2008
Nov 14.

Control of TANK-binding kinase 1-mediated signaling by the gamma(1)34.5 protein
of herpes simplex virus 1.

Verpooten D(1), Ma Y, Hou S, Yan Z, He B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) is a key component of Toll-like receptor-dependent
and -independent signaling pathways. In response to microbial components, TBK1
activates interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and cytokine expression. Here we 
show that TBK1 is a novel target of the gamma(1)34.5 protein, a virulence factor 
whose expression is regulated in a temporal fashion. Remarkably, the gamma(1)34.5
protein is required to inhibit IRF3 phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and
the induction of antiviral genes in infected cells. When expressed in mammalian
cells, the gamma(1)34.5 protein forms complexes with TBK1 and disrupts the
interaction of TBK1 and IRF3, which prevents the induction of interferon and
interferon-stimulated gene promoters. Down-regulation of TBK1 requires the
amino-terminal domain. In addition, unlike wild type virus, a herpes simplex
virus mutant lacking gamma(1)34.5 replicates efficiently in TBK1(-/-) cells but
not in TBK1(+/+) cells. Addition of exogenous interferon restores the antiviral
activity in both TBK1(-/-) and TBK(+/+) cells. Hence, control of TBK1-mediated
cell signaling by the gamma(1)34.5 protein contributes to herpes simplex virus
infection. These results reveal that TBK1 plays a pivotal role in limiting
replication of a DNA virus.

PMCID: PMC2613634
PMID: 19010780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Int Immunopharmacol. 2009 Jan;9(1):108-12. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2008.10.012.
Epub 2008 Nov 8.

Guggulsterone suppresses the activation of transcription factor IRF3 induced by
TLR3 or TLR4 agonists.

Youn HS(1), Ahn SI, Lee BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences,
Soonchunhyang University, Asan-Si, Chungnam 336-745, Republic of Korea.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are vital in the induction of innate immune responses.
The microbial components trigger the activation of the myeloid differential
factor 88 (MyD88)- and toll-interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adapter
inducing interferon-beta (TRIF)-dependent downstream TLR signaling pathways.
Guggulsterone, which has been used for centuries to treat many chronic diseases, 
inhibits the MyD88-dependent pathway by inhibiting the activity of
inhibitor-kappaB kinase. However, it is not known whether guggulsterone inhibits 
the TRIF-dependent pathway. Presently, we sought to identify the molecular
targets of guggulsterone in this pathway. Guggulsterone inhibited nuclear
factor-kappaB and IRF3 activation induced by lipopolysaccharide or poly[I:C] and 
activation of IRF3 induced by the overexpression of TRIF, TBK1 or constitutively 
active IRF3. Guggulsterone also suppressed the lipopolysaccharide-induced
phosphorylation of IRF3. These results suggest that guggulsterone can modulate
both MyD88- and TRIF-dependent signaling pathways of TLRs leading to decreased
inflammatory gene expression.

PMID: 19000789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Nov;38(11):3150-8. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838559.

IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3/7-dependent and -independent gene induction by
mammalian DNA that escapes degradation.

Okabe Y(1), Kawane K, Nagata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

DNase II in macrophages cleaves the DNA of engulfed apoptotic cells and of nuclei
expelled from erythroid precursor cells. Macrophages in DNase II-deficient mice
accumulate undigested DNA and constitutively produce IFN-beta as well as
TNF-alpha. The IFN-beta causes severe anemia in the DNase II(-/-) embryos, which 
die prenatally. On the other hand, when the DNase II gene is inactivated
postnatally, mice develop polyarthritis owing to the TNF-alpha produced by
macrophages. Here, we showed that the IFN-beta gene activation in DNase II(-/-)
mice is dependent on IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and 7. Accordingly, DNase
II(-/-)IRF3(-/-)IRF7(-/-) mice do not suffer from anemia, but they still produce 
TNF-alpha, and age-dependently develop chronic polyarthritis. A microarray
analysis of the gene expression in the fetal liver revealed a set of genes that
is induced in DNase II(-/-) mice in an IRF3/IRF7-dependent manner, and another
set that is induced independent of these factors. These results indicate that the
mammalian chromosomal DNA that accumulates in macrophages due to inefficient
degradation activates genes in both IRF3/IRF7-dependent and -independent manners.

PMID: 18991290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Virol. 2009 Jan;83(2):836-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01388-08. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Differential expression of the CXCR3 ligands in chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection and their modulation by HCV in vitro.

Helbig KJ(1), Ruszkiewicz A, Lanford RE, Berzsenyi MD, Harley HA, McColl SR,
Beard MR.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Laboratories, Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science,
Adelaide 5000,South Australia.

To investigate chemokine expression networks in chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection, we used microarray analysis to determine chemokine expression in human
infection and in chimpanzees experimentally infected with HCV. The CXCR3
chemokine family was highly expressed in both human and chimpanzee infection.
CXCL10 was the only CXCR3 chemokine elevated in the serum, suggesting that it may
neutralize any CXCR3 chemokine gradient established between the periphery and
liver by CXCL11 and CXCL9. Thus, CXCR3 chemokines may not be responsible for
recruitment of T lymphocytes but may play a role in positioning these cells
within the liver. The importance of the CXCR3 chemokines, in particular CXCL11,
was highlighted by replicating HCV (JFH-1) to selectively upregulate its
expression in response to gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) and tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-alpha). This selective upregulation was confirmed at the
transcriptional level by using the CXCL11 promoter driving the luciferase
reporter gene. This synergistic increase in expression was not a result of HCV
protein expression but the nonspecific innate response to double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA), as both in vitro-transcribed HCV RNA and the dsRNA analogue poly(I:C)
increased CXCL11 expression and promoter activity. Furthermore, we show that
CXCL11 is an IRF3 (interferon regulatory factor 3) response gene whose expression
is selectively enhanced by IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha. In conclusion, the CXCR3
chemokines are the most significantly expressed chemokines in chronic hepatitis C
and most likely play a role in positioning T cells in the liver. Furthermore, HCV
can selectively increase CXCL11 expression in response to IFN-gamma and TNF-alpha
stimulation that may play a role in the pathogenesis of HCV-related liver
disease.

PMCID: PMC2612358
PMID: 18987152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Virol. 2009 Jan;83(2):817-29. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01509-08. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Classical swine fever virus can remain virulent after specific elimination of the
interferon regulatory factor 3-degrading function of Npro.

Ruggli N(1), Summerfield A, Fiebach AR, Guzylack-Piriou L, Bauhofer O, Lamm CG,
Waltersperger S, Matsuno K, Liu L, Gerber M, Choi KH, Hofmann MA, Sakoda Y,
Tratschin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunoprophylaxis, Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.
nicolas.ruggli@ivi.admin.ch

Pestiviruses prevent alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) production by
promoting proteasomal degradation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) by
means of the viral N(pro) nonstructural protein. N(pro) is also an autoprotease, 
and its amino-terminal coding sequence is involved in translation initiation. We 
previously showed with classical swine fever virus (CSFV) that deletion of the
entire N(pro) gene resulted in attenuation in pigs. In order to elaborate on the 
role of the N(pro)-mediated IRF3 degradation in classical swine fever
pathogenesis, we searched for minimal amino acid substitutions in N(pro) that
would specifically abrogate this function. Our mutational analyses showed that
degradation of IRF3 and autoprotease activity are two independent but
structurally overlapping functions of N(pro). We describe two mutations in N(pro)
that eliminate N(pro)-mediated IRF3 degradation without affecting the
autoprotease activity. We also show that the conserved standard sequence at these
particular positions is essential for N(pro) to interact with IRF3. Surprisingly,
when these two mutations are introduced independently in the backbones of highly 
and moderately virulent CSFV, the resulting viruses are not attenuated, or are
only partially attenuated, in 8- to 10-week-old pigs. This contrasts with the
fact that these mutant viruses have lost the capacity to degrade IRF3 and to
prevent IFN-alpha/beta induction in porcine cell lines and monocyte-derived
dendritic cells. Taken together, these results demonstrate that contrary to
previous assumptions and to the case for other viral systems, impairment of
IRF3-dependent IFN-alpha/beta induction is not a prerequisite for CSFV virulence.

PMCID: PMC2612357
PMID: 18987150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 26;283(52):36211-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806576200. Epub 2008
Nov 4.

TRAF6 and MEKK1 play a pivotal role in the RIG-I-like helicase antiviral pathway.

Yoshida R(1), Takaesu G, Yoshida H, Okamoto F, Yoshioka T, Choi Y, Akira S, Kawai
T, Yoshimura A, Kobayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 25;284(52):36720.

Type I interferons (IFN-alpha/beta) are essential for immune defense against
viruses and induced through the actions of the cytoplasmic helicases, RIG-I and
MDA5, and their downstream adaptor molecule IPS-1. TRAF6 and the downstream
kinase TAK1 have been shown to be essential for the production of proinflammatory
cytokines through the TLR/MyD88/TRIF pathway. Although binding of TRAF6 with
IPS-1 has been demonstrated, the role of the TRAF6 pathway in IFN-alpha/beta
production has not been fully understood. Here, we demonstrate that TRAF6 is
critical for IFN-alpha/beta induction in response to viral infection and
intracellular double-stranded RNA, poly(I:C). Activation of NF-kappaB, JNK, and
p38, but not IRF3, was impaired in TRAF6-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts in
response to vesicular stomatitis virus and poly(I:C). However, TAK1 was not
required for IFN-beta induction in this process, since normal IFN-alpha/beta
production was observed in TAK1-deficient mouse embryo fibroblasts. Instead,
another MAP3K, MEKK1, was important for the activation of the IFN-beta promoter
in response to poly(I:C). Forced expression of MEKK1 in combination with IRF3 was
sufficient for the induction of IFN-beta, whereas suppression of MEKK1 expression
by small interfering RNA inhibited the induction of IFN-beta by poly(I:C). These 
data suggest that IPS-1 requires TRAF6 and MEKK1 to activate NF-kappaB and
mitogen-activated protein kinases that are critical for the optimal induction of 
type I interferons.

PMCID: PMC2662295
PMID: 18984593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 15;181(10):7186-93.

Chlamydia pneumoniae-induced foam cell formation requires MyD88-dependent and
-independent signaling and is reciprocally modulated by liver X receptor
activation.

Chen S(1), Sorrentino R, Shimada K, Bulut Y, Doherty TM, Crother TR, Arditi M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center and David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los
Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

Chlamydia pneumoniae is detected by macrophages and other APCs via TLRs and can
exacerbate developing atherosclerotic lesions, but how that occurs is not known. 
Liver X receptors (LXRs) centrally control reverse cholesterol transport, but
also negatively modulate TLR-mediated inflammatory pathways. We isolated
peritoneal macrophages from wild-type, TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, TLR2/4, MyD88, TRIF,
MyD88/TRIF, and IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) KO mice, treated them with live or
UV-killed C. pneumoniae in the presence or absence of oxidized LDL, then measured
foam cell formation. In some experiments, the synthetic LXR agonist GW3965 was
added to macrophages infected with C. pneumoniae in the presence of oxidized LDL.
Both live and UV-killed C. pneumoniae induced IRF3 activation and promoted foam
cell formation in wild-type macrophages, whereas the genetic absence of TLR2,
TLR4, MyD88, TRIF, or IRF3, but not TLR3, significantly reduced foam cell
formation. C. pneumoniae-induced foam cell formation was significantly reduced by
the LXR agonist GW3965, which in turn inhibited C. pneumoniae-induced IRF3
activation, suggesting a bidirectional cross-talk. We conclude that C. pneumoniae
facilitates foam cell formation via activation of both MyD88-dependent and
MyD88-independent (i.e., TRIF-dependent and IRF3-dependent) pathways downstream
of TLR2 and TLR4 signaling and that TLR3 is not involved in this process. This
mechanism could at least partly explain why infection with C. pneumoniae
accelerates the development of atherosclerotic plaque and lends support to the
proposal that LXR agonists might prove clinically useful in suppressing
atherogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2662697
PMID: 18981140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 19;283(51):35590-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805775200. Epub 2008 
Oct 31.

Negative regulation of virus-triggered IFN-beta signaling pathway by alternative 
splicing of TBK1.

Deng W(1), Shi M, Han M, Zhong J, Li Z, Li W, Hu Y, Yan L, Wang J, He Y, Tang H, 
Deubel V, Luo X, Ning Q, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Induction of Type I IFNs is a central event in antiviral responses and must be
tightly controlled. The protein kinase TBK1 is critically involved in
virus-triggered type I IFN signaling. In this study, we identify an alternatively
spliced isoform of TBK1, termed TBK1s, which lacks exons 3-6. Upon Sendai virus
(SeV) infection, TBK1s is induced in both human and mouse cells and binds to
RIG-1, disrupting the interaction between RIG-I and VISA. Consistent with that
result, overexpression of TBK1s inhibits IRF3 nuclear translocation and leads to 
a shutdown of SeV-triggered IFN-beta production. Taken together, our data
indicate that TBK1s plays an inhibitory role in virus-triggered IFN-beta
signaling pathways.

PMID: 18977754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Cell Res. 2008 Nov;18(11):1105-13. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.294.

PLP2, a potent deubiquitinase from murine hepatitis virus, strongly inhibits
cellular type I interferon production.

Zheng D(1), Chen G, Guo B, Cheng G, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infection and Immunity, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 15 Da Tun Road, Chaoyang District, Beijing 100101, China.

Infections by coronaviruses such as severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
coronavirus (SCoV) and mouse hepatitis virus A59 (MHV-A59) result in very little 
type I interferon (IFN) production by host cells, which is potentially
responsible for the rapid viral growth and severe immunopathology associated with
SARS. However, the molecular mechanisms for the low IFN production in cells
infected with coronaviruses remain unclear. Here, we provide evidence that
Papain-like protease domain 2 (PLP2), a catalytic domain of the nonstructural
protein 3 (nsp3) of MHV-A59, can bind to IRF3, cause its deubiquitination and
prevent its nuclear translocation. As a consequence, co-expression of PLP2
strongly inhibits CARDIF-, TBK1- and IRF3-mediated IFNbeta reporter activities.
In addition, we show that wild-type PLP2 but not the mutant PLP2 lacking the
deubiquitinase (DUB) activity can reduce IFN induction and promote viral growth
in cells infected with VSV. Thus, our study uncovered a viral DUB which
coronaviruses may use to escape from the host innate antiviral responses.

PMID: 18957937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Immunity. 2008 Oct 17;29(4):513-5. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.09.010.

MITAgating viral infection.

Zeng W(1), Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2008 Oct 17;29(4):538-50.
    Immunity. 2007 Sep;27(3):370-83.

Two recent papers, one in this issue of Immunity (Zhong et al., 2008), report the
identification of a membrane protein, termed MITA or STING, that activates the
transcription factor IRF3 to induce type-I interferons to mitigate viral
infection.

PMID: 18957261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 1;181(9):6563-73.

Activation of an immunoregulatory and antiviral gene expression program in
poly(I:C)-transfected human neutrophils.

Tamassia N(1), Le Moigne V, Rossato M, Donini M, McCartney S, Calzetti F, Colonna
M, Bazzoni F, Cassatella MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.

Neutrophils, historically known for their involvement in acute inflammation, are 
also targets for infection by many different DNA and RNA viruses. However, the
mechanisms by which they recognize and respond to viral components are poorly
understood. Polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)) is a synthetic mimetic of
viral dsRNA that is known to interact either with endosomal TLR3 (not expressed
by human neutrophils) or with cytoplasmic RNA helicases such as melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) and retinoic acid-inducible gene I
(RIG-I). In this study, we report that intracellularly administered poly(I:C)
stimulates human neutrophils to specifically express elevated mRNA levels
encoding type I IFNs, immunoregulatory cytokines, and chemokines, such as
TNF-alpha, IL-12p40, CXCL10, CXCL8, CCL4, and CCL20, as well as classical
IFN-responsive genes (IRG), including IFIT1 (IFN-induced protein with
tetratricopeptide repeats 1)/IFN-stimulated gene (ISG)56, G1P2/ISG15, PKR
(dsRNA-dependent protein kinase), and IFN-regulatory factor (IRF)7.
Investigations into the mechanisms whereby transfected poly(I:C) promotes gene
expression in neutrophils uncovered a crucial involvement of the MAPK-, PKR-,
NF-kappaB-, and TANK (TNF receptor-associated NF-kappaB kinase)-binding kinase
(TBK1)/IRF3-signaling transduction pathways, as illustrated by the use of
specific pharmacological inhibitors. Consistent with the requirement of the
cytoplasmic dsRNA pathway for antiviral signaling, human neutrophils were found
to constitutively express significant levels of both MDA5 and RIG-I, but not
TLR3. Accordingly, neutrophils isolated from MDA5-deficient mice had a partial
impairment in the production of IFN-beta and TNF-alpha upon infection with
encephalomyocarditis virus. Taken together, our data demonstrate that neutrophils
are able to activate antiviral responses via helicase recognition, thus acting at
the frontline of immunity against viruses.

PMID: 18941247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 1;181(9):6427-34.

Receptor-interacting protein homotypic interaction motif-dependent control of
NF-kappa B activation via the DNA-dependent activator of IFN regulatory factors.

Kaiser WJ(1), Upton JW, Mocarski ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Vaccine Center, Emory
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

DNA-dependent activator of IFN regulatory factors (IRF; DAI, also known as ZBP1
or DLM-1) is a cytosolic DNA sensor that initiates IRF3 and NF-kappaB pathways
leading to activation of type I IFNs (IFNalpha, IFNbeta) and other cytokines. In 
this study, induction of NF-kappaB is shown to depend on the adaptor
receptor-interacting protein kinase (RIP)1, acting via a RIP homotypic
interaction motif (RHIM)-dependent interaction with DAI. DAI binds to and
colocalizes with endogenous RIP1 at characteristic cytoplasmic granules.
Suppression of RIP1 expression by RNAi abrogates NF-kappaB activation as well as 
IFNbeta induction by immunostimulatory DNA. DAI also interacts with RIP3 and this
interaction potentiates DAI-mediated activation of NF-kappaB, implicating RIP3 in
regulating this RHIM-dependent pathway. The role of DAI in activation of
NF-kappaB in response to immunostimulatory DNA appears to be analogous to sensing
of dsRNA by TLR3 in that both pathways involve RHIM-dependent signaling that is
mediated via RIP1, reinforcing a central role for this adaptor in innate sensing 
of intracellular microbes.

PMCID: PMC3104927
PMID: 18941233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mol Immunol. 2009 Feb;46(5):821-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.09.007. Epub 2008
Oct 18.

Cigarette smoke attenuation of poly I:C-induced innate antiviral responses in
human PBMC is mainly due to inhibition of IFN-beta production.

Mian MF(1), Stämpfli MR, Mossman KL, Ashkar AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Centre for Gene Therapeutics, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The cellular response to dsRNA or its synthetic analog polyinosinic-polycytidylic
acid (poly I:C) results in IRF-3-, IRF-7- and NF-kB-mediated activation of type 1
IFNs and pro-inflammatory cytokines critical for innate antiviral immune
responses. To investigate whether cigarette smoke compromises type 1 IFN
signaling in humans, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from non-smoking 
individuals were treated with smoke-conditioned media (SCM) and stimulated with
poly I:C. We observed a marked attenuation of IRF-3 and NF-kB activation in PBMCs
exposed to SCM compared to control PBMCs. Similarly, PBMCs from smokers or
splenocytes from smoke-exposed mice also displayed marked reduction of poly
I:C-induced antiviral responses compared with either non-smokers or sham-exposed 
mice. Cigarette smoke was found to block the production of type I IFNs following 
poly I:C treatment and inhibit subsequent STAT1 activation. Finally, we confirmed
that inhibition of IFN-beta, but not IFN-alpha, predominantly contributes to the 
cigarette smoke-mediated suppression of innate antiviral responses. These
findings provide novel mechanistic insights to the susceptibility of cigarette
smokers to viral infections.

PMID: 18930547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003430. Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Signaling flux redistribution at toll-like receptor pathway junctions.

Selvarajoo K(1), Takada Y, Gohda J, Helmy M, Akira S, Tomita M, Tsuchiya M, Inoue
J, Matsuo K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, Tsuruoka, Japan.
kumar@ttck.keio.ac.jp

Various receptors on cell surface recognize specific extracellular molecules and 
trigger signal transduction altering gene expression in the nucleus. Gain or
loss-of-function mutations of one molecule have shown to affect alternative
signaling pathways with a poorly understood mechanism. In Toll-like receptor
(TLR) 4 signaling, which branches into MyD88- and TRAM-dependent pathways upon
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) stimulation, we investigated the gain or
loss-of-function mutations of MyD88. We predict, using a computational model
built on the perturbation-response approach and the law of mass conservation,
that removal and addition of MyD88 in TLR4 activation, enhances and impairs,
respectively, the alternative TRAM-dependent pathway through signaling flux
redistribution (SFR) at pathway branches. To verify SFR, we treated
MyD88-deficient macrophages with LPS and observed enhancement of TRAM-dependent
pathway based on increased IRF3 phosphorylation and induction of Cxcl10 and
Ifit2. Furthermore, increasing the amount of MyD88 in cultured cells showed
decreased TRAM binding to TLR4. Investigating another TLR4 pathway junction, from
TRIF to TRAF6, RIP1 and TBK1, the removal of MyD88-dependent TRAF6 increased
expression of TRAM-dependent Cxcl10 and Ifit2. Thus, we demonstrate that SFR is a
novel mechanism for enhanced activation of alternative pathways when molecules at
pathway junctions are removed. Our data suggest that SFR may enlighten hitherto
unexplainable intracellular signaling alterations in genetic diseases where gain 
or loss-of-function mutations are observed.

PMCID: PMC2561291
PMID: 18927610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Dec 12;377(2):384-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.09.147. Epub 2008 Oct 11.

Characterization of a novel isoform of murine interferon regulatory factor 3.

Zhai J(1), Gao D, Liu W, Hong R, Qin Y, Ouyang H, Kong Y, Wang Y, Xie Y, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes of Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, China.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRFs) are a family of transcription
mediators involved in the regulation of type I IFN (IFN-alpha/beta)
transcription. Among the nine already identified IRFs, IRF-3 is a constitutively 
and ubiquitously expressed and plays a critical role in the transcriptional
activation of type I IFN and IFN-stimulated genes including IFN-alpha1, IFN-beta 
and RANTES. In the present study, we report the identification of a novel
alternatively spliced transcript of murine Irf-3 gene (mIrf-3) designated
mIRF-3a. mIRF-3a is ubiquitously present in mouse tissues along with mIRF-3 and
could be translocated into the nucleus in uninfected L929 cells. EMSA and
reporter assay demonstrated that mIRF-3a binds to ISRE sequences in murine
Ifn-beta promoter and represses Ifn-beta promoter activation induced by Newcastle
disease virus infection. These results suggest that mIRF-3a may act as a
modulator of mIRF-3 functions in vivo.

PMID: 18851954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 5;283(49):33858-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806923200. Epub 2008 
Oct 10.

FLN29 deficiency reveals its negative regulatory role in the Toll-like receptor
(TLR) and retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like helicase signaling pathway.

Sanada T(1), Takaesu G, Mashima R, Yoshida R, Kobayashi T, Yoshimura A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cellular Immunology, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

FLN29 was identified as an interferon (IFN)-inducible gene, and it has been shown
to suppress Toll-like receptor 4-mediated NF-kappaB activation by binding to
TRAF6. To elucidate the physiological roles of FLN29, we generated
FLN29-deficient mice. FLN29 deficiency resulted in hyper-response to LPS both in 
vivo and in vitro, demonstrating the negative regulatory role of FLN29 in TLR4
signaling. Furthermore, we found that FLN29(-/-) mice exhibited increased
susceptibility to poly(I:C)-induced septic shock compared with WT mice.
FLN29(-/-) fibroblasts were highly resistant to vesicular stomatitis virus
infection, and these cells produced more IFN-beta than WT cells did in response
to not only intracellular poly(I:C) but also overexpression of IPS-1. Forced
expression of FLN29 inhibited the IPS-1-dependent activation of both NF-kappaB
and IRF3. We also found that FLN29 could interact with TRIF, IPS-1, TRAF3, and
TRAF6. Together, these results suggest that FLN29, in addition to playing a
negative regulatory role in the TLR4 signaling pathway, negatively regulates the 
RIG-I-like helicase signaling pathway at the level of IPS-1/TRAF6 and IPS-1/TRAF3
complexes.

PMCID: PMC2662213
PMID: 18849341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2008 Nov;15(11):1213-20. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1496. Epub 2008
Oct 5.

Insights into interferon regulatory factor activation from the crystal structure 
of dimeric IRF5.

Chen W(1), Lam SS, Srinath H, Jiang Z, Correia JJ, Schiffer CA, Fitzgerald KA,
Lin K, Royer WE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, 364 Plantation Street, 
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are essential in the innate immune response 
and other physiological processes. Activation of these proteins in the cytoplasm 
is triggered by phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues in a C-terminal 
autoinhibitory region, which stimulates dimerization, transport into the nucleus,
assembly with the coactivator CBP/p300 and initiation of transcription. The
crystal structure of the transactivation domain of pseudophosphorylated human
IRF5 strikingly reveals a dimer in which the bulk of intersubunit interactions
involve a highly extended C-terminal region. The corresponding region has
previously been shown to block CBP/p300 binding to unphosphorylated IRF3.
Mutation of key interface residues supports the observed dimer as the
physiologically activated state of IRF5 and IRF3. Thus, phosphorylation is likely
to activate IRF5 and other family members by triggering conformational
rearrangements that switch the C-terminal segment from an autoinihibitory to a
dimerization role.

PMCID: PMC2757928
PMID: 18836453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Blood. 2008 Dec 15;112(13):4961-70. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-03-144022. Epub 2008 
Sep 25.

CaMKII promotes TLR-triggered proinflammatory cytokine and type I interferon
production by directly binding and activating TAK1 and IRF3 in macrophages.

Liu X(1), Yao M, Li N, Wang C, Zheng Y, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Calcium and its major downstream effector, calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase II (CaMKII), are found to be important for the functions of immune cells. 
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) has been shown to induce intracellular calcium release
in macrophages; however, whether and how CaMKII is required for Toll-like
receptor (TLR) signaling remain unknown. Here we demonstrate that TLR 4, 9, and 3
ligands markedly induce intracellular calcium fluxes and activate CaMKII-alpha in
macrophages. Selective inhibition or RNA interference of CaMKII significantly
suppresses TLR4, 9, 3-triggered production of interleukin-6 (IL-6), tumor
necrosis factor-alpha, and interferon-alpha/beta (IFN-alpha/beta) in macrophages.
Coincidently, overexpression of constitutively active CaMKII-alpha significantly 
enhances production of the above cytokines. In addition to the activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinase and nuclear factor kappaB pathways, CaMKII-alpha
can directly bind and phosphorylate transforming growth factor beta-activated
kinase 1 (TAK1) and IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3; serine on 386) via the
N-terminal part of its regulatory domain. Therefore, CaMKII can be activated by
TLR ligands, and in turn promotes both myeloid differentiating factor 88 and
Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor protein-inducing IFN-beta-dependent 
inflammatory responses by directly activating TAK1 and IRF3. The cross-talk with 
the calcium/CaMKII pathway is needed for full activation of TLR signaling in
macrophages.

PMID: 18818394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Immunity. 2008 Oct 17;29(4):538-50. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.09.003. Epub 2008 
Sep 25.

The adaptor protein MITA links virus-sensing receptors to IRF3 transcription
factor activation.

Zhong B(1), Yang Y, Li S, Wang YY, Li Y, Diao F, Lei C, He X, Zhang L, Tien P,
Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2008 Oct 17;29(4):513-5.

Viral infection triggers activation of transcription factors such as NF-kappaB
and IRF3, which collaborate to induce type I interferons (IFNs) and elicit innate
antiviral response. Here, we identified MITA as a critical mediator of
virus-triggered type I IFN signaling by expression cloning. Overexpression of
MITA activated IRF3, whereas knockdown of MITA inhibited virus-triggered
activation of IRF3, expression of type I IFNs, and cellular antiviral response.
MITA was found to localize to the outer membrane of mitochondria and to be
associated with VISA, a mitochondrial protein that acts as an adaptor in
virus-triggered signaling. MITA also interacted with IRF3 and recruited the
kinase TBK1 to the VISA-associated complex. MITA was phosphorylated by TBK1,
which is required for MITA-mediated activation of IRF3. Our results suggest that 
MITA is a critical mediator of virus-triggered IRF3 activation and IFN expression
and further demonstrate the importance of certain mitochondrial proteins in
innate antiviral immunity.

PMID: 18818105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Immunol. 2008 Dec;46(2):269-85. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.08.265. Epub 2008 
Sep 20.

Molecular characterization of IRF3 and IRF7 in rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus
mykiss: functional analysis and transcriptional modulation.

Holland JW(1), Bird S, Williamson B, Woudstra C, Mustafa A, Wang T, Zou J, Blaney
SC, Collet B, Secombes CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, Aberdeen University, Aberdeen AB24
2TZ, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRF) 3 and 7 in mammals are known to be crucial in
regulating the type I interferon (IFN) response to viral infection as part of
transcriptional complexes binding to IRF-binding elements (IRF-Es) and interferon
stimulatory response elements (ISREs) within IFN and interferon-stimulated genes 
(ISGs). Here we report the sequencing and characterization of full-length cDNA
homologues of rainbow trout (rt)IRF7 and, for the first time in fish, IRF3.
RtIRF3 consists of 2127 bp with a 159 bp 5'-UTR-containing two upstream AUGs and 
a 573 bp 3'-UTR. RtIRF7 was found to be 2055 bp, with a 102 bp 5'-UTR and a 705
bp 3'-UTR. The open reading frames (ORFs) translate into 464 amino acid and 415
amino acid proteins, respectively, each possessing a putative DNA-binding domain 
(DBD) containing a tryptophan cluster, which is characteristic of all IRF family 
members. The presence of putative IRF association domain (IAD)s, serine-rich C
terminal domains (poorly conserved in trout IRF3), and phylogenetic analysis
places the two genes in the IRF3 subfamily. Both genes were found to be
upregulated by poly I:C, type I recombinant rainbow trout (r) IFN (second
isoform, type I rIFN), type II rIFN (rIFNgamma), LPS, and rIL-1beta in the trout 
macrophage cell line, RTS-11. Poly I:C and type I rIFN also induced IRF3 and IRF7
expression in a trout fibroblast cell line (RTG-2). Transient transfection of
RTG-2 cells with each IRF fused to GFP revealed a predominant cytoplasmic
distribution found most intensely around the nucleus and, to a lesser extent,
within cell nuclei. Transient transfection of rtIRF3 in the Mx-1-luciferase
reporter cell line, RTG-P1, revealed a modest increase in luciferase activity
relative to the vehicle control, which was lost in cells over-expressing a
DBD-truncated form of rtIRF3. Both full-length and DBD-truncated forms of rtIRF7 
increased reporter activity relative to the control, although to a
non-significant extent. Electromobility shift assays (EMSAs) did not reveal a
specific interaction between each IRF and the ISRE element found in the Mx-1
promoter, although the Mx-1 ISRE bound specifically to endogenous transcriptional
complexes. These data support the premise that rtIRF3 and rtIRF7 are important
molecules in the regulation of antiviral responses in fish, with the impact of
rIFNgamma on rtIRF3/7 expression implying a role for these IRFs in immune
processes other than type I IFN-driven antiviral responses.

PMID: 18805586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 1;181(7):4523-33.

Promoter analysis reveals critical roles for SMAD-3 and ATF-2 in expression of
IL-23 p19 in macrophages.

Al-Salleeh F(1), Petro TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology and Nebraska Center for Virology, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.

IL-23 p19/p40, produced by macrophages and dendritic cells, is critical for
development of Th17 in several autoimmune diseases. In this study, bone
marrow-derived (BMM) and splenic macrophages (SPM) from SJL/J mice, susceptible
to autoimmune demyelinating disease following Theiler's virus (TMEV) infection,
expressed IL-23 in response to TMEV. We identified potential binding sites for
IFN response factor (IRF)-3 (nt -734 to -731), Sma- and Mad-related protein
(SMAD)-3 (nt -584 to -581), activating transcription factor (ATF)-2 (nt -571 to
-568), IRF-7 (nt -533 to-525), and NF-kappaB (nt -215 to -209) in the murine p19 
promoter. The p19(prom) in the pGL3 promoter-reporter vector responded to TMEV or
poly(I:C), a TLR3 agonist in the RAW264.7 macrophage cell line. Deletions
upstream from the IRF-3 site and mutations at the IRF-3, SMAD-3, ATF-2, or
NF-kappaB, but not the IRF-7, sites significantly reduced promoter activity.
ATF-2 or SMAD-3, but not IRF-3, short-hairpin RNA reduced p19 promoter activity
and protein expression in RAW264.7 cells responding to TMEV. Chromosomal DNA
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that SMAD-3 and ATF-2 bind to the endogenous 
p19 promoter in RAW264.7 cells and SJL/J SPM following challenge with TMEV.
TGF-beta1, which activates SMAD-3, was induced in RAW264.7 cells, BMM, and SPM by
TMEV. Neutralizing Ab to TGF-beta1 eliminated TMEV-induced IL-23 production and
SMAD-3 activation in RAW264.7 cells, BMM, and SPM. Activation of ATF-2 was JNK,
but not p38 or ERK MAPK dependent. Inhibition of the JNK, but also the ERK MAPK
pathways decreased expression of p19. These results suggest that ATF-2 and SMAD-3
are transcription factors, which are, in addition to NF-kappaB, essential for
IL-23 p19 expression.

PMID: 18802055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Hepatology. 2008 Oct;48(4):1224-31. doi: 10.1002/hep.22470.

The critical role of toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 in alcoholic liver disease is
independent of the common TLR adapter MyD88.

Hritz I(1), Mandrekar P, Velayudham A, Catalano D, Dolganiuc A, Kodys K,
Kurt-Jones E, Szabo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, University
of Massachusetts, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) that recognizes endotoxin, a trigger of
inflammation in alcoholic liver disease (ALD), activates two signaling pathways
utilizing different adapter molecules: the common TLR adapter, myeloid
differentiation factor 88 (MyD88), or Toll/interleukin
immune-response-domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon (IFN)-beta. The
MyD88 pathway induces proinflammatory cytokine activation, a critical mediator of
ALD. Here we evaluated the role of MyD88 in alcohol-induced liver injury in
wild-type, TLR2-deficient, TLR4-deficient, or MyD88-deficient (knockout [KO])
mice after administration of the Lieber-De-Carli diet (4.5% volume/volume
ethanol) or an isocaloric liquid control diet for 5 weeks. Alcohol feeding
resulted in a significant increase in serum alanine aminotransferase levels,
liver steatosis and triglyceride levels suggesting liver damage in WT, TLR2-KO,
and MyD88-KO but not in TLR4-KO mice. Expression of inflammatory mediators (tumor
necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6) and TLR4 coreceptors (CD14 and MD2) was 
significantly higher in livers of alcohol-fed WT, TLR2-KO, or MyD88-KO, but not
in TLR4-KO mice, compared to controls. Reactive oxygen radicals produced by
cytochrome P450 and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate complexes
contribute to alcoholic liver damage. Alcohol feeding-induced expression and
activation of cytochrome P450 and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
complex were prevented by TLR4-deficiency but not by MyD88-deficiency. Liver
expression of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a MyD88-independent
signaling molecule, was not affected by chronic alcohol treatment in whole livers
of WT mice or in any of the KO mice. However, the induction of IRF7, an
IRF3-inducible gene, was found in Kupffer cells of alcohol-fed WT mice. Alcohol
feeding also induced nuclear factor-kappaB activation in a TLR4-dependent
MyD88-independent manner.CONCLUSION: While TLR4 deficiency was protective, MyD88 
deficiency failed to prevent alcohol-induced liver damage and inflammation. These
results suggest that the common TLR adapter, MyD88, is dispensable in
TLR4-mediated liver injury in ALD.

PMID: 18792393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Curr Mol Med. 2008 Sep;8(6):551-61.

Genetic susceptibility to autoimmune disorders: clues from gene association and
gene expression studies.

Gutierrez-Roelens I(1), Lauwerys BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université
Catholique de Louvain, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Susceptibility to autoimmune disorders results from the interaction of multiple
genetic factors that regulate the threshold of autoreactivity. Genome-wide
microsatellite screens and large-scale single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
association studies have identified chromosomal loci that are associated with
specific disorders including systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, 
juvenile arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and diabetes. Numerous candidate gene
association studies have in turn investigated the association of specific genes
within these chromosomal regions, with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases
(e.g. FcgammaReceptors, TYK2 and systemic lupus). More recently, large-scale
differential gene expression studies performed on selected tissues from patients 
with autoimmune disorders, have led to the identification of gene signatures
associated with the activation of specific pathways in these diseases (e.g.
interferon signature in lupus). In the future, integrated analyses of gene (and
protein) expression together with SNP data will allow us to sketch an
intelligible picture of the genesis of autoimmunity in humans. This review sets
out to illustrate how the most recent advances in the field of systemic lupus
erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis and juvenile arthritis have led to a better
understanding of these disorders.

PMID: 18781962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Ther. 2008 Nov;16(11):1789-97. doi: 10.1038/mt.2008.201. Epub 2008 Sep 9.

Inhibition of the IFN-beta response in hepatocellular carcinoma by alternative
spliced isoform of IFN regulatory factor-3.

Marozin S(1), Altomonte J, Stadler F, Thasler WE, Schmid RM, Ebert O.

Author information: 
(1)II. Medizinische Klinik und Poliklinik, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical
University of Munich, Munich, Germany.

The intrinsic oncolytic specificity of vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) is
currently being exploited to develop alternative therapeutic strategies for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We have observed earlier that, in contrast to
cultured human HCC cells, primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) are refractory to VSV 
infection. Impairment of the type I interferon (IFN) pathway in HCC cells has
been suggested to be the mechanism by which these cells become susceptible to VSV
infection. The goal of this study was to elucidate the nature of the IFN defect
in human HCC. We demonstrate here that the defect in IFN-beta signaling in HCC
cells results from a deregulated IFN regulatory factor-3 (IRF3) pathway.
Expression of IRF3-spliced variant (IRF3-nirs3) was constitutively observed in
HCC cells and, importantly, also in primary HCC samples. In contrast, IRF3 was
readily activated in PHHs after stimulation with dsRNA or infection with VSV. In 
addition, overexpression of IRF3-nirs3 significantly abrogated the IFN-beta
response to VSV infection and improved viral growth. Our data provide evidence
that aberrant splicing of IRF3 in HCC contributes to the defect in IFN-mediated
antiviral defenses. This work may provide a potential molecular basis for
selecting HCC patients for oncolytic VSV therapy in future clinical trials.

PMID: 18781139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Cell Microbiol. 2008 Dec;10(12):2579-88. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01232.x.
Epub 2008 Sep 2.

IFNbeta responses induced by intracellular bacteria or cytosolic DNA in different
human cells do not require ZBP1 (DLM-1/DAI).

Lippmann J(1), Rothenburg S, Deigendesch N, Eitel J, Meixenberger K, van Laak V, 
Slevogt H, N'guessan PD, Hippenstiel S, Chakraborty T, Flieger A, Suttorp N,
Opitz B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases and Pulmonary Medicine,
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin,
Germany.

Intracellular bacteria and cytosolic stimulation with DNA activate type I IFN
responses independently of Toll-like receptors, most Nod-like receptors and
RIG-like receptors. A recent study suggested that ZBP1 (DLM-1/DAI) represents the
long anticipated pattern recognition receptor which mediates IFNalpha/beta
responses to cytosolic DNA in mice. Here we show that Legionella pneumophila
infection, and intracellular challenge with poly(dA-dT), but not with
poly(dG-dC), induced expression of IFNbeta, full-length hZBP1 and a prominent
splice variant lacking the first Zalpha domain (hZBP1DeltaZalpha) in human cells.
Overexpression of hZBP1 but not hZBP1DeltaZalpha slightly amplified
poly(dA-dT)-stimulated IFNbeta reporter activation in HEK293 cells, but had no
effect on IFNbeta and IL-8 production induced by bacteria or poly(dA-dT) in A549 
cells. We found that mZBP1 siRNA impaired poly(dA-dT)-induced IFNbeta responses
in mouse L929 fibroblasts at a later time point, while multiple hZBP1 siRNAs did 
not suppress IFNbeta or IL-8 expression induced by poly(dA-dT) or bacterial
infection in human cells. In contrast, IRF3 siRNA strongly impaired the IFNbeta
responses to poly(dA-dT) or bacterial infection. In conclusion, intracellular
bacteria and cytosolic poly(dA-dT) activate IFNbeta responses in different human 
cells without requiring human ZBP1.

PMID: 18771559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Virol. 2008 Nov;82(21):10455-64. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00438-08. Epub 2008 Sep 3.

The cellular antiviral protein viperin is attenuated by proteasome-mediated
protein degradation in Japanese encephalitis virus-infected cells.

Chan YL(1), Chang TH, Liao CL, Lin YL.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Viperin is identified as an antiviral protein induced by interferon (IFN), viral 
infections, and pathogen-associated molecules. In this study, we found that
viperin is highly induced at the RNA level by Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV)
and Sindbis virus (SIN) and that viperin protein is degraded in JEV-infected
cells through a proteasome-dependent mechanism. Promoter analysis revealed that
SIN induces viperin expression in an IFN-dependent manner but that JEV by itself 
activates the viperin promoter through IFN regulatory factor-3 and AP-1. The
overexpression of viperin significantly decreased the production of SIN, but not 
of JEV, whereas the proteasome inhibitor MG132 sustained the protein level and
antiviral effect of viperin in JEV-infected cells. Knockdown of viperin
expression by RNA interference also enhanced the replication of SIN, but not that
of JEV. Our results suggest that even though viperin gene expression is highly
induced by JEV, it is negatively regulated at the protein level to counteract its
antiviral effect. In contrast, SIN induces viperin through the action of IFN, and
viperin exhibits potent antiviral activity against SIN.

PMCID: PMC2573197
PMID: 18768981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Virol. 2008 Nov;82(22):11446-53. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01284-08. Epub 2008 Sep 3.

The interferon antagonist ML protein of thogoto virus targets general
transcription factor IIB.

Vogt C(1), Preuss E, Mayer D, Weber F, Schwemmle M, Kochs G.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene,
Hermann-Herder-Strasse 11, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.

The ML protein of Thogoto virus, a tick-transmitted orthomyxovirus, is a splice
variant of the viral matrix protein and antagonizes the induction of antiviral
type I interferon (IFN). Here we identified the general RNA polymerase II
transcription factor IIB (TFIIB) as an ML-interacting protein. Overexpression of 
TFIIB neutralized the inhibitory effect of ML on IRF3-mediated promoter
activation. Moreover, a recombinant virus expressing a mutant ML protein unable
to bind TFIIB was severely impaired in its ability to suppress IFN induction. We 
concluded that TFIIB binding is required for the IFN antagonist effect exerted by
ML. We further demonstrate that the ML-TFIIB interaction has surprisingly little 
impact on gene expression in general, while a strong negative effect is observed 
for IRF3- and NF-kappaB-regulated promoters.

PMCID: PMC2573285
PMID: 18768974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Gastroenterology. 2008 Nov;135(5):1710-1718.e2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.07.023. Epub 2008 Jul 22.

Antiviral suppression vs restoration of RIG-I signaling by hepatitis C protease
and polymerase inhibitors.

Liang Y(1), Ishida H, Lenz O, Lin TI, Nyanguile O, Simmen K, Pyles RB, Bourne N, 
Yi M, Li K, Lemon SM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hepatitis Research, Institute for Human Infections and Immunity,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 77555-1073, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Expression of the nonstructural protein (NS)3/4A protease in
cells infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) results in cleavage of the
mitochondrial antiviral-signaling protein (MAVS) and disruption of signaling
pathways that lead to viral activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) 
and synthesis of type 1 interferons (IFN-alpha/beta). High concentrations of
inhibitors of NS3/4A reverse this signaling defect, but quantitative analyses of 
this potential therapeutic effect are lacking. This study quantitatively assessed
the rescue of IRF-3 signaling by NS3/4A inhibitors, compared with in vitro
antiviral activity.
METHODS: Antiviral activities of 2 NS3/4A protease inhibitors (TMC435350 and an
analog, TMC380765) and a nonnucleoside polymerase inhibitor (Tib-3) were
determined in HCV replicon cells and in cells infected with genotype 1a and 2a
viruses. The capacity to rescue IRF-3 activation in these cells was assessed by
monitoring IFN-beta promoter activity following challenge with Sendai virus.
Inhibitor-induced changes in NS3 and MAVS expression were assessed in
immunoblots.
RESULTS: Both protease inhibitors were capable of rescuing IFN-beta promoter
activation but only at concentrations approximately 100-fold the antiviral 50%
effective concentration (EC(50)) for genotype 1 virus. No rescue was observed
with the polymerase inhibitor, even at a concentration 600-fold greater than the 
EC(50). IRF-3 activation did not correlate with reductions in NS3/4A levels or
detection of full-length MAVS. Overexpression of the product of NS3/4A cleavage
of MAVS did not result in a dominant-negative effect on signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: NS3/4A protease inhibitors can restore IRF-3 signaling in
HCV-infected cells but only at concentrations far in excess of the antiviral
EC(50).

PMID: 18725224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nature. 2008 Oct 2;455(7213):674-8. doi: 10.1038/nature07317. Epub 2008 Aug 24.

STING is an endoplasmic reticulum adaptor that facilitates innate immune
signalling.

Ishikawa H(1), Barber GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University
of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2008 Nov 13;456(7219):274.

The cellular innate immune system is essential for recognizing pathogen infection
and for establishing effective host defence. But critical molecular determinants 
responsible for facilitating an appropriate immune response-following infection
with DNA and RNA viruses, for example-remain to be identified. Here we report the
identification, following expression cloning, of a molecule (STING; stimulator of
interferon genes) that appears essential for effective innate immune signalling
processes. It comprises five putative transmembrane regions, predominantly
resides in the endoplasmic reticulum and is able to activate both NF-kappaB and
IRF3 transcription pathways to induce expression of type I interferon (IFN-alpha 
and IFN-beta ) and exert a potent anti-viral state following expression. In
contrast, loss of STING rendered murine embryonic fibroblasts extremely
susceptible to negative-stranded virus infection, including vesicular stomatitis 
virus. Further, STING ablation abrogated the ability of intracellular B-form DNA,
as well as members of the herpesvirus family, to induce IFN-beta, but did not
significantly affect the Toll-like receptor (TLR) pathway. Yeast two-hybrid and
co-immunoprecipitation studies indicated that STING interacts with RIG-I and with
SSR2 (also known as TRAPbeta), which is a member of the translocon-associated
protein (TRAP) complex required for protein translocation across the endoplasmic 
reticulum membrane following translation. Ablation by RNA interference of both
TRAPbeta and translocon adaptor SEC61beta was subsequently found to inhibit
STING's ability to stimulate expression of IFN-beta. Thus, as well as identifying
a regulator of innate immune signalling, our results imply a potential role for
the translocon in innate signalling pathways activated by select viruses as well 
as intracellular DNA.

PMCID: PMC2804933
PMID: 18724357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Virol. 2008 Nov;82(21):10735-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01305-08. Epub 2008 Aug 20.

Vaccinia virus subverts a mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein-dependent
innate immune response in keratinocytes through its double-stranded RNA binding
protein, E3.

Deng L(1), Dai P, Parikh T, Cao H, Bhoj V, Sun Q, Chen Z, Merghoub T, Houghton A,
Shuman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Dermatology Service, Molecular Biology Program,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.
dengl@mskcc.org

Skin keratinocytes provide a first line of defense against invading
microorganisms in two ways: (i) by acting as a physical barrier to pathogen entry
and (ii) by initiating a vigorous innate immune response upon sensing danger
signals. How keratinocytes detect virus infections and generate antiviral immune 
responses is not well understood. Orthopoxviruses are dermatotropic DNA viruses
that cause lethal disease in humans. Virulence in animal models depends on the
virus-encoded bifunctional Z-DNA/double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-binding protein E3. 
Here, we report that infection of mouse primary keratinocytes with a vaccinia
DeltaE3L mutant virus triggers the production of beta interferon (IFN-beta),
interleukin-6 (IL-6), CCL4, and CCL5. None of these immune mediators is produced 
by keratinocytes infected with wild-type vaccinia virus. The dsRNA-binding domain
of E3 suffices to prevent activation of the innate immune response. DeltaE3L
induction of IFN-beta, IL-6, CCL4, and CCL5 secretion requires mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS; an adaptor for the cytoplasmic viral RNA
sensors RIG-I and MDA5) and the transcription factor IRF3. IRF3 phosphorylation
is induced in keratinocytes infected with DeltaE3L, an event that depends on
MAVS. The response of keratinocytes to DeltaE3L is unaffected by genetic ablation
of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), TRIF, TLR9, and MyD88.

PMCID: PMC2573174
PMID: 18715932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Immunol. 2008 Sep 1;181(5):3252-8.

Synoviocyte innate immune responses: I. Differential regulation of interferon
responses and the JNK pathway by MAPK kinases.

Yoshizawa T(1), Hammaker D, Sweeney SE, Boyle DL, Firestein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, University of California,
San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

JNK is a key regulator of matrix metalloproteinase production in rheumatoid
arthritis. It is regulated by two upstream kinases known as MKK4 and MKK7.
Previous studies demonstrated that only MKK7 is required for cytokine-mediated
JNK activation and matrix metalloproteinase expression in cultured
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS). However, the functions of MKK4 and MKK7 in
synoviocyte innate immune responses have not been determined. TNF, peptidoglycan 
(PGN), and LPS stimulation led to higher and more prolonged MKK7 phosphorylation 
compared with MKK4 in FLS. However, this pattern was reversed in poly(I-C)
stimulated cells. siRNA knockdown studies showed that TNF, PGN, and LPS-induced
JNK and c-Jun phosphorylation are MKK7 dependent, while poly(I-C) responses
require both MKK4 and MKK7. Poly(I-C)-induced expression of IP-10, RANTES, and
IFN-beta mRNA was decreased in MKK4- or MKK7-deficient FLS. However, MKK4 and
MKK7 deficiency did not affect phosphorylation of IkappaB kinase-related kinases 
in the TLR3 signaling pathway. MKK7, but not MKK4 deficiency, significantly
decreased poly(I-C)-mediated IRF3 dimerization, DNA binding, and IFN-sensitive
response element-mediated gene transcription. These results were mimicked by the 
JNK inhibitor SP600125, indicating that JNK can directly phosphorylate IRF3. In
contrast, deficiency of either MKK4 or MKK7 decreased AP-1 transcriptional
activity. Therefore, JNK is differentially regulated by MKK4 and MKK7 depending
on the stimulus. MKK7 is the primary activator of JNK in TNF, LPS, and PGN
responses. However, TLR3 requires both MKK4 and MKK7, with the former activating 
c-Jun and the latter activating both c-Jun and IRF3 through JNK-dependent
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2725405
PMID: 18713996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Cell Res. 2008 Nov;18(11):1096-104. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.277.

Negative feedback regulation of cellular antiviral signaling by RBCK1-mediated
degradation of IRF3.

Zhang M(1), Tian Y, Wang RP, Gao D, Zhang Y, Diao FC, Chen DY, Zhai ZH, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

Viral infection causes host cells to produce type I interferons (IFNs), which are
critically involved in viral clearance. Previous studies have demonstrated that
activation of the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor (IRF)3 is
essential for virus-triggered induction of type I IFNs. Here we show that the E3 
ubiquitin ligase RBCC protein interacting with PKC1 (RBCK1) catalyzes the
ubiquitination and degradation of IRF3. Overexpression of RBCK1 negatively
regulates Sendai virus-triggered induction of type I IFNs, while knockdown of
RBCK1 has the opposite effect. Plaque assays consistently demonstrate that RBCK1 
negatively regulates the cellular antiviral response. Furthermore, viral
infection leads to induction of RBCK1 and subsequent degradation of IRF3. These
findings suggest that the cellular antiviral response is controlled by a negative
feedback regulatory mechanism involving RBCK1-mediated ubiquitination and
degradation of IRF3.

PMID: 18711448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Cytokine. 2008 Sep;43(3):342-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2008.07.010. Epub 2008 Aug
15.

Signalling adaptors used by Toll-like receptors: an update.

Kenny EF(1), O'Neill LA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.
kennyef@tcd.ie

Research into the five Toll/IL1 receptor (TIR) adaptor proteins involved in
innate immunity continues to advance. Here we outline some of the more recent
findings. MyD88 has a key role in signalling by the IL1 receptor complex and
TLRs. However, a MyD88-independent pathway of IL1beta signalling in neurons has
been described which involves the protein kinase Akt, and which has an
anti-apoptotic effect. This pathway may also be important for the mechanism
whereby Alum exerts its adjuvant effect since this depends on IL1beta but is
MyD88-independent. MyD88 is also involved in tumourigenesis in models of
hepatocarcinoma and familial associated polyposis (FAP); negative regulation of
TLR3 signalling and in PKCepsilon activation. The adaptor Mal is regulated by
phosphorylation and caspase-1 cleavage. A variant form of Mal in humans termed
S180L confers protection in multiple infectious diseases. TRAM is controlled by
myristoylation and phosphorylation and the localisation of TRAM with TLR4 to
endosomes is required for activation of IRF3 and induction of IFNbeta. Finally
SARM has been shown to regulate TRIF and also appears to be involved in neuronal 
injury mediated by oxidative stress in mouse neurons. These advances confirm the 
importance for the TIR domain-containing adapters in host defence and
inflammation.

PMID: 18706831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Vaccine. 2008 Sep 15;26(39):5004-13. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.07.050. Epub
2008 Aug 6.

Gene profiling analysis of ALVAC infected human monocyte derived dendritic cells.

Harenberg A(1), Guillaume F, Ryan EJ, Burdin N, Spada F.

Author information: 
(1)Sanofi-Pasteur, Campus Mérieux, 1541 Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280 Marcy
l'Etoile, France. anke.harenberg2@sanofipasteur.com

The recombinant canarypox virus ALVAC is being extensively studied as vaccine
vector for the development of new vaccine strategies against chronic infectious
diseases and cancer. However, the mechanisms by which ALVAC initiates the immune 
response have not been completely elucidated. In order to determine the type of
innate immunity triggered by ALVAC, we characterized the gene expression profile 
of human monocyte derived dendritic cells (MDDCs) upon ALVAC infection. These
cells are permissive to poxvirus infection and play a key role in the initiation 
of immune responses. The majority of the genes that were up-regulated by ALVAC
belong to the type I interferon signaling pathway including IRF7, STAT1, RIG-1,
and MDA-5. Genes involved in the NF-kappaB pathway were not up-regulated. The
gene encoding for the chemokine CXCL10, a direct target of the transcription
factor IRF3 was among those up-regulated and DC secretion of CXCL10 following
exposure to ALVAC was confirmed by ELISA. Many downstream type I interferon
activated genes with anti-viral activity (PKR, Mx, ISG15 and OAS among others)
were also up-regulated in response to ALVAC. Among these, ISG15 expression in its
unconjugated form by Western blot analysis was demonstrated. In view of these
results we propose that ALVAC induces type I interferon anti-viral innate
immunity via a cytosolic pattern-recognition-receptor (PRR) sensing
double-stranded DNA, through activation of IRF3 and IRF7. These findings may aid 
in the design of more effective ALVAC-vectored vaccines.

PMID: 18691624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Immunol. 2008 Aug 15;181(4):2694-704.

Double-stranded RNA induces an antiviral defense status in epidermal
keratinocytes through TLR3-, PKR-, and MDA5/RIG-I-mediated differential
signaling.

Kalali BN(1), Köllisch G, Mages J, Müller T, Bauer S, Wagner H, Ring J, Lang R,
Mempel M, Ollert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Allergy Biederstein, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany.

Emerging evidence suggests an important role for human epidermal keratinocytes in
innate immune mechanisms against bacterial and viral skin infections. The
proinflammatory effect of viral infections can be mimicked by double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA). Herein, we demonstrate that keratinocytes express all known dsRNA
sensing receptors at a constitutive and inducible level, and that they use
several downstream signaling pathways leading to a broad pattern of gene
expression, not only proinflammatory and immune response genes under the control 
of NF-kappaB, but also genes under transcriptional control of IRF3. As a
consequence, dsRNA, a stimulus for TLR3, protein kinase R (PKR), and the RNA
helicases retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and MDA5, induces a status of
antiviral defense in keratinocytes. Using inhibitors for the various dsRNA
signaling pathways and specific small interfering RNA for TLR3, RIG-I, and MDA5, 
we demonstrated that in human keratinocytes, TLR3 seems to be necessary for
NF-kappaB but not for IRF3 activation, whereas RIG-I and MDA5 are crucial for
IRF3 activation. PKR is essential for the dsRNA response in both signaling
pathways and thus represents the central antiviral receptor for dsRNA
stimulation. Moreover, human keratinocytes up-regulate TLR7, the receptor for
single-stranded RNA, in response to stimulation with dsRNA, which renders
keratinocytes functionally responsive to the TLR7 agonist gardiquimod, a member
of the imidazoquinoline antiviral immune response modifier family. Thus, in
addition to building a physical barrier against infectious pathogens,
keratinocytes are specially equipped with a full antiviral defense program that
enables them to efficiently target viral infections of the skin.

PMID: 18684960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Immunol. 2008 Aug 1;181(3):1780-6.

The E3 ubiquitin ligase Ro52 negatively regulates IFN-beta production
post-pathogen recognition by polyubiquitin-mediated degradation of IRF3.

Higgs R(1), Ní Gabhann J, Ben Larbi N, Breen EP, Fitzgerald KA, Jefferies CA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Research Institute, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

Induction of type I IFNs is a fundamental cellular response to both viral and
bacterial infection. The role of the transcription factor IRF3 is well
established in driving this process. However, equally as important are cellular
mechanisms for turning off type I IFN production to limit this response. In this 
respect, IRF3 has previously been shown to be targeted for ubiquitin-mediated
degradation postviral detection to turn off the IFN-beta response. In this study,
we provide evidence that the E3 ligase Ro52 (TRIM21) targets IRF3 for degradation
post-pathogen recognition receptor activation. We demonstrate that Ro52 interacts
with IRF3 via its C-terminal SPRY domain, resulting in the polyubiquitination and
proteasomal degradation of the transcription factor. Ro52-mediated IRF3
degradation significantly inhibits IFN-beta promoter activity, an effect that is 
reversed in the presence of the proteasomal inhibitor MG132. Specific targeting
of Ro52 using short hairpin RNA rescues IRF3 degradation following
polyI:C-stimulation of HEK293T cells, with a subsequent increase in IFN-beta
production. Additionally, shRNA targeting of murine Ro52 enhances the production 
of the IRF3-dependent chemokine RANTES following Sendai virus infection of murine
fibroblasts. Collectively, this demonstrates a novel role for Ro52 in turning off
and thus limiting IRF3-dependent type I IFN production by targeting the
transcription factor for polyubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal
degradation.

PMCID: PMC2824853
PMID: 18641315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. EMBO J. 2008 Aug 6;27(15):2147-57. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.143. Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Viral targeting of DEAD box protein 3 reveals its role in
TBK1/IKKepsilon-mediated IRF activation.

Schröder M(1), Baran M, Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Immune Evasion Group, School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

Viruses are detected by different classes of pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs), such as Toll-like receptors and RIG-like helicases. Engagement of PRRs
leads to activation of interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7
through IKKepsilon and TBK1 and consequently IFN-beta induction. Vaccinia virus
(VACV) encodes proteins that manipulate host signalling, sometimes by targeting
uncharacterised proteins. Here, we describe a novel VACV protein, K7, which can
inhibit PRR-induced IFN-beta induction by preventing TBK1/IKKepsilon-mediated IRF
activation. We identified DEAD box protein 3 (DDX3) as a host target of K7.
Expression of DDX3 enhanced Ifnb promoter induction by TBK1/IKKepsilon, whereas
knockdown of DDX3 inhibited this, and virus- or dsRNA-induced IRF3 activation.
Further, dominant-negative DDX3 inhibited virus-, dsRNA- and cytosolic
DNA-stimulated Ccl5 promoter induction, which is also TBK1/IKKepsilon dependent. 
Both K7 binding and enhancement of Ifnb induction mapped to the N-terminus of
DDX3. Furthermore, virus infection induced an association between DDX3 and
IKKepsilon. Therefore, this study shows for the first time the involvement of a
DEAD box helicase in TBK1/IKKepsilon-mediated IRF activation and Ifnb promoter
induction.

PMCID: PMC2516890
PMID: 18636090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. EMBO Rep. 2008 Sep;9(9):930-6. doi: 10.1038/embor.2008.136. Epub 2008 Jul 18.

The tumour suppressor CYLD is a negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated antiviral
response.

Friedman CS(1), O'Donnell MA, Legarda-Addison D, Ng A, Cárdenas WB, Yount JS,
Moran TM, Basler CF, Komuro A, Horvath CM, Xavier R, Ting AT.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Box 1630, One Gustave L 
Levy Place, New York, New York 10029, USA.

On detecting viral RNAs, the RNA helicase retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) 
activates the interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) signalling pathway to induce 
type I interferon (IFN) gene transcription. How this antiviral signalling pathway
might be negatively regulated is poorly understood. Microarray and bioinformatic 
analysis indicated that the expression of RIG-I and that of the tumour suppressor
CYLD (cylindromatosis), a deubiquitinating enzyme that removes Lys 63-linked
polyubiquitin chains, are closely correlated, suggesting a functional association
between the two molecules. Ectopic expression of CYLD inhibits the IRF3
signalling pathway and IFN production triggered by RIG-I; conversely, CYLD
knockdown enhances the response. CYLD removes polyubiquitin chains from RIG-I as 
well as from TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1), the kinase that phosphorylates IRF3,
coincident with an inhibition of the IRF3 signalling pathway. Furthermore, CYLD
protein level is reduced in the presence of tumour necrosis factor and viral
infection, concomitant with enhanced IFN production. These findings show that
CYLD is a negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated innate antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC2529351
PMID: 18636086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 12;283(37):25660-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804479200. Epub 2008
Jul 17.

Virus infection triggers SUMOylation of IRF3 and IRF7, leading to the negative
regulation of type I interferon gene expression.

Kubota T(1), Matsuoka M, Chang TH, Tailor P, Sasaki T, Tashiro M, Kato A, Ozato
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Gakuen 
4-7-1, Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, Japan. kubota@nih.go.jp

Viral infection activates Toll-like receptor and RIG-I (retinoic acid-inducible
gene I) signaling pathways, leading to phosphorylation of IRF3 (interferon
regulatory factor 3) and IRF7 and stimulation of type I interferon (IFN)
transcription, a process important for innate immunity. We show that upon
vesicular stomatitis virus infection, IRF3 and IRF7 are modified not only by
phosphorylation but by the small ubiquitin-related modifiers SUMO1, SUMO2, and
SUMO3. SUMOylation of IRF3 and IRF7 was dependent on the activation of Toll-like 
receptor and RIG-I pathways but not on the IFN-stimulated pathway. However,
SUMOylation of IRF3 and IRF7 was not dependent on their phosphorylation, and vice
versa. We identified Lys(152) of IRF3 and Lys(406) of IRF7 to be their sole small
ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) conjugation site. IRF3 and IRF7 mutants
defective in SUMOylation led to higher levels of IFN mRNA induction after viral
infection, relative to the wild type IRFs, indicating a negative role for
SUMOylation in IFN transcription. Together, SUMO modification is an integral part
of IRF3 and IRF7 activity that contributes to postactivation attenuation of IFN
production.

PMCID: PMC2533075
PMID: 18635538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Jul 11;4(7):e1000099. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000099.

RIG-I mediates the co-induction of tumor necrosis factor and type I interferon
elicited by myxoma virus in primary human macrophages.

Wang F(1), Gao X, Barrett JW, Shao Q, Bartee E, Mohamed MR, Rahman M, Werden S,
Irvine T, Cao J, Dekaban GA, McFadden G.

Author information: 
(1)BioTherapeutics Research Group, Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario,
Canada.

The sensing of pathogen infection and subsequent triggering of innate immunity
are key to controlling zoonotic infections. Myxoma virus (MV) is a cytoplasmic
DNA poxvirus that in nature infects only rabbits. Our previous studies have shown
that MV infection of primary mouse cells is restricted by virus-induced type I
interferon (IFN). However, little is known about the innate sensor(s) involved in
activating signaling pathways leading to cellular defense responses in primary
human immune cells. Here, we show that the complete restriction of MV infection
in the primary human fibroblasts requires both tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and
type I IFN. We also demonstrate that MV infection of primary human macrophages
(pHMs) activates the cytoplasmic RNA sensor called retinoic acid inducible gene I
(RIG-I), which coordinately induces the production of both TNF and type I IFN. Of
note, RIG-I sensing of MV infection in pHMs initiates a sustained TNF induction
through the sequential involvement of the downstream IFN-regulatory factors 3 and
7 (IRF3 and IRF7). Thus, RIG-I-mediated co-induction of TNF and type I IFN by
virus-infected pHMs represents a novel innate defense mechanism to restrict viral
infection in human cells. These results also reveal a new regulatory mechanism
for TNF induction following viral infection.

PMCID: PMC2438611
PMID: 18617992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Biol Reprod. 2008 Oct;79(4):766-75. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.068619. Epub 2008
Jul 2.

Toll-like receptor 3 activation induces antiviral immune responses in mouse
sertoli cells.

Starace D(1), Galli R, Paone A, De Cesaris P, Filippini A, Ziparo E, Riccioli A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Sapienza University of Rome,
00161 Rome, Italy.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns and
elicit antimicrobial immune responses. In the testis, viruses can induce
pathological conditions, such as orchitis, and may participate in the etiology of
testicular cancer; however, the molecular mechanisms involved remain under
investigation. It has been suggested that because they constitutively express
interferon (IFN)-inducible antiviral proteins, Sertoli cells participate in the
testicular antiviral defense system. Previously, we demonstrated a key function
of mouse Sertoli cells in the bactericidal testicular defense mechanism mediated 
by a panel of TLRs. To better characterize the potential role of Sertoli cells in
the response against testicular viral infections, we investigated the TLR3
expression and function in these cells. Sertoli cells express TLR3, and under
stimulation with the synthetic double-stranded RNA analogue poly (I:C), they
produce the proinflammatory molecule ICAM1 and secrete functionally active CCL2
chemokine. Using both pharmacological and genetic approaches, we found that these
effects are TLR3-dependent. Moreover, using ELISA, we found that IFNA is
constitutively produced and not further inducible, whereas IFNB1 is absent and
dramatically induced only by transfected poly (I:C), indicating different control
mechanisms underlying IFNA and IFNB1 production. To conclude, poly (I:C) elicits 
both inflammatory and antiviral responses in Sertoli cells.

PMID: 18596219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2008 Oct 15;125(3-4):344-53. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2008.05.018. Epub 2008 May 28.

Molecular cloning and functional characterization of porcine IFN-beta promoter
stimulator 1 (IPS-1).

Wang D(1), Fang L, Li T, Luo R, Xie L, Jiang Y, Chen H, Xiao S.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, PR China.

The IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), also known as MAVS/VISA/Cardif, is an
adaptor molecule for the retinoic-acid-inducible protein I (RIG-I) or
melanoma-differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) that recognizes intracellular
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) and triggers a signal for producing type I IFN. In
the present study, porcine IPS-1 cDNA was cloned, using RT-PCR coupled with rapid
amplification of cDNA ends (RACE)-PCR, from porcine peripheral blood mononuclear 
cells. The open reading frame of porcine IPS-1 consists of 1575bp encoding 524
amino acids. The putative porcine IPS-1 protein contains a N-terminal CARD-like
domain, a central proline-rich domain, a C-terminal transmembrane domain, and
exhibits similarity to mouse, rat, monkey, human and cattle counterparts, ranging
from 59% to 79%. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR showed that porcine IPS-1 mRNA was
widely expressed in different tissues. Porcine kidney (PK-15) cells transfected
with a DNA construct encoding porcine IPS-1 produced type I IFN, and activated
IRF3 and NF-kappaB. Deletion mutant analyses further revealed that both the
CARD-like domain and transmembrane domain are essential for these functions. In
addition, poly(I:C)-induced porcine IFN-beta promoter activation in PK-15 cells
was significantly reduced by siRNA targeting IPS-1, indicating that IPS-1 is an
important immunoregulator in the porcine innate immune system. The availability
of porcine IPS-1 and establishment of its function in the type I IFN signaling
pathway provides a useful molecule for defining its role during the course of pig
infectious diseases.

PMID: 18586328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Virol. 2008 Sep;82(17):8871-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00613-08. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

STAT-1- and IRF-3-dependent pathways are not essential for repression of
ICP0-null mutant herpes simplex virus type 1 in human fibroblasts.

Everett RD(1), Young DF, Randall RE, Orr A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Virology Unit, Institute of Virology, Glasgow, Scotland, United Kingdom.
r.everett@mrcvu.gla.ac.uk

Efficient herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection of human fibroblasts
(HFs) is highly dependent on the viral immediate-early regulatory protein ICP0
unless the infection is conducted at a high multiplicity. ICP0-null mutant HSV-1 
exhibits a plaque-forming defect of up to 3 orders of magnitude in HFs, whereas
in many other cell types, this defect varies between 10- and 30-fold. The reasons
for the high ICP0 requirement for HSV-1 infection in HFs have not been
established definitively. Previous studies using other cell types suggested that 
ICP0-null mutant HSV-1 is hypersensitive to interferon and that this sensitivity 
is dependent on the cellular promyelocytic leukemia (PML) protein. To investigate
the roles of two important aspects of interferon signaling in the phenotype of
ICP0-null mutant HSV-1, we isolated HFs depleted of STAT-1 or interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). Surprisingly, plaque formation by the mutant virus
was not improved in either cell type. We found that the sensitivity to interferon
pretreatment of both ICP0-null mutant and wild-type (wt) HSV-1 was highly
dependent on the multiplicity of infection. At a low multiplicity in virus yield 
experiments, both viruses were extremely susceptible to interferon pretreatment
of HFs, but the sensitivity of the wild type but not the mutant could be overcome
at higher multiplicities. We found that both wt and ICP0-null mutant HSV-1
remained sensitive to interferon in PML-depleted HFs albeit to an apparently
lesser extent than in control cells. The data imply that the substantial
reduction in ICP0-null HSV-1 infectivity at a low multiplicity in HFs does not
occur through the activities of STAT-1- and IRF-3-dependent pathways and cannot
be explained solely by enhanced sensitivity to interferon. We suggest that
antiviral activities induced by interferon may be separable from and additive to 
those resulting from PML-related intrinsic resistance mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2519674
PMID: 18579584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Immunol. 2008 Aug;45(13):3545-52. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.05.006. Epub
2008 Jun 20.

Phosphatase PTP1B negatively regulates MyD88- and TRIF-dependent proinflammatory 
cytokine and type I interferon production in TLR-triggered macrophages.

Xu H(1), An H, Hou J, Han C, Wang P, Yu Y, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology,
Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin Road, Shanghai 200433, China.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are primary sensors to detect conserved patterns on
microorganisms, thus acting as the important components of innate immunity
against invading pathogens. Protein tyrosine phosphatase-1B (PTP1B) has been
shown to be a critical negative regulator of insulin pathway and other cellular
signaling, however, whether and how PTP1B regulates TLR-triggered innate response
remain to be investigated. We report here that PTP1B can markedly decrease
TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IFN-beta production by macrophages stimulated with LPS, CpG
ODN, or Poly I:C. Accordingly, knockdown of endogenous PTP1B expression increases
production of TNF-alpha, IL-6 and IFN-beta in macrophages stimulated with TLR
ligands. Phosphatase activity-disrupted mutant PTP1B cannot inhibit TLR-triggered
production of proinflammatory cytokines and IFN-beta, indicating PTP1B exerts its
suppressive activity in phosphatase-dependent manner. PTP1B inhibits TLR
ligands-induced activation of MAPKs, NF-kappaB, and IRF3, furthermore,
co-transfection of PTP1B inhibits both MyD88- and TRIF-induced transcription of
TNF-alpha and IFN-beta reporter genes in a dose-dependent manner. In addition,
PTP1B inhibits LPS-induced Tyk2 and STAT1 activation. Therefore, we demonstrate
that phosphatase PTP1B is a physiological negative regulator of TLR signaling via
suppression of both MyD88- and TRIF-dependent production of proinflammatory
cytokine and IFN-beta in macrophages. Our results provide new mechanistic
explanation for negative regulation TLR response and suggest PTP1B as a potential
target for the intervention of the inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 18571728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Virol. 2008 Sep;82(17):8262-71. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00226-08. Epub 2008 Jun 18.

West Nile virus nonstructural protein 1 inhibits TLR3 signal transduction.

Wilson JR(1), de Sessions PF, Leon MA, Scholle F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27695-7615, USA.

The innate immune response is the first line of defense against foreign
pathogens. The recognition of virus-associated molecular patterns, including
double- and single-stranded RNA, by pattern recognition receptors initiates a
cascade of signaling reactions. These result in the transcriptional upregulation 
and secretion of proinflammatory cytokines that induce an antiviral state. Many
viruses have evolved mechanisms to antagonize these responses in order to help
them establish a productive infection. We have previously shown that West Nile
virus (WNV) is able to inhibit Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3)-mediated activation of
interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) (F. Scholle and P. W. Mason, Virology
342:77-87, 2005). In the present study, the WNV nonstructural (NS) proteins were 
analyzed individually for their ability to antagonize signal transduction
mediated by TLR3. We report that expression of WNV NS1 inhibits TLR3-induced
transcriptional activation of the IFN-beta promoter and of an
NF-kappaB-responsive promoter. This inhibition was due to a failure of the TLR3
ligand poly(I:C) to induce nuclear translocation of IRF3 and NF-kappaB.
Furthermore, NS1 expression also inhibited TLR3-dependent production of
interleukin-6 and the establishment of an antiviral state. The function of NS1 in
flavivirus infection is not well understood. NS1 is required for viral RNA
replication and is also secreted from mammalian cells but not from insect cells. 
Here, we identify a previously unrecognized role for NS1 in the modulation of
signaling pathways of the innate immune response to WNV infection.

PMCID: PMC2519649
PMID: 18562533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Lupus. 2008 Jun;17(6):568-74. doi: 10.1177/0961203308089340.

Promoter polymorphisms in the IRF3 gene confer protection against systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Akahoshi M(1), Nakashima H, Sadanaga A, Miyake K, Obara K, Tamari M, Hirota T,
Matsuda A, Shirakawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genetics of Allergic Diseases, SNP Research Center, RIKEN
Yokohama Institute, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN),
Yokohama, Japan. akahoshi@intmed1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

In order to identify a novel candidate gene in systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE), we analysed a panel of six genes encoding molecules involved in the type I
interferon (IFN) system. We first identified variants in the five genes related
to type I IFN pathway by sequencing. Genotyping of a panel of eight selected
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in six candidate genes (TLR9, MYD88, IRF3,
IRF7, IFNB1, IFNA17) was performed in 137 patients with SLE and matched with 152 
healthy controls using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis. In functional assay, quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction was performed to assess constitutive IRF3 mRNA expression in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy subjects with different IRF3
promoter haplotypes. Among eight SNPs genotyped, an IRF3 SNP at -925 was found to
be associated with SLE after correction for multiple tests (corrected P=0.016).
Of total five IRF3 SNPs genotyped, the promoter IRF3 SNPs -925A/G and -776C/T
showed the most significant association with SLE. With regard to -925A/G, the
frequency of GG genotype was significantly decreased among SLE patients compared 
with the control group (1.5% vs. 9.9%; chi(2)=10.0, P=0.0015, odds ratio 0.12,
95% confidence interval 0.027-0.554). Our experimental data indicated that
constitutive IRF3 mRNA expression was significantly lower in cells carrying the
minor G-T/G-T haplotype pair compared with those carrying the major A-C
haplotype. In conclusion, we showed that the promoter SNPs of the IRF3 gene were 
significantly associated with resistance against SLE.

PMID: 18539711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 8;372(4):772-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.103. Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Regulation of IRF2 transcriptional activity by its sumoylation.

Han KJ(1), Jiang L, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver,
CO 80206, USA.

IRFs constitute a family of transcription factors involved in IFN signaling and
in the development and differentiation of the immune system. IRFs activities are 
regulated at transcriptional level (such as IRF1) and post-translational
modifications (such as IRF3 and IRF7). Here we show that IRF2 interacts with the 
SUMO-E3 ligase PIASy and is sumoylated in vivo. Mutagenesis analysis suggests
that IRF2 contains three sumoylation sites. Sumoylation of IRF2 has no
significant effects on its nuclear localization and DNA-binding activity, but
increases its ability to inhibit IRF1 transcriptional activity and decreases its 
ability to activate the ISRE and H4 promoters. Our findings suggest that
sumoylation of IRF2 regulates its transcriptional activities.

PMID: 18514056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 18;283(29):19879-87. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M802848200. Epub 2008
May 14.

Group A streptococcus activates type I interferon production and MyD88-dependent 
signaling without involvement of TLR2, TLR4, and TLR9.

Gratz N(1), Siller M, Schaljo B, Pirzada ZA, Gattermeier I, Vojtek I, Kirschning 
CJ, Wagner H, Akira S, Charpentier E, Kovarik P.

Author information: 
(1)Max F Perutz Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology,
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Bacterial pathogens are recognized by the innate immune system through pattern
recognition receptors, such as Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Engagement of TLRs
triggers signaling cascades that launch innate immune responses. Activation of
MAPKs and NF-kappaB, elements of the major signaling pathways induced by TLRs,
depends in most cases on the adaptor molecule MyD88. In addition, Gram-negative
or intracellular bacteria elicit MyD88-independent signaling that results in
production of type I interferon (IFN). Here we show that in mouse macrophages,
the activation of MyD88-dependent signaling by the extracellular Gram-positive
human pathogen group A streptococcus (GAS; Streptococcus pyogenes) does not
require TLR2, a receptor implicated in sensing of Gram-positive bacteria, or TLR4
and TLR9. Redundant engagement of either of these TLR molecules was excluded by
using TLR2/4/9 triple-deficient macrophages. We further demonstrate that
infection of macrophages by GAS causes IRF3 (interferon-regulatory factor
3)-dependent, MyD88-independent production of IFN. Surprisingly, IFN is induced
also by GAS lacking slo and sagA, the genes encoding cytolysins that were shown
to be required for IFN production in response to other Gram-positive bacteria.
Our data indicate that (i) GAS is recognized by a MyD88-dependent receptor other 
than any of those typically used by bacteria, and (ii) GAS as well as GAS mutants
lacking cytolysin genes induce type I IFN production by similar mechanisms as
bacteria requiring cytoplasmic escape and the function of cytolysins.

PMCID: PMC2459277
PMID: 18480050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Immunol. 2008 Jun;45(11):3025-35. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.03.012. Epub
2008 May 8.

Signal regulatory protein alpha negatively regulates both TLR3 and cytoplasmic
pathways in type I interferon induction.

Dong LW(1), Kong XN, Yan HX, Yu LX, Chen L, Yang W, Liu Q, Huang DD, Wu MC, Wang 
HY.

Author information: 
(1)International Cooperation Laboratory on Signal Transduction, Eastern
Hepatobiliary Surgery Institute, Second Military Medical University, 225 Changhai
Road, 200438 Shanghai, PR China.

Recognition of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) activates interferon-regulatory factor
3 (IRF3)-dependent expression of anti-viral factors. The innate immune system
recognizes viral dsRNA through two distinct pathways. First, the Toll-like
receptor 3 (TLR3) detects dsRNA phagocytosed in endosomes. In addition, the
helicases retinoic acid induced protein I (RIG-I)/melanoma differentiation
associated gene 5 (MDA5) binds cytoplasmic dsRNA generated during viral
replication. Both RIG-I/MDA5 and TLR3 can bind polyriboinosinic:polyribocytidylic
acid (poly(I:C)), the synthetic analog of viral dsRNA, and mediate type I IFN
production. Here we show that signal regulatory protein (SIRP) alpha negatively
regulates both TLR3- and RIG-1/MDA5-dependent anti-viral pathways. Suppression of
SIRPalpha expression by RNA interference results in enhanced activation of IRF3
and MAPK pathways after poly(I:C) treatment, coupled with the up-regulation of
IFN-beta and IFN-beta-inducible gene transcriptional activation. The requirement 
of phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) activity for the induction of IFN-beta and
IFN-beta-inducible genes by dsRNA is supported by the observation that a PI3K
inhibitor failed to activate IFN-beta and IFN-beta-inducible gene expression.
PI3K, whose activity is essential for activation of IRF3, is recruited to the
phosphorylated tyrosine residues of SIRPalpha upon poly(I:C) stimulation, which
lead to a reduction in the activity of the downstream kinase AKT. Thus SIRPalpha 
may accomplish its inhibitory function in type I IFN induction, in part, through 
its association and sequestration of the signal transducer PI3K.

PMID: 18471880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Immunity. 2008 May;28(5):651-61. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2008.03.013. Epub 2008 Apr
24.

TRADD protein is an essential component of the RIG-like helicase antiviral
pathway.

Michallet MC(1), Meylan E, Ermolaeva MA, Vazquez J, Rebsamen M, Curran J, Poeck
H, Bscheider M, Hartmann G, König M, Kalinke U, Pasparakis M, Tschopp J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, Chemin des Boveresses 155,
CH-1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

Upon detection of viral RNA, the helicases RIG-I and/or MDA5 trigger, via their
adaptor Cardif (also known as IPS-1, MAVS, or VISA), the activation of the
transcription factors NF-kappaB and IRF3, which collaborate to induce an
antiviral type I interferon (IFN) response. FADD and RIP1, known as mediators of 
death-receptor signaling, are implicated in this antiviral pathway; however, the 
link between death-receptor and antiviral signaling is not known. Here we showed 
that TRADD, a crucial adaptor of tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFRI), was
important in RIG-like helicase (RLH)-mediated signal transduction. TRADD is
recruited to Cardif and orchestrated complex formation with the E3 ubiquitin
ligase TRAF3 and TANK and with FADD and RIP1, leading to the activation of IRF3
and NF-kappaB. Loss of TRADD prevented Cardif-dependent activation of IFN-beta,
reduced the production of IFN-beta in response to RNA viruses, and enhanced
vesicular stomatitis virus replication. Thus, TRADD is not only an essential
component of proinflammatory TNFRI signaling, but is also required for
RLH-Cardif-dependent antiviral immune responses.

PMID: 18439848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Gen Virol. 2008 May;89(Pt 5):1131-41. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.83538-0.

Mouse cytomegalovirus inhibits beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene expression and
controls activation pathways of the IFN-beta enhanceosome.

Le VT(1), Trilling M, Zimmermann A, Hengel H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Institut für Virologie, 40225
Düsseldorf, Germany.

We have investigated beta interferon (IFN-beta) and IFN-alpha4 gene expression
and activation of related transcription factors in mouse cytomegalovirus
(MCMV)-infected fibroblasts. mRNA analysis demonstrated an initial phase of IFN
gene induction upon MCMV infection, which was followed by a sustained
MCMV-mediated simultaneous downregulation of IFN-beta and IFN-alpha4 gene
expression. The induction of IFN transcription resulted from the activation of
the components of the IFN-beta enhanceosome, i.e. IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3, 
nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, activating transcription factor (ATF)-2 and c-Jun.
Activation of the transcription factors occurred rapidly and in a sequential
order upon infection, but only lasted a while. As a consequence, IFN-alpha/beta
gene expression became undetectable 6 h post-infection and throughout the MCMV
replication cycle. This effect is based on an active interference since
restimulation of IFN gene induction by further external stimuli (e.g. Sendai
virus infection) was completely abolished. This inhibition required MCMV gene
expression and was not observed in cells infected with UV-inactivated MCMV
virions. The efficiency of inhibition is achieved by a concerted blockade of
IkappaBalpha degradation and a lack of nuclear accumulation of IRF3 and
ATF-2/c-Jun. Using an MCMV mutant lacking pM27, a signal transducer and activator
of transcription (STAT) 2-specific inhibitor of Jak/STAT signalling, we found
that the initial phase of IFN induction and the subsequent inhibition does not
depend on the positive-IFN feedback loop. Our findings indicate that the
MCMV-mediated downregulation of IFN transcription in fibroblasts relies on a
large arsenal of inhibitory mechanisms targeting each pathway that contributes to
the multiprotein enhanceosome complex.

PMID: 18420790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cells. 2008 Apr 30;25(2):253-7. Epub 2008 Mar 31.

Acrolein with an alpha, beta-unsaturated carbonyl group inhibits LPS-induced
homodimerization of toll-like receptor 4.

Lee JS(1), Lee JY, Lee MY, Hwang DH, Youn HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences,
Soonchunhyang University, Asan 336-745, Korea.

Acrolein is a highly electrophilic alpha,beta-unsaturated aldehyde present in a
number of environmental sources, especially cigarette smoke. It reacts strongly
with the thiol groups of cysteine residues by Michael addition and has been
reported to inhibit nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS). The mechanism by which it inhibits NF-kappaB is not
clear. Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play a key role in sensing microbial components
and inducing innate immune responses, and LPS-induced dimerization of TLR4 is
required for activation of downstream signaling pathways. Thus, dimerization of
TLR4 may be one of the first events involved in activating TLR4-mediated
signaling pathways. Stimulation of TLR4 by LPS activates both myeloid
differential factor 88 (MyD88)- and TIR domain-containing adapter inducing
IFNbeta(TRIF)-dependent signaling pathways leading to activation of NF-kappaB and
IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Acrolein inhibited NF-kappaB and IRF3 activation 
by LPS, but it did not inhibit NF-kappaB or IRF3 activation by MyD88, inhibitor
kappaB kinase (IKK)beta, TRIF, or TNF-receptor-associated factor family
member-associated NF-kappaB activator (TANK)-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). Acrolein
inhibited LPS-induced dimerization of TLR4, which resulted in the down-regulation
of NF-kappaB and IRF3 activation. These results suggest that activation of TLRs
and subsequent immune/inflammatory responses induced by endogenous molecules or
chronic infection can be modulated by certain chemicals with a structural motif
that enables Michael addition.

PMID: 18414004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Methods Enzymol. 2008;438:321-9. doi: 10.1016/S0076-6879(07)38022-1.

Characterization of RalB-Sec5-TBK1 function in human oncogenesis.

Chien Y(1), White MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.

The Ras-like GTPases, RalA and RalB, are key components of the oncogenic Ras
signaling network. Recent evidence suggests that RalA and RalB collaborate to
support tumorigenic transformation through distinct cell regulatory events. While
RalA is apparently required to bypass normal restraints on cell proliferation,
RalB is required to bypass normal restraints on cell survival. A direct Ral
effector protein, Sec5, is a subunit of the exocyst complex, and is required to
mediate RalB-dependent survival signals in transformed cells. Further analysis
identified TBK1, a key mediator of the host defense response to viral challenge, 
as a novel Sec5 interacting protein essential for the capacity of RalB and Sec5
to deflect cell death in transformed cells. RalB activation promotes a direct
interaction between Sec5 and TBK1 that results in TBK1 kinase activation via an
unknown mechanism. Accordingly, both RalB and Sec5 are required for initiating
host defense pathway activation upon virus infection. These observations revealed
a novel relationship between molecular components of cell-autonomous innate
immune signaling pathways and oncogenic transformation, and identified TBK1 as a 
potential target for therapeutic intervention in cancer. Here we describe details
of methods, including protein complex analysis, protein kinase assays, host
defense-response pathway activation, and cell transformation analysis, that can
be used to investigate the contribution of the RalB-Sec5-TBK1 signaling cascade
to both innate immune signaling and cell transformation.

PMID: 18413258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Iran Biomed J. 2008 Jan;12(1):23-34.

The full length hepatitis C virus polyprotein and interactions with the
interferon-beta signalling pathways in vitro.

Ghannad MS(1), Zamani A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Microbiology, School of Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical
Sciences, Hamadan 65178-3-8736, Iran. sabouri39@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis C is a global health problem. The exact mechanisms by which
hepatitis C virus (HCV) can evade the host immune system have become
controversial. Whether HCV polyproteins modulate IFN signalling pathways or HCV
proteins are responsible for such a property is the subject of interest.
Therefore, an efficient baculovirus delivery system was developed to introduce
the whole genome of HCV1B minus 3'untranslated region (UTR) (HCV1BDelta3'UTR)
into hepatoma cells.
METHODS: The whole genome of HCV genotype 1b was developed into hepatoma cells.
Also, two replicon constructs were used in this research: a recombinant
baculovirus containing the culture adapted sub-genomic replicon (Fk5.1) derived
from HCV genotype 1b, and a mutant form containing an inactivating mutation
within the non-structural protein 5B (NS5B).
RESULTS: As expected, the baculovirus carrying the FK5.1 replicon induced the
production of IFN-beta as judged by the use of an IFN-beta promoter luciferase
reporter construct, whereas the GND baculovirus (a control polymerase knock-out
replicon) and the full-length 3'UTR deletant failed to induce luciferase
expression. The activation of both IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and nuclear
factor kappaB (NFkappaB), two transcription factors induced by dsRNA signalling
were examined. Both the wild type and GND-mutant replicon blocked the
dsRNA-induced activation of IRF3 and NFkappaB.
CONCLUSION: Inhibition of the transcriptional response to IRF3 and NFkappaB seems
to be one of the multiple mechanisms which HCV employs to escape the host immune 
defense. In contrast, the full length 3'UTR deletant had no significant effect on
either transcription factor. These results may be attributed to the function of
HCV subgenomic replicons when compared with full length 3'UTR deletant.

PMID: 18392092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 23;283(21):14269-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M710089200. Epub 2008
Mar 24.

Select paramyxoviral V proteins inhibit IRF3 activation by acting as alternative 
substrates for inhibitor of kappaB kinase epsilon (IKKe)/TBK1.

Lu LL(1), Puri M, Horvath CM, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

V accessory proteins from Paramyxoviruses are important in viral evasion of the
innate immune response. Here, using a cell survival assay that identifies both
inhibitors and activators of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-mediated gene 
induction, we identified select paramyxoviral V proteins that inhibited
double-stranded RNA-mediated signaling; these are encoded by mumps virus (MuV),
human parainfluenza virus 2 (hPIV2), and parainfluenza virus 5 (PIV5), all
members of the genus Rubulavirus. We showed that interaction between V and the
IRF3/7 kinases, TRAF family member-associated NFkappaB activator (TANK)-binding
kinase 1 (TBK1)/inhibitor of kappaB kinase epsilon (IKKe), was essential for this
inhibition. Indeed, V proteins were phosphorylated directly by TBK1/IKKe, and
this, intriguingly, resulted in lowering of the cellular level of V. Thus, it
appears that V mimics IRF3 in both its phosphorylation by TBK1/IKKe and its
subsequent degradation. Finally, a PIV5 mutant encoding a V protein that could
not inhibit IKKe was much more susceptible to the antiviral effects of
double-stranded RNA than the wild-type virus. Because many innate immune response
signaling pathways, including those initiated by TLR3, TLR4, RIG-I, MDA5, and
DNA-dependent activator of IRFs (DAI), use TBK1/IKKe as the terminal kinases to
activate IRFs, rubulaviral V proteins have the potential to inhibit all of them.

PMCID: PMC2386944
PMID: 18362155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 23;283(21):14277-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709731200. Epub 2008
Mar 20.

Glucocorticoids inhibit IRF3 phosphorylation in response to Toll-like receptor-3 
and -4 by targeting TBK1 activation.

McCoy CE(1), Carpenter S, Pålsson-McDermott EM, Gearing LJ, O'Neill LA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2,
Ireland. cmccoy@tcd.ie

Phosphorylation of the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
is essential for the induction of promoters which contain the
interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE). IRF3 can be activated by Toll-like
receptor 3 (TLR3) in response to the double-stranded RNA mimic poly(I-C) and by
TLR4 in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Here we have analyzed the effect of
the glucocorticoid dexamethasone on this response. Dexamethasone inhibited the
induction of the ISRE-dependent gene RANTES (regulated on activation normal T
cell expressed and secreted) in both U373-CD14 cells and human peripheral blood
mononuclear cells and also an ISRE luciferase construct, activated by either TLR3
or TLR4. It also inhibited increased phosphorylation of IRF3 in its N terminus in
response to LPS and in its C terminus on Ser-396 in response to either poly(I-C) 
or LPS. Several dexamethasone-induced phosphatases were tested for possible
involvement in these effects; MKP1 did not appear to be involved, although MKP2
and MKP5 both partially inhibited induction of the ISRE, pointing to their
possible involvement in the effect of dexamethasone. Importantly, we found that
dexamethasone could inhibit TBK1 kinase activity and TBK1 phosphorylation on
Ser-172, both of which are required for IRF3 phosphorylation downstream of TLR3
and TLR4 stimulation. Our study, therefore, demonstrates that TBK1 is a target
for dexamethasone, common to both TLR3 and TLR4 signaling.

PMID: 18356163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Immunol. 2008 Apr 1;180(7):4910-8.

MDA5 participates in the detection of paramyxovirus infection and is essential
for the early activation of dendritic cells in response to Sendai Virus defective
interfering particles.

Yount JS(1), Gitlin L, Moran TM, López CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029, USA.

Defective interfering (DI) particles are byproducts of virus replication that
potently enhance dendritic cell (DC) maturation by virus infection. DI particles 
have been reported for many different viruses and are strong inducers of type I
IFNs. The cellular mechanisms involved in the response to DI particles are not
known. In this study, we show that 1) DI particles are recognized by more than
one viral sensor independently of TLRs and type I IFN signaling; 2) The helicase 
MDA5 participates in the detection of DI genomes as MDA5-deficient DCs respond
inefficiently to Sendai virus stocks containing DI particles; 3) DI particles
stimulate the expression of IRF3-responsive genes by a uniquely potent mechanism 
when compared with other prototypic viral stimulus; and 4) the efficient
detection of DI particles overcomes virus immune antagonism. These data highlight
the outstanding adjuvant capacity of DI particles in stimulating mouse and human 
DCs. They also offer biological relevance to the previously reported inhibition
of MDA5 by different paramyxovirus V proteins. The unique mechanism by which DI
particles trigger the maturation of DCs represents a novel strategy that could be
further exploited for the development of potent adjuvant molecules.

PMID: 18354215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Trends Biochem Sci. 2008 Apr;33(4):171-80. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2008.01.002. Epub 
2008 Mar 18.

Are the IKKs and IKK-related kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon similarly activated?

Chau TL(1), Gioia R, Gatot JS, Patrascu F, Carpentier I, Chapelle JP, O'Neill L, 
Beyaert R, Piette J, Chariot A.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Cluster for Applied Genoproteomics, University of Liège,
Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

The IkappaB kinases (IKKs) IKK-alpha and IKK-beta, and the IKK-related kinases
TBK1 and IKK-epsilon, have essential roles in innate immunity through
signal-induced activation of NF-kappaB, IRF3 and IRF7, respectively. Although the
signaling events within these pathways have been extensively studied, the
mechanisms of IKK and IKK-related complex assembly and activation remain poorly
defined. Recent data provide insight into the requirement for scaffold proteins
in complex assembly; NF-kappaB essential modulator coordinates some IKK
complexes, whereas TANK, NF-kappaB-activating kinase-associated protein 1 (NAP1) 
or similar to NAP1 TBK1 adaptor (SINTBAD) assemble TBK1 and IKK-epsilon
complexes. The different scaffold proteins undergo similar post-translational
modifications, including phosphorylation and non-degradative polyubiquitylation. 
Moreover, increasing evidence indicates that distinct scaffold proteins assemble 
IKK, and potentially TBK1 and IKK-epsilon subcomplexes, in a stimulus-specific
manner, which might be a mechanism to achieve specificity.

PMID: 18353649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2008 Mar;28(3):167-79. doi: 10.1089/jir.2007.0054.

Cigarette smoke suppresses type I interferon-mediated antiviral immunity in lung 
fibroblast and epithelial cells.

Bauer CM(1), Dewitte-Orr SJ, Hornby KR, Zavitz CC, Lichty BD, Stämpfli MR,
Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Gene Therapeutics, Department of Pathology and Molecular
Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5.

The objective of this study was to investigate the impact of cigarette smoke on
innate antiviral defense mechanisms; specifically, we examined the effects of
cigarette smoke on the induction of type I interferon (IFN). We observed a
dose-dependent decrease in the ability of human lung fibroblast and epithelial
cells to elicit an antiviral response against a viral double-strand RNA (dsRNA)
mimic, polyI:C, in the presence of cigarette smoke-conditioned medium (SCM).
Mechanistically, SCM decreases the expression of IFN-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15)
and IFN regulatory factor-7 (IRF-7) transcripts and suppresses the nuclear
translocation of key transcription factors, nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) and
IRF-3, after polyI:C stimulation. Furthermore, we provide evidence that the
intercellular defense strategy against viral infection is also impaired. We
observed a decrease in the ability of fibroblasts to elicit an antiviral state in
response to IFN-beta stimulation. This was associated with decreased nuclear
translocation of phosphorylated Stat1 in response to IFN-beta treatment. The
effects elicited by SCM are reversible and are almost entirely abrogated in the
presence of an antioxidant, such as glutathione. Our findings suggest that
cigarette smoke affects the immediate-early, inductive, and amplification phases 
of the type I IFN response.

PMID: 18338949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Immunol. 2008 May;45(10):2839-46. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.01.028. Epub
2008 Mar 11.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) suppresses
interferon-beta production by interfering with the RIG-I signaling pathway.

Luo R(1), Xiao S, Jiang Y, Jin H, Wang D, Liu M, Chen H, Fang L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) is the cause of an
economically important swine disease that has been devastating the swine industry
since the late 1980s. Accumulating evidences have revealed that PRRSV infection
fails to induce type I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta), which are normally induced
rapidly during virus replication in virus-infected cells. However, the potential 
mechanisms remain largely unclear. In this study, we showed that PRRSV infection 
activated the signal transduction components of NF-kappaB and AP-1, but not of
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), an essential IFN-beta transcription
factor. Furthermore, PRRSV infection significantly blocked synthetic
dsRNA-induced IFN-beta production and IRF3 nuclear translocation. To better
understand the upstream signaling events that suppress IRF3 activation, we
further investigated the roles of individual components of the retinoic
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)- and Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3)-mediated signaling
pathway for IFN-beta production during PRRSV infection. We observed that PRRSV
infection significantly inhibited dsRNA-induced IRF3 activation and IFN-beta
generation by inactivating IFN-beta promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), an adaptor
molecule of RIG-I. In contrast, PRRSV infection only partially reduced the
activation of TIR domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta (TRIF), an adaptor 
molecule of TLR3. Our results suggest that PRRSV infection suppresses production 
of IFN-beta primarily by interfering with the IPS-1 activation in the RIG-I
signaling pathway.

PMID: 18336912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 May;28(5):871-7. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.107.160663. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Effects of statins on adipose tissue inflammation: their inhibitory effect on
MyD88-independent IRF3/IFN-beta pathway in macrophages.

Abe M(1), Matsuda M, Kobayashi H, Miyata Y, Nakayama Y, Komuro R, Fukuhara A,
Shimomura I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Macrophage-mediated chronic inflammation of adipose tissue is causally
linked to insulin resistance in obesity. The beneficial effects of
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl (HMG) coenzyme A (CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins) 
on glucose metabolism have been suggested, but the effects of these agents on
adipose tissue inflammation are unclear. The aim of the present study is to
define the effects of statins on adipose tissue inflammation and macrophages.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pravastatin or pitavastatin treatment of obese mice
attenuated an increase in mRNA expressions of proinflammatory genes, including
MCP1 and IL6, in adipose tissue. The supernatant of TLR4-stimulated RAW264
macrophages strongly induced the expression of these genes in 3T3-L1 adipocytes, 
which was inhibited by pretreatment of macrophages with either statin. Statins
inhibited TLR4-mediated activation of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF)3
by either lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or palmitic acid, resulting in suppression of 
IFN-beta expression, but not that of NF-kappaB or JNK. Moreover, statins strongly
downregulated TLR3-mediated gene expressions by poly(I:C), but not
TLR2-stimulation by zymosan A. Neutralization of IFN-beta attenuated
proinflammatory activities of the macrophage supernatant.
CONCLUSIONS: Statins partially attenuated the development of adipose tissue
inflammation in obese mice, which might be associated with an inhibitory effect
of statins on TLR4-triggered expression of IFN-beta via MyD88-independent
signaling pathway in macrophages.

PMID: 18323514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. EMBO J. 2008 Mar 19;27(6):865-75. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.28. Epub 2008 Feb 28.

S-glutathionylation of IRF3 regulates IRF3-CBP interaction and activation of the 
IFN beta pathway.

Prinarakis E(1), Chantzoura E, Thanos D, Spyrou G.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Basic Research I-Biochemistry Division, Biomedical Research
Foundation, Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is an essential transcriptional regulator
of the interferon genes. IRF3 is constitutively present in a latent conformation 
in the cell cytoplasm. In cells infected by Sendai virus, IRF3 becomes
phosphorylated, homodimerizes, translocates to the nucleus, binds to target genes
and activates transcription by interacting with CBP/p300 co-activators. In this
study, we report that in non-infected cells IRF3 is post-translationally modified
by S-glutathionylation. Upon viral-infection, it undergoes a deglutathionylation 
step that is controlled by the cytoplasmic enzyme glutaredoxin-1 (GRX-1). In
virus-infected GRX-1 knockdown cells, phosphorylation, homodimerization and
nuclear translocation of IRF3 were not affected, but the transcriptional activity
of IRF3 and the expression of interferon-beta (IFNbeta), were severely reduced.
We show that deglutathionylation of IRF3 is necessary for efficient interaction
of IRF3 with CBP, an event essential for transcriptional activation of the
interferon genes. Taken together, these findings reveal a crucial role for
S-glutathionylation and GRX-1 in controlling the activation of IRF3 and IFNbeta
gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2274937
PMID: 18309294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Mar;38(3):614-8. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838161.

IRAK4 in TLR/IL-1R signaling: possible clinical applications.

Li X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, 
USA. lix@ccf.org

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2008 Mar;38(3):788-96.

A member of the IL-1 receptor (IL-1R)-associated kinase (IRAK) family, IRAK4, has
been shown to play an essential role in Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated
signaling. IRAK4 kinase-inactive knockin mice have been shown to be completely
resistant to LPS- and CpG-induced shock, due to impaired TLR-mediated induction
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines. A reduction of LPS-, R848- and
IL-1-mediated mRNA stability contributes to the reduced cytokine and chemokine
production in bone marrow (BM)-derived macrophages from IRAK4 kinase-inactive
knockin mice: however, not all of the TLR/IL-1R signaling events are ablated in
IRAK4 kinase-inactive knockin mice. A paper in this issue of the European Journal
of Immunology shows that, while JNK activation is significantly impaired,
NF-kappaB and IRF3 activation are retained in the absence of IRAK4 kinase
activity. These residual TLR/IL-1R-induced signaling events allow the production 
of some cytokines and chemokines (including TNFalpha and CXCL1); at early times
after the stimulation and induction of a group of TLR-mediated
MyD88/IRAK4-independent genes in IRAK4 kinase-inactive knockin cells. Therefore, 
pharmacological blocking of IRAK4 kinase activity will retain some levels of host
defence, while reducing the levels and duration of inflammatory responses, which 
should provide beneficial therapies for sepsis and chronic inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 18286571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Int Immunopharmacol. 2008 Mar;8(3):495-501. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2007.12.008.
Epub 2008 Jan 14.

Selenium suppresses the activation of transcription factor NF-kappa B and IRF3
induced by TLR3 or TLR4 agonists.

Youn HS(1), Lim HJ, Choi YJ, Lee JY, Lee MY, Ryu JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences,
Soonchunhyang University, Asan-Si, Chungnam 336-745, South Korea.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in recognition of microbial
components and induce innate immune responses by recognizing invading microbial
pathogens leading to the activation of the adaptive immune responses. The
microbial components trigger the activation of two downstream signaling pathways 
of TLRs; MyD88- and TRIF-dependent pathways leading to the expression of
pro-inflammatory cytokines and type I interferons (IFNs). The MyD88- and
TRIF-dependent pathways lead to the activation of NF-kappa B and IRF3 through the
activation of IKK-beta and TBK1, respectively. Selenium is an essential trace
element nutrient possessing anticarcinogenic properties. Here, we attempted to
identify the molecular targets of selenium in TLR signaling pathways. Selenium
inhibited NF-kappaB activation induced by poly[I:C] (TLR3 agonist), LPS (TLR4
agonist) or overexpression of MyD88 or IKK-beta which is the key kinase of
MyD88-dependent signaling pathway. Selenium inhibited IRF3 activation induced by 
poly[I:C], LPS or the overexpression of TRIF or TBK1. Selenium also suppressed
the expression of COX-2 and iNOS and the endogenous IFN beta mRNA induced by
poly[I:C] or LPS. Therefore, our results suggest that selenium can modulate both 
MyD88- and TRIF-dependent signaling pathways of TLRs leading to decreased
inflammatory gene expression.

PMID: 18279804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Mar;38(3):788-96. doi: 10.1002/eji.200737886.

IRAK-4 kinase activity-dependent and -independent regulation of
lipopolysaccharide-inducible genes.

Koziczak-Holbro M(1), Glück A, Tschopp C, Mathison JC, Gram H.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2008 Mar;38(3):614-8.

IRAK-4 kinase inactive (IRAK-4 KD) knock-in mice display defects in TLR- and IL-1
receptor signaling and are resistant to LPS-induced shock. In the present study
we examined the LPS-induced response in IRAK-4 KD mice in more detail. We show
that IRAK-4 kinase activity is required for certain aspects of TLR-mediated
signaling but not for others. We found that IRAK-4 KD cells displayed reduced JNK
and p38 signaling, while NF-kappaB was activated to a normal level but with
delayed kinetics compared to wild-type cells. TLR4-mediated IRF3 activation was
intact in these cells. Comprehensive analysis of expression of LPS-inducible
genes by microarray demonstrated that IRAK-4 KD cells were severely impaired in
the expression of many pro-inflammatory genes, suggesting their dependence on
IRAK-4 kinase activity. In contrast, the expression of a subset of LPS-induced
genes of anti-viral response was not affected by IRAK-4 kinase deficiency.
Additionally, we demonstrate that LPS-activated early expression and production
of some cytokines, e.g., TNF-alpha, is partially induced in the absence of IRAK-4
kinase activity. This suggests that the partially unaffected TLR4-mediated
signaling could still drive expression of these genes in early phases and that
IRAK-4 kinase activity is important for a more sustained anti-bacterial response.

PMID: 18266302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Apr 11;368(3):556-62. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.01.123. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Characterization of the double-stranded RNA responses in human liver progenitor
cells.

Maire M(1), Parent R, Morand AL, Alotte C, Trépo C, Durantel D, Petit MA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U871, 69003 Lyon, France.

Human HepaRG cells are liver progenitors which possess hepatocyte-like
functionality. We investigated the effects of double-stranded (ds) RNA on
interferon (IFN)-beta and chemokine (CK) expression in these cells. By microarray
and ELISA, we showed strong induction of CXCL10 and interleulin (IL)-8 besides
IFN-beta and other CK ligands. RNA interference directed silencing of TLR3,
RIG-I, IRF3, NFkappaB or MAP kinases (p38, ERK, JNK) was carried out. Knockdown
of all these molecules, except ERK and JNK, blocked IFN-beta production. Both
TLR3 and RIG-I are required for CXCL10 expression. Silencing of TLR3 completely
impaired the IL-8 expression. dsRNA-conditioned medium from HepaRG cells exerted 
a drastic antiviral effect in HCV replicons, and in the JFH-1-based HCV
production cell culture system. The IFN-beta knockdown in HepaRG cells removed
this antiviral effect but did not enhance their capacity to initiate HCV RNA
replication. We conclude that dsRNA induces antiviral and pro-inflammatory status
in HepaRG cells.

PMID: 18258184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Leukoc Biol. 2008 May;83(5):1249-57. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0607412. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

poly(I:C) and LPS induce distinct IRF3 and NF-kappaB signaling during type-I IFN 
and TNF responses in human macrophages.

Reimer T(1), Brcic M, Schweizer M, Jungi TW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Virology, University of Bern, Laenggassstrasse 122,
Bern CH-3001, Switzerland. reimer@ivv.unibe.ch

Macrophages play major roles in the onset of immune responses and inflammation by
inducing a variety of cytokines such as TNF and IFN-beta. The pathogen-associated
molecular pattern, polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid [poly(I:C)], and LPS were used
to study type-I IFN and TNF responses in human macrophages. Additionally,
activation of the key signaling pathways, IFN-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and
NF-kappaB, were studied. We found that TNF production occurred rapidly after LPS 
stimulation. LPS induced a strong IFN-beta mRNA response within a short
time-frame, which subsided at 8 h. The IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), ISG56 and
IFN-inducible protein 10, were strongly induced by LPS. These responses were
associated with NF-kappaB and IRF3 activation, as shown by IRF3 dimerization and 
by nuclear translocation assays. poly(I:C), on the other hand, induced a strong
and long-lasting (>12 h) IFN-beta mRNA and protein response, particularly when
transfected, whereas only a protracted TNF response was observed when poly(I:C)
was transfected. However, these responses were induced in the absence of
detectable IRF3 and NF-kappaB signaling. Thus, in human macrophages, poly(I:C)
treatment induces a distinct cytokine response when compared with murine
macrophages. Additionally, a robust IFN-beta response can be induced in the
absence of detectable IRF3 activation.

PMID: 18252870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Immunology. 2008 Aug;124(4):480-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2567.2007.02799.x. Epub
2008 Jan 31.

Double-stranded RNA mediates interferon regulatory factor 3 activation and
interleukin-6 production by engaging Toll-like receptor 3 in human brain
astrocytes.

Kim H(1), Yang E, Lee J, Kim SH, Shin JS, Park JY, Choi SJ, Kim SJ, Choi IH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Institute for Immunology and Immunological
Diseases, Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College
of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) participates in the innate immune response by
recognizing viral pathogens. In this study, human brain astrocytes were found to 
constitutively express TLR3, and this expression was increased by
interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) or double-stranded RNA (dsRNA). Treatment employing 
dsRNA in astrocytes induced IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) phosphorylation, dimer
formation and nuclear translocation followed by STAT1 activation. This treatment 
also activated nuclear factor-kappaB, p38 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase
significantly, while activating extracellular signal-regulated kinase to a lesser
extent. Treatment with anti-TLR3 antibody inhibited dsRNA-mediated interleukin-6 
(IL-6) production. In the presence of mitogen-activated protein kinase
inhibitors, astrocytes failed to secrete IL-6 in response to dsRNA treatment.
Therefore, dsRNA-induced IL-6 production is dependent on mitogen-activated
protein kinases and type I IFN production is dependent on IRF3 in brain
astrocytes. These results suggest that brain inflammation, which produces
inflammatory cytokines and type I IFNs, may enhance TLR3 expression in
astrocytes. Additionally, upregulated TLR3 might modulate inflammatory processes 
by producing proinflammatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC2492940
PMID: 18248388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Immunol. 2008 Feb 1;180(3):1818-25.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate 1 and TLR4 mediate IFN-beta expression in human gingival 
epithelial cells.

Eskan MA(1), Rose BG, Benakanakere MR, Lee MJ, Kinane DF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Oral Health and Systemic Disease, Department of Periodontics,
Endodontics, and Dental Hygiene, University of Louisville School of Dentistry,
501 South Preston Street, Louisville, KY 40202, USA.

IFN-beta production is a critical step in human innate immune responses and is
primarily controlled at the transcription level by highly ordered mechanisms.
IFN-beta can be induced by pattern-recognition receptors such as the TLR4. S1P1
is a G protein-coupled receptor, which has a high affinity for sphingosine
1-phosphate (S1P). Although many of the receptors and signaling pathways leading 
to the expression of IFN-beta have been identified and characterized, it is still
unclear how IFN-beta is regulated in primary human gingival epithelial cells
(HGECs). In this study, we demonstrate that S1P1 and TLR4, acting in unison, play
an important role in IFN-beta expression at the protein and mRNA level in HGECs. 
We demonstrate that the expression of both IFN-beta and IFN-inducible protein-10 
(CXCL-10) is significantly up-regulated by LPS and S1P or LPS and a specific S1P1
agonist. This enhanced innate immune response is attenuated in HGECs by small
interfering RNA knockdown of either TLR4 or S1P1. Moreover, we show that
triggering of TLR4 results in the increased expression of S1P1 receptors.
Furthermore, we found that IFN-regulatory factor 3 activation was maximized by
LPS and S1P through PI3K. Our data show that triggering TLR4 increases S1P1, such
that both TLR4 and S1P1 acting through PI3K enhancement of IFN-regulatory factor 
3 activation increase IFN-beta expression in epithelial cells. The functional
association between TLR4 and the S1P1 receptor demonstrates a novel mechanism in 
the regulation of IFN-beta and CXCL-10 in human primary gingival epithelial
cells.

PMID: 18209079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Immunol. 2008 Apr;45(8):2277-87. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2007.11.018. Epub 2008
Jan 22.

Identification of MAVS splicing variants that interfere with RIGI/MAVS pathway
signaling.

Lad SP(1), Yang G, Scott DA, Chao TH, Correia Jda S, de la Torre JC, Li E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey
Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The mitochondrial anti-viral signaling protein (MAVS), also known as CARDIF,
IPS-1, KIAA1271 and VISA, is a mitochondria associated protein that regulates
type I interferon production through coordinated activation of NF-kappaB and
IRF3. The N-terminal CARD domain of MAVS interacts with RIGI helicase of upcapped
RNA detection and the putative TRAF2 and TRAF6 binding motifs modulate protein
interaction for NF-kappaB activation. MAVS is encoded by a single gene composed
of 6 exons but is generally detected as multiple protein bands after separation
by SDS-PAGE. In an effort to identify MAVS variants with diverse biological
functions, we isolated three splicing variants and named them MAVS 1a (exon 2
deletion), 1b (exon 3 deletion) and 1c (exon 6 deletion), respectively. MAVS 1a
and 1b, due to a frame shift by exon deletion, encode 131 and 124 aa residues,
respectively. Except the first 39 aa residues encoded by exon 1, MAVS 1a does not
share sequence homology with known proteins, it instead contains a putative
TRAF2-binding motif and interacts with TRAF2 and RIP1. MAVS 1b shares the first
97 residues with wt MAVS and 27 aa residues of unknown protein. Unlike MAVS that 
activates both NF-kappaB and IRF3 pathways, expression of MAVS 1b selectively
activates an IFNbeta but not an IL8 promoter. MAVS 1b interacts with RIP1 and
FADD and exhibits anti-viral activity against VSV infection. This study uncovers 
MAVS splicing variants of diverse biological function.

PMID: 18207245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Clin Microbiol Rev. 2008 Jan;21(1):13-25. doi: 10.1128/CMR.00022-07.

Sensing of viral infection and activation of innate immunity by toll-like
receptor 3.

Vercammen E(1), Staal J, Beyaert R.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Molecular Biomedical Research, VIB, Ghent, Belgium.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) form a major group of transmembrane receptors that are
involved in the detection of invading pathogens. Double-stranded RNA is a marker 
for viral infection that is recognized by TLR3. TLR3 triggering activates
specific signaling pathways that culminate in the activation of NF-kappaB and
IRF3 transcription factors, as well as apoptosis, enabling the host to mount an
effective innate immune response through the induction of cytokines, chemokines, 
and other proinflammatory mediators. In this review, we describe the paradoxical 
role of TLR3 in innate immunity against different viruses and in viral
pathogenesis but also the evidence for TLR3 as a "danger" receptor in nonviral
diseases. We also discuss the structure and cellular localization of TLR3, as
well as the complex signaling and regulatory events that contribute to
TLR3-mediated immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2223843
PMID: 18202435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Virol. 2008 Mar;82(6):2699-704. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02344-07. Epub 2008 Jan 16.

Inhibition of IRF-3 activation by VP35 is critical for the high level of
virulence of ebola virus.

Hartman AL(1), Bird BH, Towner JS, Antoniadou ZA, Zaki SR, Nichol ST.

Author information: 
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 Clifton Rd., MS G-14,
Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.

Zaire ebolavirus causes a rapidly progressing hemorrhagic disease with high
mortality. Identification of the viral virulence factors that contribute to the
severity of disease induced by Ebola virus is critical for the design of
therapeutics and vaccines against the disease. Given the rapidity of disease
progression, virus interaction with the innate immune system early in the course 
of infection likely plays an important role in determining the outcome of the
disease. The Ebola virus VP35 protein inhibits the activation of IRF-3, a
critical transcription factor for the induction of early antiviral immunity.
Previous studies revealed that a single amino acid change (R312A) in VP35 renders
the protein unable to inhibit IRF-3 activation. A reverse-genetics-generated,
mouse-adapted, recombinant Ebola virus that encodes the R312A mutation in VP35
was produced. We found that relative to the case for wild-type virus containing
the authentic VP35 sequence, this single amino acid change in VP35 renders the
virus completely attenuated in mice. Given that these viruses differ by only a
single amino acid in the IRF-3 inhibitory domain of VP35, the level of alteration
of virulence is remarkable and highlights the importance of VP35 for the
pathogenesis of Ebola virus.

PMCID: PMC2259001
PMID: 18199658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Gen Virol. 2008 Feb;89(Pt 2):432-43. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.83316-0.

Hepatitis C virus proteins interfere with the activation of chemokine gene
promoters and downregulate chemokine gene expression.

Sillanpää M(1), Kaukinen P, Melén K, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland. maarit.sillanpaa@ktl.fi

The hepatitis C virus (HCV) non-structural (NS) 3/4A protein complex inhibits the
retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I) pathway by proteolytically cleaving
mitochondria-associated CARD-containing adaptor protein Cardif, and this leads to
reduced production of beta interferon (IFN-beta). This study examined the
expression of CCL5 (regulated upon activation, normal T-cell expressed and
secreted, or RANTES), CXCL8 (interleukin 8) and CXCL10 (IFN-gamma-activated
protein 10, or IP-10) chemokine genes in osteosarcoma cell lines that inducibly
expressed NS3/4A, NS4B, core-E1-E2-p7 and the entire HCV polyprotein. Sendai
virus (SeV)-induced production of IFN-beta, CCL5, CXCL8 and CXCL10 was
downregulated by the NS3/4A protein complex and by the full-length HCV
polyprotein. Expression of NS3/4A and the HCV polyprotein reduced the binding of 
interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 1 and 3 and, to a lesser extent, nuclear
factor (NF)-kappaB (p65/p50) to their respective binding elements on the CXCL10
promoter during SeV infection. Furthermore, binding of IRF1 and IRF3 to the
interferon-stimulated response element-like element, and of c-Jun and
phosphorylated c-Jun to the activator protein 1 element of the CXCL8 promoter,
was reduced when NS3/4A and the HCV polyprotein were expressed. In cell lines
expressing NS3/4A and the HCV polyprotein, the subcellular localization of
mitochondria was changed, and this was kinetically associated with the partial
degradation of endogenous Cardif. These results indicate that NS3/4A alone or as 
part of the HCV polyprotein disturbs the expression of IRF1- and IRF3-regulated
genes, as well as affecting mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase- and
NF-kappaB-regulated genes.

PMID: 18198374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Jan;4(1):e6. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.0040006.

Distinct TLR- and NLR-mediated transcriptional responses to an intracellular
pathogen.

Leber JH(1), Crimmins GT, Raghavan S, Meyer-Morse NP, Cox JS, Portnoy DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California, United States of America.

How the innate immune system tailors specific responses to diverse microbial
infections is not well understood. Cells use a limited number of host receptors
and signaling pathways to both discriminate among extracellular and intracellular
microbes, and also to generate responses commensurate to each threat. Here, we
have addressed these questions by using DNA microarrays to monitor the macrophage
transcriptional response to the intracellular bacterial pathogen Listeria
monocytogenes. By utilizing combinations of host and bacterial mutants, we have
defined the host transcriptional responses to vacuolar and cytosolic bacteria.
These compartment-specific host responses induced significantly different sets of
target genes, despite activating similar transcription factors. Vacuolar
signaling was entirely MyD88-dependent, and induced the transcription of
pro-inflammatory cytokines. The IRF3-dependent cytosolic response induced a
distinct set of target genes, including IFNbeta. Many of these cytosolic response
genes were induced by secreted cytokines, so we further identified those host
genes induced independent of secondary signaling. The host response to cytosolic 
bacteria was reconstituted by the cytosolic delivery of L. monocytogenes genomic 
DNA, but we observed an amplification of this response by NOD2 signaling in
response to MDP. Correspondingly, the induction of IFNbeta was reduced in nod2-/-
macrophages during infection with either L. monocytogenes or Mycobacterium
tuberculosis. Combinatorial control of IFNbeta induction by recognition of both
DNA and MDP may highlight a mechanism by which the innate immune system
integrates the responses to multiple ligands presented in the cytosol by
intracellular pathogens.

PMCID: PMC2186359
PMID: 18193943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nihon Rinsho. 2008 Jan;66(1):83-8.

[Immunosuppressive effects of glucocoriticoid].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health.

Although glucocorticoid (GC) is widely used to treat a variety of autoimmune
diseases, inflammatory diseases, allergic diseases and many, GC causes a number
of significant side effects. Among them, bacterial, fungal and viral infections, 
based on immunosuppressive conditions induced by GC, are major complications of
GC therapy. GC exerts its biological effects through binding to the GC receptor
(GR), a ligand activated transcription factor(TF). Recent findings indicate that 
the crosstalk between GR and certain TF induced by cytokines or toll-like
receptor (TLR) signaling, results in the modulation of genes targeted by these
specific TF, including NF-kappaB, AP-1, STAT and IRF3. The modification of these 
TF by GR regulate the transcription of targeted genes involved in innate
immunity, acquired immunity, allergy and inflammation, which results in the final
outcome of the immune responses.

PMID: 18193547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Cell Microbiol. 2008 May;10(5):1116-29. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2007.01114.x.
Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Type I IFN are host modulators of strain-specific Listeria monocytogenes
virulence.

Reutterer B(1), Stockinger S, Pilz A, Soulat D, Kastner R, Westermayer S, Rülicke
T, Müller M, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology,
University of Vienna, Dr Bohr-Gasse 9/4, A-1030 Vienna, Austria.

Type I IFN (IFN-I) increase the sensitivity of cells and mice to lethal infection
with Listeria monocytogenes. Therefore the amount of IFN-I produced during
infection might be an important factor determining Listeria virulence. Two
commonly used strains of L. monocytogenes, EGD and LO28, were identified as,
respectively, low and high inducers of IFN-I synthesis in infected macrophages.
Increased IFN-I production resulted from the stronger ability of the LO28 strain 
to trigger the IRF3 signalling pathway and correlated with an increased
sensitization of macrophages to lethal infection. In contrast, stimulation of
NFkappaB, MAPK, or inflammasome signalling by the LO28 and EGD strains did not
differ significantly. The LO28 strain was more virulent in wild-type (wt) C57/BL6
mice than the EGD strain whereas both strains were similarly virulent in IFN-I
receptor-deficient C57/BL6 mice. Together our data suggest that isolates of wt L.
monocytogenes differ in their ability to trigger the IRF3 signalling pathway and 
IFN-I production, and that the amount of IFN-I produced during infection is an
important determinant of Listeria virulence.

PMID: 18182083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Blood. 2008 Mar 15;111(6):3050-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-11-122408. Epub 2008
Jan 7.

Targeting dendritic cell signaling to regulate the response to immunization.

Escors D(1), Lopes L, Lin R, Hiscott J, Akira S, Davis RJ, Collins MK.

Author information: 
(1)Infection and Immunity, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Dendritic cells (DCs) are key regulators of the immune system; they capture
antigens and then can either stimulate an immune response or induce tolerance.
Our aim was to activate individual DC signaling pathways to regulate the immune
response. We therefore expressed constitutive activators of mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK) pathways or the interferon pathway, together with tumor
antigens, using lentivectors. Triggering of p38 activated DCs substantially
enhanced the antitumor immune response and prolonged survival of tumor-bearing
mice. Activation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) increased
TGF-beta expression while expression of a constitutively activated interferon
regulatory factor-3 (IRF3) stimulated IL-10 secretion by DCs. ERK and IRF3
suppressed the immune response and stimulated expansion of regulatory T cells.
These results provide a toolkit to regulate immune responses to viral vector or
DC immunization; vaccine responses to foreign or tumor antigens can be enhanced
and harmful responses to self-antigens or introduced transgenes can be reduced.

PMID: 18180378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Genes Immun. 2008 Mar;9(2):168-75. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

IRF-3-dependent and augmented target genes during viral infection.

Andersen J(1), VanScoy S, Cheng TF, Gomez D, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Stony Brook University, New York,
NY 11794, USA.

Activation of the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) is 
an essential event in the innate immune response to viral infection. To
understand the contribution of IRF-3 to host defense, we used a systems biology
approach to analyze global gene expression dependent on IRF-3. Comparison of
expression profiles in cells from IRF-3 knockout animals or wild-type siblings
following viral infection revealed three sets of induced genes, those that are
strictly dependent on IRF-3, augmented with IRF-3, or not responsive to IRF-3.
Products of identified IRF-3 target genes are involved in innate or acquired
immunity, or in the regulation of cell cycle, apoptosis and proliferation. These 
results reveal the global effects of one transcription factor in the immune
response and provide information to evaluate the integrated response to viral
infection.

PMID: 18094709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mol Immunol. 2008 Apr;45(7):1926-34. Epub 2007 Dec 18.

Differential regulation of IKK alpha-mediated activation of IRF3/7 by NIK.

Wang RP(1), Zhang M, Li Y, Diao FC, Chen D, Zhai Z, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Type I interferons (IFNs) are critical mediators of the innate immune system to
defend viral infection. Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7 are
transcription factors that play critical roles in type I IFN production in
response to viral infection. It has been shown that the protein kinase I kappaB
kinase alpha (IKK alpha) is critically involved in IRF7 activation and IFN-alpha 
production in Toll-like receptor 7/9 (TLR7/9) signaling cascades. However,
overexpression of IKK alpha does not activate the IFN-alpha promoters. Here we
show that the protein kinase nuclear factor kappaB-inducing kinase (NIK) confers 
IKK alpha the ability to activate IRF3/7. Previous studies have shown that NIK
phosphorylates IKK alpha at Ser-176 and Ser-180 residues, and mutation of each of
the two residues to glutamate, which mimics its phosphorylation, caused
constitutive activation of NF-kappaB. However, mutation of the two serine
residues has differential effects on IKK alpha-mediated activation of IRF3/7.
While IKK alpha(S176E) constitutively activates IRF3/7, IKK alpha(S180E) losses
its ability to activate IRF3/7. These findings suggest that IKK alpha-mediated
activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3/7 are differentially regulated by NIK, and NIK
plays an important role in TLR7/9-mediated IFN-alpha production.

PMID: 18068231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 2008 Feb 15;283(7):3988-96. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

MyD88 functions as a negative regulator of TLR3/TRIF-induced corneal inflammation
by inhibiting activation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase.

Johnson AC(1), Li X, Pearlman E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

The adaptor molecule MyD88 is necessary for responses to all Toll-like receptors 
except TLR3 and a subset of TLR4 signaling events, which are mediated by the
adaptor molecule TRIF. To determine the role of TRIF in host inflammatory
responses, corneal epithelium of C57BL/6, TLR3(-/-), TRIF(-/-), and MyD88(-/-)
mice was abraded and stimulated with the synthetic TLR3 ligand poly(I:C). We
found that poly(I:C) induced a pronounced cellular infiltration into the corneal 
stroma, which was TLR3- and TRIF-dependent. Unexpectedly, the inflammatory
response was exacerbated in MyD88(-/-) mice, with enhanced neutrophil and
F4/80(+) cell infiltration into the corneal stroma and elevated corneal haze,
which is an indicator of loss of corneal transparency. To determine whether
MyD88-dependent inhibition of TLR3/TRIF responses is a general phenomenon, we
examined cytokine production by MyD88(-/-) bone marrow-derived macrophages;
however, no significant difference was observed between MyD88(+/+) or MyD88(-/-) 
macrophages. In contrast, human corneal epithelial cells (HCECs) transfected with
MyD88 small interfering RNA had significantly increased (2.5-fold) CCL5/RANTES
production compared with control HCECs, demonstrating a negative regulatory role 
for MyD88 in TLR3/TRIF responses in these cells. Finally, knockdown of MyD88 in
HCECs resulted in increased phosphorylation of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), but
not p38, IRF-3, or NF-kappaB. Consistent with this finding, the JNK inhibitor
SP600125, but not p38 inhibitor SB203580, ablated this response. Taken together, 
these findings demonstrate a novel JNK-dependent inhibitory role for MyD88 in the
TLR3/TRIF activation pathway.

PMID: 18057004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Cancer Res. 2007 Dec 1;67(23):11133-40.

Direct transcriptional activation of promyelocytic leukemia protein by IFN
regulatory factor 3 induces the p53-dependent growth inhibition of cancer cells.

Kim TK(1), Lee JS, Oh SY, Jin X, Choi YJ, Lee TH, Lee Eh, Choi YK, You S, Chung
YG, Lee JB, DePinho RA, Chin L, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Cell Growth and Function Regulation, Division of
Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, School of Medicine,
Korea University, Anam-dong, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-713, South Korea.

IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is a transcriptional factor that plays a crucial
role in activation of innate immunity and inflammation in response to viral
infection, and is also involved in p53-dependent inhibition of cell growth.
Although functional activation of IRF3 by viral infection is relatively well
documented, the biological role and regulatory mechanism underlying cell growth
inhibition by IRF3 are poorly understood. Here, we show a novel regulatory
pathway connecting IRF3-promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML)-p53 in primary and
cancer cell lines. Overexpression of IRF3 induces p53-dependent cell growth
inhibition in cancer cell lines with normal p53 activity. In addition,
doxycycline-induced expression of IRF3 in U87MG cells inhibits tumor growth in
nude mice in vivo. IRF3 is found to increase expression of PML by a direct
transcriptional activation as determined by PML-promoter-luciferase and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays. When PML is depleted by RNA interference-mediated
knockdown, IRF3 fails to increase p53 acetylation and its transcriptional
activity. Taken together, the results of the present study indicate that direct
transcriptional activation of PML by IRF3 results in the p53-dependent growth
inhibition of normal and cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, which is suggestive
of a novel regulatory network between the innate immune response and tumor
suppression.

PMID: 18056437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Hepatology. 2008 Jan;47(1):207-14.

CXCL10 regulates liver innate immune response against ischemia and reperfusion
injury.

Zhai Y(1), Shen XD, Gao F, Zhao A, Freitas MC, Lassman C, Luster AD, Busuttil RW,
Kupiec-Weglinski JW.

Author information: 
(1)Dumont-UCLA Transplant Center, Division of Liver and Pancreas Transplantation,
Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA
90095, USA.

We have shown that activation of toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) and its interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-dependent downstream signaling pathway are required
for the development of liver ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI). This study
focused on the role of TLR4-IRF3 activation pathway products, in particular,
chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 10 (CXCL10). The induction of CXCL10 by liver IR
was rapid (1 hour postreperfusion), restricted (ischemic lobes), and specific (no
CXCL9 and CXCL11 induction). Functionally, CXCL10 was critical for IR-induced
liver inflammation and hepatocellular injury. CXCL10 knockout (KO) mice were
protected from IRI, as evidenced by reduced serum alanine aminotransferase (sALT)
levels and preserved liver histological detail. The induction of pro-inflammatory
genes, such as tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin 1beta
(IL-1beta), IL-6, and IL-12beta was diminished, whereas the induction of the
IL-10 gene remained intact in CXCL10 KO mice, indicating an altered liver
response against IR. This was accompanied by selective down-regulation of
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK), but intact Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK), activation in the KO IR livers. This altered liver inflammation response
was (1) specific to IR, because lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induced a comparable
pro-inflammatory response in CXCL10 KO and wild-type (WT) mice; and (2)
responsible for liver cytoprotection from IR, because neutralization of IL-10
restored local inflammation and hepatocellular damage.CONCLUSION: CXCL10
regulates liver inflammation response against IRI, and its deficiency protected
livers from IRI by local IL-10-mediated cytoprotection. Targeting CXCL10 may
provide a novel therapeutic means to ameliorate liver IRI in clinics.

PMID: 18041715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cell Microbiol. 2007 Dec;9(12):2921-30.

The mengovirus leader protein blocks interferon-alpha/beta gene transcription and
inhibits activation of interferon regulatory factor 3.

Hato SV(1), Ricour C, Schulte BM, Lanke KH, de Bruijni M, Zoll J, Melchers WJ,
Michiels T, van Kuppeveld FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical
Centre, Nijmegen Centre for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Viral infection of mammalian cells triggers the synthesis and secretion of type I
interferons (i.e. IFN-alpha/beta), which induce the transcription of genes that
cause cells to adopt an antiviral state. Many viruses have adapted mechanisms to 
evade IFN-alpha/beta-mediated responses. The leader protein of mengovirus, a
picornavirus, has been implicated as an IFN-alpha/beta antagonist. Here, we show 
that the leader inhibits the transcription of IFN-alpha/beta and that both the
presence of a zinc finger motif in its N-terminus and phosphorylation of
threonine-47 are required for this function. Transcription of IFN-alpha/beta
genes relies on the activity of a number of transcription factors, including
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). We show that the leader interferes with
the transactivation activity of IRF-3 by interfering with its dimerization.
Accordingly, mutant viruses with a disturbed leader function were impaired in
their ability to suppress IFN-alpha/beta transcription in vivo. By consequence,
the leader mutant viruses had an impaired ability to replicate and spread in
normal mice but not in IFNAR-KO mice, which are incapable of mounting an
IFN-alpha/beta-dependent antiviral response. These results suggest that the
leader, by suppressing IRF3-mediated IFN-alpha/beta production, plays an
important role in replication and dissemination of mengovirus in its host.

PMID: 17991048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Immunol. 2007 Nov 15;179(10):6867-72.

Spatiotemporal mobilization of Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor
molecule-1 in response to dsRNA.

Funami K(1), Sasai M, Ohba Y, Oshiumi H, Seya T, Matsumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Hokkaido University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Japan.

TLR3 recognizes viral dsRNA and induces antiviral immune responses. TLR3-mediated
cell activation relies on Toll/IL-1R (TIR) domain-containing adaptor molecule-1
(TICAM-1, also named TIR domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta or TRIF),
which recruits downstream signaling molecules to activate the transcription
factors IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and NF-kappaB. The mechanisms by which
TICAM-1 is activated and transmits signals remain largely unknown. In this study 
we show that TICAM-1 alters its distribution profile from a diffuse cytoplasmic
form to a speckle-like structure in response to dsRNA. The receptor-interacting
protein 1 (RIP1), a crucial signaling molecule for TICAM-1-mediated NF-kappaB
activation, accumulated in the TICAM-1 speckles. In addition,
NF-kappaB-activating kinase-associated protein 1 (NAP1), a downstream molecule
linking TICAM-1 and the IRF-3-activating kinase TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase 1), was
also recruited to the TICAM-1 speckles. Notably, a transient colocalization of
TICAM-1 and TLR3 was observed before the extensive formation of the TICAM-1
speckles. Thus, the spatiotemporal mobilization of TICAM-1 in response to dsRNA
and the formation of the TICAM-1 speckles containing RIP1 and NAP1 are important 
for the activation of the TLR3-TICAM-1 pathway.

PMID: 17982077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Immunol. 2007 Nov 1;179(9):6123-33.

Differential type I IFN-inducing abilities of wild-type versus vaccine strains of
measles virus.

Shingai M(1), Ebihara T, Begum NA, Kato A, Honma T, Matsumoto K, Saito H, Ogura
H, Matsumoto M, Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Laboratory adapted and vaccine strains of measles virus (MV) induced type I IFN
in infected cells. The wild-type strains in contrast induced it to a far lesser
extent. We have investigated the mechanism for this differential type I IFN
induction in monocyte-derived dendritic cells infected with representative MV
strains. Laboratory adapted strains Nagahata and Edmonston infected
monocyte-derived dendritic cells and activated IRF-3 followed by IFN-beta
production, while wild-type MS failed to activate IRF-3. The viral IRF-3
activation is induced within 2 h, an early response occurring before protein
synthesis. Receptor usage of CD46 or CD150 and nucleocapsid (N) protein
variations barely affected the strain-to-strain difference in IFN-inducing
abilities. Strikingly, most of the IFN-inducing strains possessed defective
interference (DI) RNAs of varying sizes. In addition, an artificially produced DI
RNA consisting of stem (the leader and trailer of MV) and loop (the GFP sequence)
exhibited potential IFN-inducing ability. In this case, however, cytoplasmic
introduction was needed for DI RNA to induce type I IFN in target cells. By
gene-silencing analysis, DI RNA activated the RIG-I/MDA5-mitochondria antiviral
signaling pathway, but not the TLR3-TICAM-1 pathway. DI RNA-containing strains
induced IFN-beta mRNA within 2 h while the same recombinant strains with no DI
RNA required >12 h postinfection to attain similar levels of IFN-beta mRNA. Thus,
the stem-loop structure, rather than full genome replication or specific internal
sequences of the MV genome, is required for an early phase of type I IFN
induction by MV in host cells.

PMID: 17947687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8729-38. Epub 2007 Oct 15.

CHD8 associates with human Staf and contributes to efficient U6 RNA polymerase
III transcription.

Yuan CC(1), Zhao X, Florens L, Swanson SK, Washburn MP, Hernandez N.

Author information: 
(1)Stony Brook University, Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Stony Brook, New York 11794, USA.

Chromatin remodeling and histone modification are essential for eukaryotic
transcription regulation, but little is known about chromatin-modifying
activities acting on RNA polymerase III (Pol III)-transcribed genes. The human U6
small nuclear RNA promoter, located 5' of the transcription start site, consists 
of a core region directing basal transcription and an activating region that
recruits the transcription factors Oct-1 and Staf (ZNF143). Oct-1 activates
transcription in part by helping recruit core binding factors, but nothing is
known about the mechanisms of transcription activation by Staf. We show that Staf
activates U6 transcription from a preassembled chromatin template in vitro and
associates with several proteins linked to chromatin modification, among them
chromodomain-helicase-DNA binding protein 8 (CHD8). CHD8 binds to histone H3 di- 
and trimethylated on lysine 4. It resides on the human U6 promoter as well as the
mRNA IRF3 promoter in vivo and contributes to efficient transcription from both
these promoters. Thus, Pol III transcription from type 3 promoters uses some of
the same factors used for chromatin remodeling at Pol II promoters.

PMCID: PMC2169411
PMID: 17938208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 11;283(2):802-8. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

IRF3-dependent type I interferon response in B cells regulates CpG-mediated
antibody production.

Oganesyan G(1), Saha SK, Pietras EM, Guo B, Miyahira AK, Zarnegar B, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California at Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Hypomethylated CpG oligonucleotides (CpG) are not only potent adjuvants for
enhancing adaptive immune responses but may also play a critical role in the
development of autoimmune diseases such as Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) and Systemic
Lupus Erythematosus (SLE). Here we provide evidence that, in addition to
dendritic cells, murine B lymphocytes also exhibit a type I IFN response to
CpG-B. Unlike dendritic cells, B cell-mediated type I IFN induction depended on
the transcription factor IRF3, but similar to dendritic cells this pathway was
independent of the IRF3 kinase TBK1. Utilizing type I IFN receptor-deficient
mice, we were able to demonstrate that this IFN pathway enhanced Syndecan-1
expression and IgM production and was required for IgG2a production following
CpG-B stimulation. Overall, our findings identify a unique IFN pathway in B cells
that may play a central role in mediating B cell biology in response to CpG,
potentially implicating this pathway in autoantibody production and the
pathogenesis of certain autoimmune diseases.

PMID: 17925397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Jan 15;75(2):494-502. Epub 2007 Sep 2.

Cinnamaldehyde suppresses toll-like receptor 4 activation mediated through the
inhibition of receptor oligomerization.

Youn HS(1), Lee JK, Choi YJ, Saitoh SI, Miyake K, Hwang DH, Lee JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, College of Medical Sciences,
Soonchunhyang University, Asan-Si, Chungnam, 336-745, Republic of Korea.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play a critical role in induction of innate immune and
inflammatory responses by recognizing invading pathogens or non-microbial
endogenous molecules. TLRs have two major downstream signaling pathways, MyD88-
and TRIF-dependent pathways leading to the activation of NFkappaB and IRF3 and
the expression of inflammatory mediators. Deregulation of TLR activation is known
to be closely linked to the increased risk of many chronic diseases.
Cinnamaldehyde (3-phenyl-2-propenal) has been reported to inhibit NFkappaB
activation induced by pro-inflammatory stimuli and to exert anti-inflammatory and
anti-bacterial effects. However, the underlying mechanism has not been clearly
identified. Our results showed that cinnamaldehyde suppressed the activation of
NFkappaB and IRF3 induced by LPS, a TLR4 agonist, leading to the decreased
expression of target genes such as COX-2 and IFNbeta in macrophages (RAW264.7).
Cinnamaldehyde did not inhibit the activation of NFkappaB or IRF3 induced by
MyD88-dependent (MyD88, IKKbeta) or TRIF-dependent (TRIF, TBK1) downstream
signaling components. However, oligomerization of TLR4 induced by LPS was
suppressed by cinnamaldehyde resulting in the downregulation of NFkappaB
activation. Further, cinnamaldehyde inhibited ligand-independent NFkappaB
activation induced by constitutively active TLR4 or wild-type TLR4. Our results
demonstrated that the molecular target of cinnamaldehyde in TLR4 signaling is
oligomerization process of receptor, but not downstream signaling molecules
suggesting a novel mechanism for anti-inflammatory activity of cinnamaldehyde.

PMID: 17920563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Virol. 2007 Dec;81(24):13640-8. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Differential activation of human monocyte-derived and plasmacytoid dendritic
cells by West Nile virus generated in different host cells.

Silva MC(1), Guerrero-Plata A, Gilfoy FD, Garofalo RP, Mason PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, 3.206B Mary Moody Northen Pavilion, University of
Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-0436, USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) play a central role in innate immunity and antiviral
responses. In this study, we investigated the production of alpha interferon
(IFN-alpha) and inducible chemokines by human monocyte-derived dendritic cells
(mDCs) and plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) infected with West Nile virus
(WNV), an emergent pathogen whose infection can lead to severe cases of
encephalitis in the elderly, children, and immunocompromised individuals. Our
experiments demonstrated that WNV grown in mammalian cells (WNV(Vero)) was a
potent inducer of IFN-alpha secretion in pDCs and, to a lesser degree, in mDCs.
The ability of WNV(Vero) to induce IFN-alpha in pDCs did not require viral
replication and was prevented by the treatment of cells with bafilomycin A1 and
chloroquine, suggesting that it was dependent on endosomal Toll-like receptor
recognition. On the other hand, IFN-alpha production in mDCs required viral
replication and was associated with the nuclear translocation of IRF3 and viral
antigen expression. Strikingly, pDCs failed to produce IFN-alpha when stimulated 
with WNV grown in mosquito cells (WNV(C7/10)), while mDCs responded similarly to 
WNV(Vero) or WNV(C7/10). Moreover, the IFN-dependent chemokine IP-10 was produced
in substantial amounts by pDCs in response to WNV(Vero) but not WNV(C7/10), while
interleukin-8 was produced in greater amounts by mDCs infected with WNV(C7/10)
than in those infected with WNV(Vero). These findings suggest that cell-specific 
mechanisms of WNV recognition leading to the production of type I IFN and
inflammatory chemokines by DCs may contribute to both the innate immune response 
and disease pathogenesis in human infections.

PMCID: PMC2168853
PMID: 17913823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Nov 23;363(3):722-6. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

Involvement of RelB in aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated induction of
chemokines.

Vogel CF(1), Sciullo E, Matsumura F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, University of California, Davis, One
Shields Avenue, Davis, CA 95616, USA. cfvogel@ucdavis.edu

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is a well-known immunotoxic compound
affecting the expression of inflammatory genes. We found that TCDD induces the
expression of the B-cell activating factor of the tumor necrosis factor family
(BAFF), B-lymphocyte chemoattractant (BLC), CC-chemokine ligand 1 (CCL1), and the
transcription factor interferon gamma responsive factor (IFR3) in U937
macrophages in an aryl hydrocarbon receptor- (AhR) and RelB-dependent manner. The
induction was associated with increased binding activity of an AhR/RelB complex
without participation of ARNT to a NF-kappaB element that is recognized by the
NF-kappaB subunit RelB and localized on promoters of the cytokine and chemokine
genes BAFF, BLC, CCL1, and the transcription factor IRF3. The interaction of AhR 
with RelB binding on a novel type of NF-kappaB binding site represents a new
regulatory function of the AhR.

PMCID: PMC4275028
PMID: 17900530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Feb 1;75(3):589-602. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

The interplay between viruses and innate immune signaling: recent insights and
therapeutic opportunities.

Unterholzner L(1), Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2,
Ireland.

The immediate response to viral infection relies on pattern-recognition receptors
(PRRs), most prominently the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and the RNA helicases
RIG-I and MDA5, as well as double stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) and
the DNA receptor, DAI. These PRRs recognize pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs) such as viral proteins and nucleic acids. The engagement of
these receptors then initiates intracellular signaling cascades which ultimately 
cause the activation of transcription factors and the expression of type I
interferons and pro-inflammatory cytokines. This innate response establishes an
anti-viral state in the infected cell and its neighbours and alerts immune cells 
to the danger. In order to establish a productive infection, viruses need to
overcome this initial anti-viral response. Evasion of innate immune defences is
achieved by means of viral proteins that inhibit the signaling cascades emanating
from the PRRs. The same innate signal transduction pathways have been implicated 
in conditions of sterile inflammation, such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple 
sclerosis, and in autoimmunity. Because viral proteins target crucial host
proteins involved in these pathways, they can point the way to key drug targets. 
Further, the viral proteins themselves or derivatives of them may be of use
therapeutically to curtail inflammation and autoimmunity.

PMID: 17868652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Virol. 2007 Nov;81(22):12439-49. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 viruses elicit an attenuated type i
interferon response in polarized human bronchial epithelial cells.

Zeng H(1), Goldsmith C, Thawatsupha P, Chittaganpitch M, Waicharoen S, Zaki S,
Tumpey TM, Katz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Pathogenesis Branch, Influenza Division, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.

The unparalleled spread of highly pathogenic avian influenza A (HPAI) H5N1
viruses has resulted in devastating outbreaks in domestic poultry and sporadic
human infections with a high fatality rate. To better understand the mechanism(s)
of H5N1 virus pathogenesis and host responses in humans, we utilized a polarized 
human bronchial epithelial cell model that expresses both avian alpha-2,3- and
human alpha-2,6-linked sialic acid receptors on the apical surface and supports
productive replication of both H5N1 and H3N2 viruses. Using this model, we
compared the abilities of selected 2004 HPAI H5N1 viruses isolated from humans
and a recent human H3N2 virus to trigger the type I interferon (IFN) response.
H5N1 viruses elicited significantly less IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) nuclear
translocation, as well as delayed and reduced production of IFN-beta compared
with the H3N2 virus. Furthermore, phosphorylation of Stat2 and induction of
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), such as MX1, ISG15, IRF7, and retinoic
acid-inducible gene I, were substantially delayed and reduced in cells infected
with H5N1 viruses. We also observed that the highly virulent H5N1 virus
replicated more efficiently and induced a weaker IFN response than the H5N1 virus
that exhibited low virulence in mammals in an earlier study. Our data suggest
that the H5N1 viruses tested, especially the virus with the high-pathogenicity
phenotype, possess greater capability to attenuate the type I IFN response than
the human H3N2 virus. The attenuation of this critical host innate immune defense
may contribute to the virulence of H5N1 viruses observed in humans.

PMCID: PMC2169033
PMID: 17855549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. PLoS Genet. 2007 Sep;3(9):1587-97. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

Irf3 polymorphism alters induction of interferon beta in response to Listeria
monocytogenes infection.

Garifulin O(1), Qi Z, Shen H, Patnala S, Green MR, Boyartchuk V.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Gene Function and Expression, University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

Genetic makeup of the host plays a significant role in the course and outcome of 
infection. Inbred strains of mice display a wide range of sensitivities to
Listeria monocytogenes infection and thus serve as a good model for analysis of
the effect of genetic polymorphism. The outcome of L. monocytogenes infection in 
mice is influenced by the ability of this bacterium to induce expression of
interferon beta mRNA, encoded in mouse by the Ifnb1 (interferon beta 1,
fibroblast) gene. Mouse strains that lack components of the IFN beta signaling
pathway are substantially more resistant to infection. We found that macrophages 
from the ByJ substrain of the common C57BL/6 inbred strain of mice are impaired
in their ability to induce Ifnb1 expression in response to bacterial and viral
infections. We mapped the locus that controls differential expression of Ifnb1 to
a region on Chromosome 7 that includes interferon regulatory factor 3 (Irf3),
which encodes a transcription factor responsible for early induction of Ifnb1
expression. In C57BL/6ByJ mice, Irf3 mRNA was inefficiently spliced, with a
significant proportion of the transcripts retaining intron 5. Analysis of the
Irf3 locus identified a single base-pair polymorphism and revealed that intron 5 
of Irf3 is spliced by the atypical U12-type spliceosome. We found that the
polymorphism disrupts a U12-type branchpoint and has a profound effect on the
efficiency of splicing of Irf3. We demonstrate that a naturally occurring change 
in the splicing control element has a dramatic effect on the resistance to L.
monocytogenes infection. Thus, the C57BL/6ByJ mouse strain serves as an example
of how a mammalian host can counter bacterial virulence strategies by introducing
subtle alteration of noncoding sequences.

PMCID: PMC1971118
PMID: 17845078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Biol Chem. 2007 Oct 26;282(43):31131-46. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Lipopolysaccharide-mediated interferon regulatory factor activation involves
TBK1-IKKepsilon-dependent Lys(63)-linked polyubiquitination and phosphorylation
of TANK/I-TRAF.

Gatot JS(1), Gioia R, Chau TL, Patrascu F, Warnier M, Close P, Chapelle JP,
Muraille E, Brown K, Siebenlist U, Piette J, Dejardin E, Chariot A.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Cluster for Applied Genoproteomics, Medical Chemistry, and
Virology/Immunology units, University of Liege, Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

Type I interferon gene induction relies on IKK-related kinase TBK1 and
IKKepsilon-mediated phosphorylations of IRF3/7 through the Toll-like
receptor-dependent signaling pathways. The scaffold proteins that assemble these 
kinase complexes are poorly characterized. We show here that TANK/ITRAF is
required for the TBK1- and IKKepsilon-mediated IRF3/7 phosphorylations through
some Toll-like receptor-dependent pathways and is part of a TRAF3-containing
complex. Moreover, TANK is dispensable for the early phase of double-stranded
RNA-mediated IRF3 phosphorylation. Interestingly, TANK is heavily phosphorylated 
by TBK1-IKKepsilon upon lipopolysaccharide stimulation and is also subject to
lipopolysaccharide- and TBK1-IKKepsilon-mediated Lys(63)-linked
polyubiquitination, a mechanism that does not require TBK1-IKKepsilon kinase
activity. Thus, we have identified TANK as a scaffold protein that assembles some
but not all IRF3/7-phosphorylating TBK1-IKKepsilon complexes and demonstrated
that these kinases possess two functions, namely the phosphorylation of both
IRF3/7 and TANK as well as the recruitment of an E3 ligase for Lys(63)-linked
polyubiquitination of their scaffold protein, TANK.

PMID: 17823124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Virol. 2007 Nov;81(22):12375-81. Epub 2007 Sep 5.

Hepatitis C virus infection induces the beta interferon signaling pathway in
immortalized human hepatocytes.

Kanda T(1), Steele R, Ray R, Ray RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University, St Louis, MO 63104, USA.

Beta interferon (IFN-beta) expression is triggered by double-stranded RNA, a
common intermediate in the replication of many viruses including hepatitis C
virus (HCV). The recent development of cell culture-grown HCV allowed us to
analyze the IFN signaling pathway following virus infection. In this study, we
have examined the IFN-beta signaling pathway following infection of immortalized 
human hepatocytes (IHH) with HCV genotype 1a (clone H77) or 2a (clone JFH1). We
observed that IHH possesses a functional Toll-like receptor 3 pathway. HCV
infection in IHH enhanced IFN-beta and IFN-stimulated gene 56 (ISG56) promoter
activities; however, poly(I-C)-induced IFN-beta and ISG56 expression levels were 
modestly inhibited upon HCV infection. IHH infected with HCV (genotype 1a or 2a) 
exhibited various levels of translocation of IRF-3 into the nucleus. The
upregulation of endogenous IFN-beta and 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase 1 mRNA
expression was also observed in HCV-infected IHH. Subsequent studies suggested
that HCV infection in IHH enhanced STAT1 and ISG56 protein expression. A
functional antiviral response of HCV-infected IHH was observed by the
growth-inhibitory role in vesicular stomatitis virus. Together, our results
suggested that HCV infection in IHH induces the IFN signaling pathway, which
corroborates observations from natural HCV infection in humans.

PMCID: PMC2169013
PMID: 17804510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 15;179(6):4083-92.

Role for MyD88-independent, TRIF pathway in lipid A/TLR4-induced endotoxin
tolerance.

Biswas SK(1), Bist P, Dhillon MK, Kajiji T, Del Fresno C, Yamamoto M,
Lopez-Collazo E, Akira S, Tergaonkar V.

Author information: 
(1)Singapore Immunology Network, Biomedical Sciences Institutes, Agency for
Science, Technology and Research, Immunos. subhra_biswas@immunol.a-star.edu.sg

Repeated exposure to low doses of endotoxin results in progressive
hyporesponsiveness to subsequent endotoxin challenge, a phenomenon known as
endotoxin tolerance. In spite of its clinical significance in sepsis and
characterization of the TLR4 signaling pathway as the principal endotoxin
detection mechanism, the molecular determinants that induce tolerance remain
obscure. We investigated the role of the TRIF/IFN-beta pathway in TLR4-induced
endotoxin tolerance. Lipid A-induced homotolerance was characterized by the
down-regulation of MyD88-dependent proinflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha and CCL3, 
but up-regulation of TRIF-dependent cytokine IFN-beta. This correlated with a
molecular phenotype of defective NF-kappaB activation but a functional
TRIF-dependent STAT1 signaling. Tolerance-induced suppression of TNF-alpha and
CCL3 expression was significantly relieved by TRIF and IFN regulatory factor 3
deficiency, suggesting the involvement of the TRIF pathway in tolerance.
Alternatively, selective activation of TRIF by poly(I:C)-induced tolerance to
lipid A. Furthermore, pretreatment with rIFN-beta also induced tolerance, whereas
addition of IFN-beta-neutralizing Ab during the tolerization partially alleviated
tolerance to lipid A but not TLR2-induced endotoxin homo- or heterotolerance.
Furthermore, IFNAR1-/- murine embryonal fibroblast and bone-marrow derived
macrophages failed to induce tolerance. Together, these observations constitute
evidence for a role of the TRIF/IFN-beta pathway in the regulation of lipid
A/TLR4-mediated endotoxin homotolerance.

PMID: 17785847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 15;179(6):3434-42.

IFN regulatory factor family members differentially regulate the expression of
type III IFN (IFN-lambda) genes.

Osterlund PI(1), Pietilä TE, Veckman V, Kotenko SV, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland. pamela.osterlund@ktl.fi

Virus replication induces the expression of antiviral type I (IFN-alphabeta) and 
type III (IFN-lambda1-3 or IL-28A/B and IL-29) IFN genes via TLR-dependent and
-independent pathways. Although type III IFNs differ genetically from type I
IFNs, their similar biological antiviral functions suggest that their expression 
is regulated in a similar fashion. Structural and functional characterization of 
the IFN-lambda1 and IFN-lambda3 gene promoters revealed them to be similar to
IFN-beta and IFN-alpha genes, respectively. Both of these promoters had
functional IFN-stimulated response element and NF-kappaB binding sites. The
binding of IFN regulatory factors (IRF) to type III IFN promoter IFN-stimulated
response element sites was the most important event regulating the expression of 
these genes. Ectopic expression of the components of TLR7 (MyD88 plus IRF1/IRF7),
TLR3 (Toll/IL-1R domain-containing adapter-inducing factor), or retinoic
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) signal transduction pathways induced the activation
of IFN-lambda1 promoter, whereas the IFN-lambda3 promoter was efficiently
activated only by overexpression of MyD88 and IRF7. The ectopic expression of
Pin1, a recently identified suppressor for IRF3-dependent antiviral response,
decreased the IFN promoter activation induced by any of these three signal
transduction pathways, including the MyD88-dependent one. To conclude, the data
suggest that the IFN-lambda1 gene is regulated by virus-activated IRF3 and IRF7, 
thus resembling that of the IFN-beta gene, whereas IFN-lambda2/3 gene expression 
is mainly controlled by IRF7, thus resembling those of IFN-alpha genes.

PMID: 17785777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Biol Psychol. 2007 Oct;76(3):147-55. Epub 2007 Jul 31.

Gene expression signature in peripheral blood cells from medical students exposed
to chronic psychological stress.

Kawai T(1), Morita K, Masuda K, Nishida K, Shikishima M, Ohta M, Saito T, Rokutan
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stress Science, Institute of Health Biosciences, University of
Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15 Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima, Japan.

To assess response to chronic psychological stress, gene expression profiles in
peripheral blood from 18 medical students confronting license examination were
analyzed using an original microarray. Total RNA was collected from each subject 
9 months before the examination and mixed to be used as a universal control. At
that time, most students had normal scores on the state-trait anxiety inventory
(STAI). However, STAI scores were significantly elevated at 2 months and at 2
days before the examination. Pattern of the gene expression profile was more
uniform 2 days before than 2 months before the examination. We identified 24
genes that significantly and uniformly changed from the universal control 2 days 
before the examination. Of the 24 genes, real-time PCR validated changes in mRNA 
levels of 10 (PLCB2, CSF3R, ARHGEF1, DPYD, CTNNB1, PPP3CA, POLM, IRF3, TP53, and 
CCNI). The identified genes may be useful to assess chronic psychological stress 
response.

PMID: 17766027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Mol Immunol. 2008 Feb;45(4):1078-84. Epub 2007 Aug 24.

UbcH8 regulates ubiquitin and ISG15 conjugation to RIG-I.

Arimoto K(1), Konishi H, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Virus Research, Kyoto University, Shogo-in, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

The RNA helicase retinoic inducible gene I (RIG-I) recognizes viral
double-stranded RNA and initiates signaling cascades that lead to activation of
the protein kinases IKKalphabeta, TBK1 and IKKepsilon, and to subsequent
activation of the transcription factors NF-kappaB and IRF3. We recently reported 
that RIG-I was ubiquitinated by RNF125, an ubiquitin E3 ligase, leading to
proteasomal degradation. RIG-I is also reported to be ISGylated by an
unidentified ISG15 (IFN-stimulated gene, 15kDa) E3 ligase. UbcH8, an ubiquitin E2
conjugating enzyme, was shown to be involved in RIG-I ISGylation. Here, we found 
that UbcH8 suppressed RIG-I ubiquitination by RNF125, and this suppression was
relieved by ectopic expression of ISG15. Alternately, ISG15 conjugation to RIG-I 
was suppressed by RNF125. By analyzing this regulatory circuit, we found that
UbcH8 and ISG15 are functional regulators of RNF125 E3 ligase activity, which
regulates the level of ubiquitin and ISG15 conjugation of RIG-I.

PMID: 17719635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Virology. 2007 Nov 25;368(2):262-72. Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Inhibition of interleukin-6 expression by the V protein of parainfluenza virus 5.

Lin Y(1), Sun M, Fuentes SM, Keim CD, Rothermel T, He B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

The V protein of parainfluenza virus 5 (PIV5) plays an important role in the
evasion of host immune responses. The V protein blocks interferon (IFN) signaling
in human cells by causing degradation of the STAT1 protein, a key component of
IFN signaling, and blocks IFN-beta production by preventing nuclear translocation
of IRF3, a key transcription factor for activating IFN-beta promoter.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), along with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and IL-1beta, 
is a major proinflammatory cytokine that plays important roles in clearing virus 
infection through inflammatory responses. Many viruses have developed strategies 
to block IL-6 expression. Wild-type PIV5 infection induces little, if any,
expression of cytokines such as IL-6 or TNF-alpha, whereas infection by a mutant 
PIV5 lacking the conserved C-terminal cysteine rich domain (rPIV5VDeltaC) induced
high levels of IL-6 expression. Examination of mRNA levels of IL-6 indicated that
the transcription activation of IL-6 played an important role in the increased
IL-6 expression. Co-infection with wild-type PIV5 prevented the activation of
IL-6 transcription by rPIV5VDeltaC, and a plasmid encoding the full-length PIV5 V
protein prevented the activation of IL-6 promoter-driven reporter gene expression
by rPIV5VDeltaC, indicating that the V protein played a role in inhibiting IL-6
transcription. The activation of IL-6 was independent of IFN-beta even though
rPIV5VDeltaC-infected cells produced IFN-beta. Using reporter gene assays and
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), it was found that NF-kappaB played an
important role in activating expression of IL-6. We have proposed a model of
activating and inhibiting IL-6 transcription by PIV5.

PMCID: PMC2100396
PMID: 17692882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Hepatology. 2007 Oct;46(4):1146-54.

Innate immune response to double-stranded RNA in biliary epithelial cells is
associated with the pathogenesis of biliary atresia.

Harada K(1), Sato Y, Itatsu K, Isse K, Ikeda H, Yasoshima M, Zen Y, Matsui A,
Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan.

Infections of Reoviridae consisting of a double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) genome are a
possible cause of biliary atresia (BA). The aim of the present study is to
clarify the pathophysiological function of dsRNA viruses in the pathogenesis of
BA. The expression of dsRNA pattern-recognizing receptors, Toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3), retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I), melanoma
differentiation-associated gene-5 (MDA-5), and dsRNA-activated protein kinase R
(PKR) was constitutively detected in cultured human biliary epithelial cells
(BECs). Stimulation with polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid [poly(I:C), a synthetic 
analog of viral dsRNA] induced the activation of transcription factors [nuclear
factor (NF)-kappaB and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)] and the production 
of interferon-beta1 (IFN-beta1) and MxA as potent antiviral responses. Moreover, 
poly(I:C) up-regulated the expression of tumor necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), and both poly(I:C) and TRAIL reduced the
viability of cultured human BECs by enhancing apoptosis. Experiments in vivo
using tissue sections of extrahepatic bile ducts from patients with BA and
controls (choledochal cysts and nonbiliary diseases) showed that the activation
of NF-kappaB, interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3), and PKR, and the
enhancement of TRAIL and single-stranded DNA (ssDNA)-positive apoptosis were
significant in BA, although extrahepatic bile ducts diffusely and constantly
expressed TLR3 in all diseases.CONCLUSION: dsRNA viruses could directly induce
the expression of TRAIL and apoptosis in human biliary epithelial cells as a
result of the biliary innate immune response, supporting the notion that
Reoviridae infections are directly associated with the pathogenesis of
cholangiopathies in cases of BA.

PMID: 17661372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mod Pathol. 2007 Oct;20(10):1095-102. Epub 2007 Jul 27.

A molecular expression signature distinguishing follicular lesions in thyroid
carcinoma using preamplification RT-PCR in archival samples.

Denning KM(1), Smyth PC, Cahill SF, Finn SP, Conlon E, Li J, Flavin RJ, Aherne
ST, Guenther SM, Ferlinz A, O'Leary JJ, Sheils OM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Trinity College, University of Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland.

Follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma is a lesion that frequently
causes difficulties from a diagnostic perspective in the laboratory. The purpose 
of this study was to interrogate a cohort of archival thyroid lesions using gene 
expression analysis of a panel of markers proposed to have utility as adjunctive 
markers in the diagnosis of thyroid neoplasia and follicular variant of papillary
thyroid carcinoma in particular. Laser Capture Microdissection was used to
procure pure cell populations for extraction. In addition a novel, multiplex
preamplification technique was used to facilitate analysis of multiple targets.
The panel comprised: HLA-DMA, HLA-DBQ1, CD74, CSNK1G2, IRF3, KRAS2, LYN, MT1K,
MT1X, RAB23, TGFB1 and TOP2A, with CDKN1B as an endogenous control. Expression
profiles for each target were generated using TaqMan Real-Time PCR. HLA-DMA,
HLA-DQB1, MT1X, CSNK1G2 and RAB23 were found to be differentially expressed
(P<0.05) when comparing follicular adenoma and follicular variant of papillary
thyroid carcinoma. Comparison of follicular adenoma and follicular thyroid
carcinoma groups showed significant differential expression for MT1K, MT1X and
RAB23 (P<0.05). Comparison of the papillary thyroid carcinoma group (classic and 
follicular variants) and the follicular adenoma group showed differential
expression for CSNK1G2, HLA-DQB1, MT1X and RAB23 (P<0.05). Finally, KRAS2 was
found to be differentially expressed (P<0.05) when comparing the papillary
thyroid carcinoma and follicular thyroid carcinoma groups. This panel of
molecular targets discriminates between follicular adenoma, papillary thyroid
carcinoma, follicular variant of papillary thyroid carcinoma and follicular
thyroid carcinoma by their expression repertoires. It may have utility for
broader use in the setting of fine-needle aspiration cytology and could improve
the definitive diagnosis of certain categories of thyroid malignancy.

PMID: 17660800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. FEBS J. 2007 Aug;274(16):4161-76. Epub 2007 Jul 25.

Limited suppression of the interferon-beta production by hepatitis C virus serine
protease in cultured human hepatocytes.

Dansako H(1), Ikeda M, Kato N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Okayama University Graduate School of
Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Japan.

Toll-like receptors and RNA helicase family members [retinoic acid-inducible gene
I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation associated gene-5 (MDA5)] play important
roles in the induction of interferon-beta as a major event in innate immune
responses after virus infection. TRIF (adaptor protein of Toll-like receptor
3)-mediated and Cardif (adaptor protein of RIG-I or MDA5)-mediated signaling
pathways contribute rapid induction of interferon-beta through the activation of 
interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3). Previously, it has been reported that the
hepatitis C virus NS3-4A serine protease blocks virus-induced activation of IRF-3
in the human hepatoma cell line HuH-7, and that NS3-4A cleaves TRIF and Cardif
molecules, resulting in the interruption of antiviral signaling pathways. On the 
other hand, it has recently been reported that non-neoplastic human hepatocyte
PH5CH8 cells retain robust TRIF- and Cardif-mediated pathways, unlike HuH-7
cells, which lack a TRIF-mediated pathway. In the present study, we further
investigated the effect of NS3-4A on antiviral signaling pathways. Although we
confirmed that PH5CH8 cells were much more effective than HuH-7 cells for the
induction of interferon-beta, we obtained the unexpected result that NS3-4A could
not suppress the interferon-beta production induced by the TRIF-mediated pathway,
although it suppressed the Cardif-mediated pathway by cleaving Cardif at the
Cys508 residue. Using PH5CH8, HeLa, and HuH-7-derived cells, we further showed
that NS3-4A could not cleave TRIF, in disagreement with a previous report
describing the cleavage of TRIF by NS3-4A. Taken together, our findings suggest
that the blocking of the interferon production by NS3-4A is not sufficient in
HCV-infected hepatocyte cells.

PMID: 17651439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Immunol. 2007 Aug 1;179(3):1796-802.

Early innate immune responses to Sin Nombre hantavirus occur independently of IFN
regulatory factor 3, characterized pattern recognition receptors, and viral
entry.

Prescott JB(1), Hall PR, Bondu-Hawkins VS, Ye C, Hjelle B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Infectious Diseases and Immunity, School
of Medicine, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.

Sin Nombre virus (SNV) is a highly pathogenic New World virus and etiologic agent
of hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome. We have previously shown that
replication-defective virus particles are able to induce a strong IFN-stimulated 
gene (ISG) response in human primary cells. RNA viruses often stimulate the
innate immune response by interactions between viral nucleic acids, acting as a
pathogen-associated molecular pattern, and cellular pattern-recognition receptors
(PRRs). Ligand binding to PRRs activates transcription factors which regulate the
expression of antiviral genes, and in all systems examined thus far, IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) has been described as an essential intermediate for
induction of ISG expression. However, we now describe a model in which IRF3 is
dispensable for the induction of ISG transcription in response to viral
particles. IRF3-independent ISG transcription in human hepatoma cell lines is
initiated early after exposure to SNV virus particles in an entry- and
replication-independent fashion. Furthermore, using gene knockdown, we discovered
that this activation is independent of the best-characterized RNA- and
protein-sensing PRRs including the cytoplasmic caspase recruitment
domain-containing RNA helicases and the TLRs. SNV particles engage a heretofore
unrecognized PRR, likely located at the cell surface, and engage a novel
IRF3-independent pathway that activates the innate immune response.

PMID: 17641046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Virology. 2007 Nov 10;368(1):73-82. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Replacement of the respiratory syncytial virus nonstructural proteins NS1 and NS2
by the V protein of parainfluenza virus 5.

Tran KC(1), He B, Teng MN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State
University, 406 South Frear, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Paramyxoviruses have been shown to produce proteins that inhibit interferon
production and signaling. For human respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), the
nonstructural NS1 and NS2 proteins have been shown to have interferon antagonist 
activity through an unknown mechanism. To understand further the functions of NS1
and NS2, we generated recombinant RSV in which both NS1 and NS2 were replaced by 
the PIV5 V protein, which has well-characterized IFN antagonist activities
(DeltaNS1/2-V). Expression of V was able to partially inhibit IFN responses in
DeltaNS1/2-V-infected cells. In addition, the replication kinetics of
DeltaNS1/2-V were intermediate between DeltaNS1/2 and wild-type (rA2) in A549
cells. However, expression of V did not affect the ability of DeltaNS1/2-V to
activate IRF3 nuclear translocation and IFNbeta transcription. These data
indicate that V was able to replace some of the IFN inhibitory functions of the
RSV NS1 and NS2 proteins, but also that NS1 and NS2 have functions in viral
replication beyond IFN antagonism.

PMCID: PMC2078599
PMID: 17632199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(18):9838-50. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

Astrocyte indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase is induced by the TLR3 ligand poly(I:C):
mechanism of induction and role in antiviral response.

Suh HS(1), Zhao ML, Rivieccio M, Choi S, Connolly E, Zhao Y, Takikawa O, Brosnan 
CF, Lee SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park
Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) is the first and rate-limiting enzyme in the
kynurenine pathway of tryptophan catabolism and has been implicated in
neurotoxicity and suppression of the antiviral T-cell response in HIV
encephalitis (HIVE). Here we show that the Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) ligand
poly(I:C) (PIC) induces the expression of IDO in human astrocytes. PIC was less
potent than gamma interferon (IFN-gamma) but more potent than IFN-beta in
inducing IDO. PIC induction of IDO was mediated in part by IFN-beta but not
IFN-gamma, and both NF-kappaB and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) were
required. PIC also upregulated TLR3, thereby augmenting the primary (IFN-beta)
and secondary (IDO and viperin) response genes upon subsequent stimulation with
PIC. In HIVE, the transcripts for TLR3, IFN-beta, IDO, and viperin were increased
and IDO immunoreactivity was detected in reactive astrocytes as well as
macrophages and microglia. PIC caused suppression of intracellular replication of
human immunodeficiency virus pseudotyped with vesicular stomatitis virus G
protein and human cytomegalovirus in a manner dependent on IRF3 and IDO. The
involvement of IDO was demonstrated by partial but significant reversal of the
PIC-mediated antiviral effect by IDO RNA interference and/or tryptophan
supplementation. Importantly, the cytokine interleukin-1 abolished
IFN-gamma-induced IDO enzyme activity in a nitric oxide-dependent manner without 
suppressing protein expression. Our results demonstrate that IDO is an innate
antiviral protein induced by double-stranded RNA and suggest a therapeutic
utility for PIC in human viral infections. They also show that IDO activity can
be dissociated from protein expression, indicating that the local central nervous
system cytokine and nitric oxide environment determines IDO function.

PMCID: PMC2045380
PMID: 17626075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Nature. 2007 Jul 26;448(7152):501-5. Epub 2007 Jul 8.

DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) is a cytosolic DNA sensor and an activator of innate immune
response.

Takaoka A(1), Wang Z, Choi MK, Yanai H, Negishi H, Ban T, Lu Y, Miyagishi M,
Kodama T, Honda K, Ohba Y, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 Jul 26;448(7152):423-4.

Central to innate immunity is the sensing of pathogen-associated molecular
patterns by cytosolic and membrane-associated receptors. In particular, DNA is a 
potent activator of immune responses during infection or tissue damage, and
evidence indicates that, in addition to the membrane-associated Toll-like
receptor 9, an unidentified cytosolic DNA sensor(s) can activate type I
interferon (IFN) and other immune responses. Here we report on a candidate DNA
sensor, previously named DLM-1 (also called Z-DNA binding protein 1 (ZBP1)), for 
which biological function had remained unknown; we now propose the alternative
name DAI (DNA-dependent activator of IFN-regulatory factors). The artificial
expression of otherwise IFN-inducible DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) in mouse fibroblasts
selectively enhances the DNA-mediated induction of type I IFN and other genes
involved in innate immunity. On the other hand, RNA interference of messenger RNA
for DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) in cells inhibits this gene induction programme upon
stimulation by DNA from various sources. Moreover, DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) binds to
double-stranded DNA and, by doing so, enhances its association with the IRF3
transcription factor and the TBK1 serine/threonine kinase. These observations
underscore an integral role of DAI (DLM-1/ZBP1) in the DNA-mediated activation of
innate immune responses, and may offer new insight into the signalling mechanisms
underlying DNA-associated antimicrobial immunity and autoimmune disorders.

PMID: 17618271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 15;179(2):1166-77.

Type I IFN induction in response to Listeria monocytogenes in human macrophages: 
evidence for a differential activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3).

Reimer T(1), Schweizer M, Jungi TW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Virology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
reimer@ivv.unibe.ch

Listeria monocytogenes is a prototypic bacterium for studying innate and adaptive
cellular immunity as well as host defense. Using human monocyte-derived
macrophages, we report that an infection with a wild-type strain, but not a
listeriolysin O-deficient strain, of the Gram-positive bacterium L. monocytogenes
induces expression of IFN-beta and a bioactive type I IFN response. Investigating
the activation of signaling pathways in human macrophages after infection
revealed that a wild-type strain and a hemolysin-deficient strain of L.
monocytogenes activated the NF-kappaB pathway and induced a comparable TNF
response. p38 MAPK and activating transcription factor 2 were phosphorylated
following infection with either strain, and IFN-beta gene expression induced by
wild-type L. monocytogenes was reduced when p38 was inhibited. However, neither
IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 translocation to the nucleus nor posttranslational 
modifications and dimerizations were observed after L. monocytogenes infection.
In contrast, vesicular stomatitis virus and LPS triggered IRF3 activation and
signaling. When IRF3 was knocked down using small interfering RNA, a L.
monocytogenes-induced IFN-beta response remained unaffected whereas a vesicular
stomatitis virus-triggered response was reduced. Evidence against the possibility
that IRF7 acts in place of IRF3 is provided. Thus, we show that wild-type L.
monocytogenes induced an IFN-beta response in human macrophages and propose that 
this response involves p38 MAPK and activating transcription factor 2. Using
various stimuli, we show that IRF3 is differentially activated during type I IFN 
responses in human macrophages.

PMID: 17617610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Cell Microbiol. 2007 Nov;9(11):2700-15. Epub 2007 Jun 30.

YopJ targets TRAF proteins to inhibit TLR-mediated NF-kappaB, MAPK and IRF3
signal transduction.

Sweet CR(1), Conlon J, Golenbock DT, Goguen J, Silverman N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Departments of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The Yersinia pestis virulence factor YopJ is a potent inhibitor of the NF-kappaB 
and MAPK signalling pathways, however, its molecular mechanism and relevance to
pathogenesis are the subject of much debate. In this report, we characterize the 
effects of this type III effector protein on bone fide signalling events
downstream of Toll-like receptors (TLRs), critical sensors in innate immunity.
YopJ inhibited TLR-mediated NF-kappaB and MAP kinase activation, as suggested by 
previous studies. In addition, induction of the TLR-mediated interferon response 
was blocked by YopJ, indicating that YopJ also inhibits IRF3 signalling.
Examination of the NF-kappaB signalling pathway in detail suggested that YopJ
acts at the level of TAK1 (MAP3K7) activation. Further studies revealed a
YopJ-dependent decrease in the ubiquitination of TRAF3 and TRAF6. These data
support the hypothesis that YopJ is a deubiquitinating protease that acts on TRAF
proteins to prevent or remove the K63-polymerized ubiquitin conjugates required
for signal transduction. Our data do not directly address the alternative
hypothesis that YopJ is an acetyltransferase that acts on the activation loop of 
IKK and MKK proteins, but support the conclusion that the critical function of
YopJ is to deubiquinate TRAF proteins.

PMID: 17608743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 25;26(14):3451-62. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Involvement of the ubiquitin-like domain of TBK1/IKK-i kinases in regulation of
IFN-inducible genes.

Ikeda F(1), Hecker CM, Rozenknop A, Nordmeier RD, Rogov V, Hofmann K, Akira S,
Dötsch V, Dikic I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt,
Germany.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1/NAK/T2K) and I-kappaB Kinase (IKK-i/IKK-epsilon) play
important roles in the regulation of interferon (IFN)-inducible genes during the 
immune response to bacterial and viral infections. Cell stimulation with ssRNA
virus, dsDNA virus or gram-negative bacteria leads to activation of TBK1 or
IKK-i, which in turn phosphorylates the transcription factors, IFN-regulatory
factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7, promoting their translocation in the nucleus. To
understand the molecular basis of activation of TBK1, we analyzed the sequence of
TBK1 and IKK-i and identified a ubiquitin-like domain (ULD) adjacent to their
kinase domains. Deletion or mutations of the ULD in TBK1 or IKK-i impaired
activation of respective kinases, failed to induce IRF3 phosphorylation and
nuclear localization and to activate IFN-beta or RANTES promoters. The importance
of the ULD of TBK1 in LPS- or poly(I:C)-stimulated IFN-beta production was
demonstrated by reconstitution experiments in TBK1-IKK-i-deficient cells. We
propose that the ULD is a regulatory component of the TBK1/IKK-i kinases involved
in the control of the kinase activation, substrate presentation and downstream
signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC1933404
PMID: 17599067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 1;179(1):329-36.

Potential of transfected muscle cells to contribute to DNA vaccine
immunogenicity.

Shirota H(1), Petrenko L, Hong C, Klinman DM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Immunology, National Cancer Institute, Frederick,
MD 21702, USA.

The mechanism(s) by which DNA vaccines trigger the activation of Ag-specific T
cells is incompletely understood. A series of in vivo and in vitro experiments
indicates plasmid transfection stimulates muscle cells to up-regulate expression 
of MHC class I and costimulatory molecules and to produce multiple cytokines and 
chemokines. Transfected muscle cells gain the ability to directly present Ag to
CD8 T cells through an IFN-regulatory factor 3-dependent process. These findings 
suggest that transfected muscle cells at the site of DNA vaccination may
contribute to the magnitude and/or duration of the immune response initiated by
professional APCs.

PMID: 17579053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 11;26(13):3180-90. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

SINTBAD, a novel component of innate antiviral immunity, shares a TBK1-binding
domain with NAP1 and TANK.

Ryzhakov G(1), Randow F.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

The expression of antiviral genes during infection is controlled by inducible
transcription factors such as IRF3 (interferon regulatory factor). Activation of 
IRF3 requires its phosphorylation by TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase) or IKKi
(inhibitor of nuclear factor kappaB kinase, inducible). We have identified a new 
and essential component of this pathway, the adaptor protein SINTBAD (similar to 
NAP1 TBK1 adaptor). SINTBAD constitutively binds TBK1 and IKKi but not related
kinases. Upon infection with Sendai virus, SINTBAD is essential for the efficient
induction of IRF-dependent transcription, as are two further TBK1 adaptors, TANK 
and NAP1. We identified a conserved TBK1/IKKi-binding domain (TBD) in the three
adaptors, predicted to form an alpha-helix with residues essential for kinase
binding clustering on one side. Isolated TBDs compete with adaptor binding to
TBK1 and prevent poly(I:C)-induced IRF-dependent transcription. Our results
suggest that efficient signal transduction upon viral infection requires SINTBAD,
TANK and NAP1 because they link TBK1 and IKKi to virus-activated signalling
cascades.

PMCID: PMC1914091
PMID: 17568778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(17):9100-8. Epub 2007 Jun 13.

Early production of type I interferon during West Nile virus infection: role for 
lymphoid tissues in IRF3-independent interferon production.

Bourne N(1), Scholle F, Silva MC, Rossi SL, Dewsbury N, Judy B, De Aguiar JB,
Leon MA, Estes DM, Fayzulin R, Mason PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX
77555-0436, USA.

Infection of cells with flaviviruses in vitro is reduced by pretreatment with
small amounts of type I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta). Similarly, pretreatment of
animals with IFN and experiments using mice defective in IFN signaling have
indicated a role for IFN in controlling flavivirus disease in vivo. These data,
along with findings that flavivirus-infected cells block IFN signaling, suggest
that flavivirus infection can trigger an IFN response. To investigate IFN gene
induction by the very first cells infected during in vivo infection with the
flavivirus West Nile virus (WNV), we infected mice with high-titer preparations
of WNV virus-like particles (VLPs), which initiate viral genome replication in
cells but fail to spread. These studies demonstrated a brisk production of IFN in
vivo, with peak levels of over 1,000 units/ml detected in sera between 8 and 24 h
after inoculation by either the intraperitoneal or footpad route. The IFN
response was dependent on genome replication, and WNV genomes and WNV
antigen-positive cells were readily detected in the popliteal lymph nodes (pLN)
of VLP-inoculated mice. High levels of IFN mRNA transcripts and functional IFN
were also produced in VLP-inoculated IFN regulatory factor 3 null (IRF3(-/-))
mice, indicating that IFN production was independent of the IRF3 pathways to IFN 
gene transcription, consistent with the IFN type produced (predominantly alpha).

PMCID: PMC1951458
PMID: 17567689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 May 7;13(17):2446-54.

The interferon inducing pathways and the hepatitis C virus.

Meurs EF(1), Breiman A.

Author information: 
(1)Hepacivirus Unit, Department of Virology, Pasteur Institute, 28 rue du Dr
Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France. emeurs@pasteur.fr

The innate immune response is triggered by a variety of pathogens, including
viruses, and requires rapid induction of type I interferons (IFN), such as
IFNbeta and IFNalpha. IFN induction occurs when specific pathogen motifs bind to 
specific cellular receptors. In non-professional immune, virally-infected cells, 
IFN induction is essentially initiated after the binding of dsRNA structures to
TLR3 receptors or to intracytosolic RNA helicases, such as RIG-I/MDA5. This leads
to the recruitment of specific adaptors, such as TRIF for TLR3 and the
mitochondrial-associated IPS-1/VISA/MAVS/CARDIF adapter protein for the RNA
helicases, and the ultimate recruitment of kinases, such as MAPKs, the canonical 
IKK complex and the TBK1/IKKepsilon kinases, which activate the transcription
factors ATF-2/c-jun, NF-kappaB and IRF3, respectively. The coordinated action of 
these transcription factors leads to induction of IFN and of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and to the establishment of the innate immune response. HCV can cleave 
both the adapters TRIF and IPS-1/VISA/MAVS/CARDIF through the action of its
NS3/4A protease. This provokes abrogation of the induction of the IFN and
cytokine pathways and favours viral propagation and presumably HCV chronic
infection.

PMCID: PMC4146763
PMID: 17552028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 15;178(12):7607-15.

IL-27 synthesis induced by TLR ligation critically depends on IFN regulatory
factor 3.

Molle C(1), Nguyen M, Flamand V, Renneson J, Trottein F, De Wit D, Willems F,
Goldman M, Goriely S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 8 rue
Adrienne Bolland, B-6041 Charleroi-Gosselies, Belgium.

IL-27 is a heterodimeric cytokine composed of EBV-induced gene 3 and p28.
Produced by dendritic cells (DCs) in response to TLR ligands, IL-27 recently
emerged as a key regulator of inflammatory responses. In this study, we first
demonstrate that Toll/IL-1R-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta and its
associated IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 transcription factor are critically
involved in IL-27p28 expression in mouse DCs stimulated by TLR ligands. We then
show that IL-27 serum levels are dramatically reduced in IRF3(-/-) upon LPS
injection, indicating a critical role for IRF3 in TLR4-mediated IL-27 production 
in vivo. We identified an IRF3-binding site within the IL-27p28 promoter region
which is required for IL-27p28 gene activation in reporter gene assays. In human 
DCs, IL-27p28 mRNA was preferentially induced by Toll/IL-1R-containing adaptor
inducing IFN-beta-coupled TLR ligands and following CMV infection. Furthermore,
chromatin immunoprecipitation studies demonstrate that IRF3 is recruited to the
endogenous p28 promoter in TLR4-stimulated human DCs. We conclude that IRF3
activation is a master switch for IL-27 synthesis.

PMID: 17548596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):6770-6.

Lack of essential role of NF-kappa B p50, RelA, and cRel subunits in
virus-induced type 1 IFN expression.

Wang X(1), Hussain S, Wang EJ, Wang X, Li MO, García-Sastre A, Beg AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center &
Research Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Type 1 IFNs (IFN-alphabeta) play pivotal roles in the host antiviral response and
in TLR-induced signaling. IFN regulatory factor (IRF) and NF-kappaB transcription
factors are thought to be crucial for virus-induced mRNA expression of IFN-beta. 
Although recent studies have demonstrated essential roles for IRF3 and IRF7, the 
definitive role of NF-kappaB factors in IFN-beta (or IFN-alpha) expression
remains unknown. Using mice deficient in distinct members of the NF-kappaB
family, we investigated NF-kappaB function in regulating type 1 IFN expression in
response to Sendai virus and Newcastle disease virus infection. Surprisingly,
IFN-beta and IFN-alpha expression was strongly induced following virus infection 
of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from p50(-/-), RelA/p65(-/-), cRel(-/-),
p50(-/-)cRel(-/-), and p50(-/-)RelA(-/-) mice. Compared with wild-type MEFs, only
RelA(-/-) and p50(-/-)RelA(-/-) MEFs showed a modest reduction in IFN-beta
expression. To overcome functional redundancy between different NF-kappaB
subunits, we expressed a dominant-negative IkappaBalpha protein in
p50(-/-)RelA(-/-) MEFs to inhibit activation of remaining NF-kappaB subunits.
Although viral infection of these cells failed to induce detectable NF-kappaB
activity, both Sendai virus and Newcastle disease virus infection led to robust
IFN-beta expression. Virus infection of dendritic cells or TLR9-ligand CpG-D19
treatment of plasmacytoid dendritic cells from RelA(-/-) or p50(-/-)cRel(-/-)
mice also induced robust type 1 IFN expression. Our findings therefore indicate
that NF-kappaB subunits p50, RelA, and cRel play a relatively minor role in
virus-induced type 1 IFN expression.

PMID: 17513724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Virol. 2007 Jul;81(13):7316-9. Epub 2007 May 2.

Cytokine-independent upregulation of MDA5 in viral infection.

Yount JS(1), Moran TM, López CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L.
Levy Place, Box 1124, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(17):9609.

The RNA helicases RIG-I and MDA5 detect virus infection of dendritic cells (DCs) 
leading to cytokine induction. Maximal sensitivity for virus detection by these
helicases is obtained after their upregulation, which is thought to occur
primarily through type I interferon (IFN) signaling. Here we demonstrate that in 
response to paramyxovirus infection, RIG-I upregulation requires type I IFN
whereas MDA5 expression is increased by Sendai virus infection independently of
signaling mediated by type I IFN, STAT1, tumor necrosis factor alpha, or
NF-kappaB. This MDA5 upregulation is largely lost in IRF3 knockout DCs and is
achieved in type I IFN-deficient cells expressing constitutively active IRF3.

PMCID: PMC1933291
PMID: 17475649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Sci STKE. 2007 May 1;2007(384):pe20.

Regulation of interferon production by RIG-I and LGP2: a lesson in self-control.

Vitour D(1), Meurs EF.

Author information: 
(1)Hepacivirus Unit, Pasteur Institute, Paris Cedex 15, France.

The cytoplasmic CARD-containing DExD/H box RNA helicases RIG-I and MDA5 act as
sensors of viral infections through recognition of viral double-stranded (ds)
RNAs. They both associate with the mitochondrial adaptor IPS-1 (also referred to 
as MAVS, VISA, and CARDIF) through homotypic CARD-CARD interactions. IPS-1, in
turn, triggers signaling pathways, including activation of the protein kinases
TBK1 and IKKepsilon, responsible for the phosphorylation of IRF3, a key
transcription factor involved in interferon (IFN) synthesis, one essential
element of the innate immune response. RIG-I remains in an autoinhibited state in
the absence of dsRNA, through an internal repressor domain (RD) that binds within
both its CARD and its RNA helicase domains and therefore acts in cis to control
its multimerization and interaction with IPS-1. Ectopic expression of the RD
prevents signaling and increases cell permissiveness to viruses, including
hepatitis C virus. LGP2, which is another DExD/H RNA helicase of the RIG-I and
MDA5 family and which is devoid of CARD domain, negatively controls IFN induction
at different levels: by sequestering dsRNA, by blocking RIG-I's multimerization
in trans through a domain analogous to the RIG-I RD, and by competing with the
protein kinase IKKepsilon for a common interaction site on IPS-1. The ability of 
RIG-I and LGP2 to exert such a feedback control at the earliest steps of IFN
synthesis allows the cells to exert a tight regulation of the induction of the
innate immune response.

PMID: 17473309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Nat Immunol. 2007 Jun;8(6):592-600. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

The NEMO adaptor bridges the nuclear factor-kappaB and interferon regulatory
factor signaling pathways.

Zhao T(1), Yang L, Sun Q, Arguello M, Ballard DW, Hiscott J, Lin R.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal H3T 1E2, Canada.

Intracellular detection of RNA virus infection is mediated by the RNA helicase
RIG-I, which is recruited to mitochondria by the adaptor protein MAVS and
triggers activation of the transcription factors NF-kappaB, IRF3 and IRF7. Here
we demonstrate that virus-induced activation of IRF3 and IRF7 depended on the
NF-kappaB modulator NEMO, which acted 'upstream' of the kinases TBK1 and
IKKepsilon. IRF3 phosphorylation, formation of IRF3 dimers and DNA binding, as
well as IRF3-dependent gene expression, were abrogated in NEMO-deficient cells.
IRF3 phosphorylation and interferon production were restored by ectopic
expression of NEMO. Thus, NEMO, like MAVS, acts as an adaptor protein that allows
RIG-I to activate both the NF-kappaB and IRF signaling pathways.

PMID: 17468758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Virol. 2007 Jul;81(13):7189-99. Epub 2007 Apr 25.

Inhibition of the alpha/beta interferon response by mouse hepatitis virus at
multiple levels.

Roth-Cross JK(1), Martínez-Sobrido L, Scott EP, García-Sastre A, Weiss SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, School of Medicine,
36th Street and Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6076, USA.

Mouse hepatitis virus (MHV) was used as a model to study the interaction of
coronaviruses with the alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) response. While MHV
strain A59 appeared to induce IFN-beta gene transcription and low levels of
nuclear translocation of the IFN-beta transcription factor interferon regulatory 
factor 3 (IRF-3), MHV did not induce IFN-beta protein production during the
course of infection in L2 mouse fibroblast cells. In addition, MHV was able to
significantly decrease the level of IFN-beta protein induced by both Newcastle
disease virus (NDV) and Sendai virus infections, without targeting it for
proteasomal degradation and without altering the nuclear translocation of IRF-3
or IFN-beta mRNA production or stability. These results indicate that MHV
infection causes an inhibition of IFN-beta production at a posttranscriptional
level, without altering RNA or protein stability. In contrast, MHV induced
IFN-beta mRNA and protein production in the brains of infected animals,
suggesting that the inhibitory mechanisms observed in vitro are not enough to
prevent IFN-alpha/beta production in vivo. Furthermore, MHV replication is highly
resistant to IFN-alpha/beta action, as indicated by unimpaired MHV replication in
L2 cells pretreated with IFN-beta. However, when L2 cells were coinfected with
MHV and NDV in the presence of IFN-beta, NDV, but not MHV, replication was
inhibited. Thus, rather than disarming the antiviral activity induced by IFN-beta
pretreatment completely, MHV may be inherently resistant to some aspects of the
antiviral state induced by IFN-beta. These findings show that MHV employs unique 
strategies to circumvent the IFN-alpha/beta response at multiple steps.

PMCID: PMC1933268
PMID: 17459917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007 May;7(5):353-64.

The family of five: TIR-domain-containing adaptors in Toll-like receptor
signalling.

O'Neill LA(1), Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2,
Ireland. laoneill@tcd.ie agbowie@tcd.ie

Signalling by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) involves five adaptor proteins known as 
MyD88, MAL, TRIF, TRAM and SARM. Recent insights have revealed additional
functions for MyD88 apart from NF-kappaB activation, including activation of the 
transcription factors IRF1, IRF5 and IRF7, and also a role outside the TLRs in
interferon-gamma signalling. Biochemical information on MAL and TRAM has shown
that both act as bridging adaptors, with MAL recruiting MyD88 to TLR2 and TLR4,
and TRAM recruiting TRIF to TLR4 to allow for IRF3 activation. Finally, the
function of the fifth adaptor, SARM, has been revealed, which negatively
regulates TRIF. These new insights allow for a detailed description of the
function of the five TIR-domain-containing adaptors in the initiation of TLR
signalling.

PMID: 17457343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Virology. 2007 Aug 15;365(1):20-33. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

Bax-dependent mitochondrial membrane permeabilization enhances IRF3-mediated
innate immune response during VSV infection.

Sharif-Askari E(1), Nakhaei P, Oliere S, Tumilasci V, Hernandez E, Wilkinson P,
Lin R, Bell J, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

An effective type I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) response is critical for the
control of many viral infections. Using an oncolytic strain of vesicular
stomatitis virus, we have examined the cross-talk between virus-induced apoptosis
and initiation of innate immune response. The intrinsic apoptotic cascade,
specifically the Bax-Bcl-2-Caspase-9 cascade, was revealed as the primary pathway
of VSV-induced apoptosis. Cell death was significantly reduced in BaxBak(-/-)
murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and in human A549 epithelial cells treated
with siRNA against Bax. Although inhibition of apoptosis resulted in enhanced
virus replication in the BaxBak(-/-) MEFs as compared to wild-type cells,
induction of the IFN antiviral response and expression of cytokine genes were
attenuated in virus-infected cells. Moreover, Bax but not Bak pro-apoptotic
protein was required for IRF-3 phosphorylation and activation, further
substantiating a role for the intrinsic mitochondrial pathway in the innate
immune response. Therefore, virus-induced apoptosis through a Bax-dependent
mitochondrial pathway appears to enhance the full development of the IRF-3
mediated IFN antiviral response.

PMID: 17451770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Glycobiology. 2007 Jul;17(7):12C-5C. Epub 2007 Apr 20.

Double-stranded RNA induces galectin-9 in vascular endothelial cells: involvement
of TLR3, PI3K, and IRF3 pathway.

Imaizumi T(1), Yoshida H, Nishi N, Sashinami H, Nakamura T, Hirashima M, Ohyama
C, Itoh K, Satoh K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Biology, Hirosaki University School of Medicine,
Hirosaki, Japan. timaizum@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

Galectin-9 is a member of the galectin family, which induces various biological
reactions such as chemotaxis of eosinophils and apoptosis of T cells. We
previously reported that polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly IC), an authentic 
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), induces the expression of galectin-9 in human
umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs). In the present study, we addressed the
possible involvement of two potential receptors for dsRNA, Toll-like receptor
(TLR) 3 and retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I), in the expression of
galectin-9 in HUVECs. Poly IC-induced galectin-9 expression was almost completely
suppressed by RNA interference (RNAi) against TLR3, but not against RIG-I.
LY294002, an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), inhibited the
induction of galectin-9 by poly IC. RNAi against interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3) also inhibited poly IC-induced galectin-9 expression. We conclude that
TLR3, PI3K, and IRF3 are involved in the poly IC-induced galectin-9 expression in
HUVECs.

PMID: 17449641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int Immunol. 2007 May;19(5):635-43. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Differential expression of Toll-like receptors in murine peritoneal macrophages
in vitro on treatment with cisplatin.

Tarang S(1), Sodhi A, Chauhan P.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi 221005, India.

In the present study, we have investigated the differential expression of
Toll-like receptors [(TLRs) 1-9] in murine peritoneal macrophages in vitro, on
treatment with cis-diaminedichloroplatinum (II) (cisplatin). It is demonstrated
that cisplatin induces the expression of TLRs and is a potent activator of
Toll-signaling pathway. The enhanced expression of TLR2, -3, -4, -5, -6, -7, -8
and -9 is observed at different time intervals after 5 microg ml(-1) cisplatin
treatment. The expression of downstream signaling molecules of TLR-signaling
pathway--myeloid differentiation factor 88, IRAK1, tumor necrosis factor
receptor-associated factor 6 and transcription factors IRF3 and nuclear
factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)--has also been investigated. The expression of TLR2,
-3, -4 and -9 was down-regulated in cisplatin-treated macrophages in the presence
of inhibitors of mitogen-activated protein kinases and NF-kappaB pathways,
suggesting a role of these pathways in cisplatin-induced TLR expression. It is
also observed that pre-treatment of macrophages with cisplatin and subsequent
incubation with TLR ligands significantly enhanced the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-alpha, IFN-gamma, IL-1beta and 
IL-12) and iNOS expression in macrophages. The data suggest that treatment of
macrophages with cisplatin renders them more susceptible to subsequent induction 
of pro-inflammatory cytokines and iNOS expression by different TLR ligands. It is
proposed that the pharmacological reagents like cisplatin can be used to
manipulate the innate immune responses, which may be effectively used for the
development of novel therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 17446211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Virol. 2007 Jul;81(13):7011-21. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

Multiple anti-interferon actions of the influenza A virus NS1 protein.

Kochs G(1), García-Sastre A, Martínez-Sobrido L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Freiburg, D-79008 Freiburg, Germany.

The replication and pathogenicity of influenza A virus (FLUAV) are controlled in 
part by the alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) system. This virus-host
interplay is dependent on the production of IFN-alpha/beta and on the capacity of
the viral nonstructural protein NS1 to counteract the IFN system. Two different
mechanisms have been described for NS1, namely, blocking the activation of IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and blocking posttranscriptional processing of
cellular mRNAs. Here we directly compare the abilities of NS1 gene products from 
three different human FLUAV (H1N1) strains to counteract the antiviral host
response. We found that A/PR/8/34 NS1 has a strong capacity to inhibit IRF3 and
activation of the IFN-beta promoter but is unable to suppress expression of other
cellular genes. In contrast, the NS1 proteins of A/Tx/36/91 and of A/BM/1/18, the
virus that caused the Spanish influenza pandemic, caused suppression of
additional cellular gene expression. Thus, these NS1 proteins prevented the
establishment of an IFN-induced antiviral state, allowing virus replication even 
in the presence of IFN. Interestingly, the block in gene expression was dependent
on a newly described NS1 domain that is important for interaction with the
cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor (CPSF) component of the cellular 
pre-mRNA processing machinery but is not functional in A/PR/8/34 NS1. We
identified the Phe-103 and Met-106 residues in NS1 as being critical for CPSF
binding, together with the previously described C-terminal binding domain. Our
results demonstrate the capacity of FLUAV NS1 to suppress the antiviral host
defense at multiple levels and the existence of strain-specific differences that 
may modulate virus pathogenicity.

PMCID: PMC1933316
PMID: 17442719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 24;104(17):7253-8. Epub 2007 Apr 16.

Disruption of innate immunity due to mitochondrial targeting of a picornaviral
protease precursor.

Yang Y(1), Liang Y, Qu L, Chen Z, Yi M, Li K, Lemon SM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Hepatitis Research, Institute for Human Infections and Immunity,
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, TX 77555-1019, USA.

Mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) is an essential component of
virus-activated signaling pathways that induce protective IFN responses. Its
localization to the outer mitochondrial membrane suggests an important yet
unexplained role for mitochondria in innate immunity. Here, we show that
hepatitis A virus (HAV), a hepatotropic picornavirus, ablates type 1 IFN
responses by targeting the 3ABC precursor of its 3C(pro) cysteine protease to
mitochondria where it colocalizes with and cleaves MAVS, thereby disrupting
activation of IRF3 through the MDA5 pathway. The 3ABC cleavage of MAVS requires
both the protease activity of 3C(pro) and a transmembrane domain in 3A that
directs 3ABC to mitochondria. Lacking this domain, mature 3C(pro) protease is
incapable of MAVS proteolysis. HAV thus disrupts host signaling by a mechanism
that parallels that of the serine NS3/4A protease of hepatitis C virus, but
differs in its use of a stable, catalytically active polyprotein processing
intermediate. The unique requirement for mitochondrial localization of 3ABC
underscores the importance of mitochondria to host control of virus infections
within the liver.

PMCID: PMC1855380
PMID: 17438296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Int J Biol Markers. 2007 Jan-Mar;22(1):34-8.

Differential expression patterns of IRF3 and IRF7 in pediatric lymphoid
disorders.

Park HS(1), Kim YJ, Bae YK, Lee NH, Lee YJ, Hah JO, Park TI, Lee KS, Park JB, Kim
HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Daegu,
Korea.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are multifunctional transcriptional factors.
To define the role of IRFs in lymphoid disorders, we determined the expression
patterns of IRF3 and IRF7 by immunohistochemistry in 5 normal lymph nodes, 12
reactive hyperplastic lymph nodes, and 27 pediatric lymphomas. IRF3 was
prominently expressed in the nuclei of the histiocytes, and was expressed very
weakly in the cytoplasm of most of the lymphocytes of the normal lymph nodes.
However, IRF7 was expressed strongly in the nuclei of over 50% of the lymphocytes
throughout the normal lymph nodes, but the histiocytes and fibroblasts were
spared. In the reactive hyperplastic lymph nodes, the number of IRF3- and IRF7-
positive cells in the nuclei was elevated. In the lymphomas, the number of
IRF3-positive cells in the nucleus appeared to have decreased, and the cells were
scattered throughout the lymphoma tissue in no specific pattern. However, in most
cases the number of IRF7-positive cells was elevated. These results suggested
that IRF3 was activated principally in the histiocytes and T cells under
inflammatory conditions, but IRF3 activation was attenuated in cases of lymphoma.
However, the number of IRF7-positive cells was found to be elevated in the
reactive hyperplastic lymph nodes and pediatric lymphoma.

PMID: 17393359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Int Immunopharmacol. 2007 May;7(5):687-700. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

Shrimp (Penaeus monodon) anti-lipopolysaccharide factor reduces the lethality of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa sepsis in mice.

Pan CY(1), Chao TT, Chen JC, Chen JY, Liu WC, Lin CH, Kuo CM.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Research Station, Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology,
Academia Sinica, 23-10 Dahuen Road, Jiaushi, Ilan 262, Taiwan.

We investigated the efficacy of amino acids 55-76 of the synthetic shrimp
anti-lipopolysaccharide factor peptide (SALF(55-76) cyclic peptide), the
C-terminal part of the shrimp anti-lipopolysaccharide factor. This study was
conducted to elucidate the effects of the antiseptic action of this peptide. The 
SALF(55-76) cyclic peptide was tested against bacterial clinical isolates and
showed broad-spectrum antimicrobial activity. Transmission electron microscopic
(TEM) examination of SALF(55-76) cyclic peptide-treated Pseudomonas aeruginosa
showed that severe swelling preceded cell death and breakage of the outer
membrane; the intracellular inclusion was found to have effluxed extracellularly.
When mice were treated with the SALF(55-76) cyclic peptide before bacterial
challenge with P. aeruginosa, the peptide highly protected mice against death by 
sepsis. The P. aeruginosa recovered from SALF(55-76) cyclic peptide-treated mice 
after 4 h exhibited reduced bacterial growth similar to that recovered from
vancomycin-treated mice. In addition, the syntheses of inflammatory cytokines,
such as interleukin (IL)-2, IL-4, IL-10, IL-12, IL-13, interferon-gamma, and
tumor necrosis factor [TNF]-alpha, were significantly upregulated 4 h after
SALF(55-76) cyclic peptide treatment except for IL-4 in the liver. The
expressions of Toll-like receptor 4 (Tlr4), Irf3, myd88, and Tram, were
considerably elevated, but only Tlr4 existed in the spleen 4 h after SALF(55-76) 
cyclic peptide treatment. The prophylactic administration of SALF(55-76) cyclic
peptide was begun the TNF-alpha response in comparison to untreated mice by an
ELISA analysis. Due to its multifunctional properties, the SALF(55-76) cyclic
peptide may become an important prophylaxis against and therapy for bacterial
infectious diseases, as well as for septic shock.

PMID: 17386416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(11):5737-48. Epub 2007 Mar 21.

Inhibition of transcription of the beta interferon gene by the human herpesvirus 
6 immediate-early 1 protein.

Jaworska J(1), Gravel A, Fink K, Grandvaux N, Flamand L.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology and Immunology Research Center, Room T1-49, 2705 Laurier Blvd.,
Quebec, Quebec, Canada G1V 4G2.

Human herpesviruses (HHV) are stealth pathogens possessing several decoy or
immune system evasion mechanisms favoring their persistence within the infected
host. Of these viruses, HHV-6 is among the most successful human parasites,
establishing lifelong infections in nearly 100% of individuals around the world. 
To better understand this host-pathogen relationship, we determined whether HHV-6
could interfere with the development of the innate antiviral response by
affecting interferon (IFN) biosynthesis. Using inducible cell lines and transient
transfection assays, we have identified the immediate-early 1 (IE1) protein as a 
potent inhibitor of IFN-beta gene expression. IE1 proteins from both HHV-6
variants were capable of suppressing IFN-beta gene induction. IE1 prevents
IFN-beta gene expression triggered by Sendai virus infection, double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA) and dsDNA transfection, or the ectopic expression of IFN-beta gene
activators such as retinoic inducible gene I protein, mitochondrial antiviral
signaling protein, TBK-1, IkappaB kinase epsilon (IKKepsilon), and IFN regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3). While the stability of IFN-beta mRNA is not affected,
IE1-expressing cells have reduced levels of dimerized IRF3 and
nucleus-translocated IRF3 in response to activation by TBK-1 or IKKepsilon. Using
nuclear extracts and gel shift experiments, we could demonstrate that in the
presence of IE1, IRF3 does not bind efficiently to the IFN-beta promoter
sequence. Overall, these results indicate that the IE1 protein of HHV-6, one of
the first viral proteins synthesized upon viral entry, is a potent suppressor of 
IFN-beta gene induction and likely contributes to favor the establishment of and 
successful infection of cells with this virus.

PMCID: PMC1900312
PMID: 17376932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Jun;81(6):1591-8. Epub 2007 Mar 14.

Role of IRAK4 and IRF3 in the control of intracellular infection with Chlamydia
pneumoniae.

Trumstedt C(1), Eriksson E, Lundberg AM, Yang TB, Yan ZQ, Wigzell H, Rottenberg
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institute, Nobels väg 16,
171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

TLR signal transduction involves a MyD88-mediated pathway, which leads to
recruitment of the IL-1 receptor (IL-1R)-associated kinase 4 (IRAK4) and
Toll/IL-1R translation initiation region domain-containing adaptor-inducing
IFN-beta-mediated pathway, resulting in the activation of IFN regulatory factor
(IRF)3. Both pathways can lead to expression of IFN-beta. TLR-dependent and
-independent signals converge in the TNF receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6)
adaptor, which mediates the activation of NF-kappaBeta. Infection of murine bone 
marrow-derived macrophages (BMM) with Chlamydia pneumoniae induces
IFN-alpha/beta- and NF-kappaBeta-dependent expression of IFN-gamma, which in
turn, will control bacterial growth. The role of IRAK4 and IRF3 in the regulation
of IFN-alpha/beta expression and NF-kappaBeta activation was studied in C.
pneumoniae-infected BMM. We found that levels of IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, and
IFN-gamma mRNA were reduced in infected IRAK4(-/-) BMM compared with wild-type
(WT) controls. BMM also showed an IRAK4-dependent growth control of C.
pneumoniae. No increased IRF3 activation was detected in C. pneumoniae-infected
BMM. Similar numbers of intracellular bacteria, IFN-alpha, and IFN-gamma mRNA
titers were observed in C. pneumoniae-infected IRF3(-/-) BMM. On the contrary,
IFN-beta(-/-) BMM showed lower IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma mRNA levels and higher
bacterial titers compared with WT controls. C. pneumoniae infection-induced
activation of NF-kappaBeta and expression of proinflammatory cytokines were shown
to be TRAF6-dependent but did not require IRAK4 or IRF3. Thus, our data indicate 
that IRAK4, but not IRF3, controls C. pneumoniae-induced IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma 
secretion and bacterial growth. IRAK4 and IRF3 are redundant for
infection-induced NF-kappaB activation, which is regulated by TRAF6.

PMID: 17360955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2006 Mar;1(1):77-88.

Conservation of Toll-Like Receptor Signaling Pathways in Teleost Fish.

Purcell MK, Smith KD, Hood L, Winton JR, Roach JC.

In mammals, Toll-like receptors (TLR) recognize ligands, including
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), and respond with ligand-specific 
induction of genes. In this study, we establish evolutionary conservation in
teleost fish of key components of the TLR-signaling pathway that act as switches 
for differential gene induction, including MYD88, TIRAP, TRIF, TRAF6, IRF3, and
IRF7. We further explore this conservation with a molecular phylogenetic analysis
of MYD88. To the extent that current genomic analysis can establish, each
vertebrate has one ortholog to each of these genes. For molecular tree
construction and phylogeny inference, we demonstrate a methodology for including 
genes with only partial primary sequences without disrupting the topology
provided by the high-confidence full-length sequences. Conservation of the
TLR-signaling molecules suggests that the basic program of gene regulation by the
TLR-signaling pathway is conserved across vertebrates. To test this hypothesis,
leukocytes from a model fish, rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), were
stimulated with known mammalian TLR agonists including: diacylated and
triacylated forms of lipoprotein, flagellin, two forms of LPS, synthetic
double-stranded RNA, and two imidazoquinoline compounds (loxoribine and R848).
Trout leukocytes responded in vitro to a number of these agonists with distinct
patterns of cytokine expression that correspond to mammalian responses. Our
results support the key prediction from our phylogenetic analyses that strong
selective pressure of pathogenic microbes has preserved both TLR recognition and 
signaling functions during vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC1524722
PMID: 17330145  [PubMed]


272. Annu Rev Biochem. 2007;76:447-80.

Signaling pathways downstream of pattern-recognition receptors and their cross
talk.

Lee MS(1), Kim YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yonsei University, Seoul 120-749, Republic of
Korea. myeongsup.lee@gmail.com

Pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) initiate innate immunity through pathogen
recognition. Serum PRRs opsonize pathogens for enhanced phagocytic clearance.
Toll-like receptors (TLRs) initiate common NF-kappaB/AP-1 and distinct IRF3/7
pathways to coordinate innate immunity and to initiate adaptive immunity against 
diverse pathogens. Cytoplasmic caspase-recruiting domain (CARD) helicases, such
as RIG-I/MDA5, mediate antiviral immunity by inducing the production of type I
interferons via the adaptor IPS-1, whereas nucleotide-binding oligomerization
domain (NOD)-like receptors mediate mainly antibacterial immunity by activating
NF-kappaB or inflammasomes. Dectin-1 is important for antifungal immunity,
promoting phagocytosis and activating NF-kappaB. Potentially harmful TLR
signaling pathways can be negatively regulated by negative feedback mechanisms
and also by anti-inflammatory factors such as TGFbeta, interleukin (IL)-10, and
steroids. Many combinations of TLR-TLR and TLR-NOD modulate inflammatory
responses. TLRs and NALP3 interplay to produce mature IL-1beta. Thus signaling
pathways downstream of PRRs and their cross talk control immune responses in
effective manners.

PMID: 17328678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Int Immunopharmacol. 2007 Apr;7(4):454-63. Epub 2006 Dec 28.

Concanavalin A induced expression of Toll-like receptors in murine peritoneal
macrophages in vitro.

Sodhi A(1), Tarang S, Kesherwani V.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.
ajit.sodhi@lycos.com

The differential expression of Toll-like receptors (TLRs 1-9) and their
associated proteins in murine peritoneal macrophages in vitro, on treatment with 
plant lectin concanavalin A (Con A) has been investigated. It is observed that
there is enhanced expression of TLRs 2-9 and downstream molecules--MyD88, IRAK1, 
TRAF6 and IRF3 in murine peritoneal macrophages on in vitro treatment with Con A.
Pretreatment of macrophages with inhibitors of JNK, p38, p42/44 and NF-kappaB,
significantly decreased the Con A induced expression of TLRs. When cells are
pre-treated with Con A and subsequently treated with TLR ligands--Zymosan A,
PolyI:C, LPS, CpG DNA, there is enhanced production of proinflammatory cytokines 
(TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, IL-12 and IFN-gamma,), nitric oxide and iNOS expression in 
murine peritoneal macrophages. The results suggest that treatment of macrophages 
with Con A renders them more susceptible to subsequent activation and induction
of proinflammatory cytokines and nitric oxide production by different TLR
ligands.

PMID: 17321468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Virology. 2007 Apr 25;361(1):18-26. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Group 2 coronaviruses prevent immediate early interferon induction by protection 
of viral RNA from host cell recognition.

Versteeg GA(1), Bredenbeek PJ, van den Worm SH, Spaan WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Laboratory, Department of Medical Microbiology, Center of
Infectious Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center, LUMC E4-P, P.O. Box 9600, 
2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Many viruses encode antagonists to prevent interferon (IFN) induction. Infection 
of fibroblasts with the murine hepatitis coronavirus (MHV) and SARS-coronavirus
(SARS-CoV) did not result in nuclear translocation of interferon-regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3), a key transcription factor involved in IFN induction, and
induction of IFN mRNA transcription. Furthermore, MHV and SARS-CoV infection
could not prevent IFN induction by poly (I:C) or Sendai virus, suggesting that
these CoVs do not inactivate IRF3-mediated transcription regulation, but
apparently prevent detection of replicative RNA by cellular sensory molecules.
Our data indicate that shielding of viral RNA to host cell sensors might be the
main general mechanism for coronaviruses to prevent IFN induction.

PMID: 17316733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Aug;82(2):187-95. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Innate immune system regulation of nuclear hormone receptors in metabolic
diseases.

Chow EK(1), Razani B, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The immune system modulates a number of biological processes to properly defend
against pathogens. Here, we review how crosstalk between nuclear hormone
receptors and the innate immune system may influence multiple biological
functions during an immune response. Although nuclear hormone receptor repression
of innate immune responses and inflammation has been well studied, a number of
new studies have identified repression of nuclear hormone receptor signaling by
various innate immune responses. IFN regulatory factor 3, a key transcription
factor involved in the induction of antiviral genes, may play a role in mediating
such crosstalk between the innate immune response and nuclear receptor-regulated 
metabolism. This crosstalk mechanism is now implicated in the pathogenesis of
atherosclerosis and Reye's syndrome and could provide an explanation for other
pathogen-associated metabolic and developmental disorders.

PMID: 17314330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Virol. 2007 May;81(9):4473-81. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Rotavirus NSP1 inhibits expression of type I interferon by antagonizing the
function of interferon regulatory factors IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7.

Barro M(1), Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Disease, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, Bethesda, MD
20892-8026, USA.

Secretion of interferon (IFN) by virus-infected cells is essential for activating
autocrine and paracrine pathways that promote cellular transition to an antiviral
state. In most mammalian cells, IFN production is initiated by the activation of 
constitutively expressed IFN regulatory factor 3, IRF3, which in turn leads to
the induction of IRF7, the "master regulator" of IFN type I synthesis (alpha/beta
IFN). Previous studies established that rotavirus NSP1 antagonizes IFN signaling 
by inducing IRF3 degradation. In the present study, we have determined that, in
comparison to wild-type rotaviruses, rotaviruses encoding defective NSP1 grow to 
lower titers in some cell lines and that this poor growth phenotype is due to
their failure to suppress IFN expression. Furthermore, we provide evidence that
rotaviruses encoding wild-type NSP1 subvert IFN signaling by inducing the
degradation of not only IRF3, but also IRF7, with both events occurring through
proteasome-dependent processes that proceed with similar efficiencies. The
capacity of NSP1 to induce IRF7 degradation may allow rotavirus to move across
the gut barrier by enabling the virus to replicate in specialized trafficking
cells (dendritic cells and macrophages) that constitutively express IRF7. Along
with IRF3 and IRF7, NSP1 was found to induce the degradation of IRF5, a factor
that upregulates IFN expression and that is involved in triggering apoptosis
during viral infection. Our analysis suggests that NSP1 mediates the degradation 
of IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 by recognizing a common element of IRF proteins, thereby 
allowing NSP1 to act as a broad-spectrum antagonist of IRF function.

PMCID: PMC1900170
PMID: 17301153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 18;282(20):15022-32. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Protein kinase Calpha is involved in interferon regulatory factor 3 activation
and type I interferon-beta synthesis.

Johnson J(1), Albarani V, Nguyen M, Goldman M, Willems F, Aksoy E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 8 Rue
Adrienne Bolland, 6041 Charleroi, Belgium.

Protein kinase C (PKC) isoforms are critically involved in the regulation of
innate immune responses. Herein, we investigated the role of conventional
PKCalpha in the regulation of IFN-beta gene expression mediated by the Toll-like 
receptor 3 (TLR3) signaling pathway. Inhibition of conventional PKC (cPKC)
activity in monocyte-derived dendritic cells or TLR3-expressing cells by an
isoform-specific inhibitor, Gö6976, selectively inhibited IFN-beta synthesis
induced by double-stranded RNA polyinosine-polycytidylic acid. Furthermore,
reporter gene assays confirmed that PKCalpha regulates IFN-beta promoter
activity, since overexpression of dominant negative PKCalpha but not PKCbeta(I)
repressed interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3)-dependent but not
NF-kappaB-mediated promoter activity upon TLR3 engagement in HEK 293 cells.
Dominant negative PKCalpha inhibited IRF-3 transcriptional activity mediated by
overexpression of TIR domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-beta and
Tank-binding kinase-1. Additional biochemical analysis demonstrated that
Gö6976-treated dendritic cells exhibited IRF-3 phosphorylation, dimerization,
nuclear translocation, and DNA binding activity analogous to their control
counterparts in response to polyinosine-polycytidylic acid. In contrast,
co-immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that TLR3-induced cPKC activity is
essential for mediating the interaction of IRF-3 but not p65/RelA with the
co-activator CREB-binding protein. Furthermore, PKCalpha knock-down with specific
small interfering RNA inhibited IFN-beta expression and down-regulated
IRF-3-dependent promoter activity, establishing PKCalpha as a component of TLR3
signaling that regulates IFN-beta gene expression by targeting IRF-3-CREB-binding
protein interaction. Finally, we analyzed the involvement of cPKCs in other
signaling pathways leading to IFN-beta synthesis. These experiments revealed that
cPKCs play a role in the synthesis of IFN-beta induced via both TLR-dependent and
-independent pathways.

PMID: 17296604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Biol Chem. 2007 Apr 6;282(14):10792-803. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Functional and therapeutic analysis of hepatitis C virus NS3.4A protease control 
of antiviral immune defense.

Johnson CL(1), Owen DM, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a major global public health
problem. HCV infection is supported by viral strategies to evade the innate
antiviral response wherein the viral NS3.4A protease complex targets and cleaves 
the interferon promoter stimulator-1 (IPS-1) adaptor protein to ablate signaling 
of interferon alpha/beta immune defenses. Here we examined the structural
requirements of NS3.4A and the therapeutic potential of NS3.4A inhibitors to
control the innate immune response against virus infection. The structural
composition of NS3 includes an amino-terminal serine protease domain and a
carboxyl-terminal RNA helicase domain. NS3 mutants lacking the helicase domain
retained the ability to control virus signaling initiated by retinoic
acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I) or melanoma differentiation antigen 5 and
suppressed the downstream activation of interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3)
and nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) through the targeted proteolysis of IPS-1. 
This regulation was abrogated by truncation of the NS3 protease domain or by
point mutations that ablated protease activity. NS3.4A protease control of
antiviral immune signaling was due to targeted proteolysis of IPS-1 by the NS3
protease domain and minimal NS4A cofactor. Treatment of HCV-infected cells with
an NS3 protease inhibitor prevented IPS-1 proteolysis by the HCV protease and
restored RIG-I immune defense signaling during infection. Thus, the NS3.4A
protease domain can target IPS-1 for cleavage and is essential for blocking RIG-I
signaling to IRF-3 and NF-kappaB, whereas the helicase domain is dispensable for 
this action. Our results indicate that NS3.4A protease inhibitors have
immunomodulatory potential to restore innate immune defenses to HCV infection.

PMID: 17289677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Gen Virol. 2007 Feb;88(Pt 2):613-20.

Zinc-binding domain of rotavirus NSP1 is required for proteasome-dependent
degradation of IRF3 and autoregulatory NSP1 stability.

Graff JW(1), Ewen J, Ettayebi K, Hardy ME.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Molecular Biology, Montana State University, Bozeman, MT 59717,
USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is a key transcription factor involved in
the induction of interferon (IFN) in response to viral infection. Rotavirus
non-structural protein NSP1 binds to and targets IRF3 for proteasome degradation 
early post-infection. Mutational analysis of cysteine and histidine residues
within the conserved N-terminal zinc-binding domain in NSP1 of bovine rotavirus
strain B641 abolished IRF3 degradation in transfected cells. Thus, the integrity 
of the zinc-binding domain in NSP1 is important for degradation of IRF3. In
contrast to bovine strain B641, IRF3 was stable in cells infected with porcine
rotavirus strain OSU and OSU NSP1 bound only weakly to IRF3. Both B641 NSP1 and
OSU NSP1 were stabilized in cells or cell-free extracts in the presence of the
proteasome inhibitor MG132 and when the zinc-binding domain was disrupted by
site-directed mutagenesis. Data from the B641 analyses that show IRF3 degradation
is dependent on the presence of NSP1 and the integrity of the N-terminal
zinc-binding domain, coupled with the regulated stability of IRF3 and NSP1 by the
proteasome, collectively support the hypothesis that NSP1 is an E3 ubiquitin
ligase.

PMID: 17251580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(8):4145-57. Epub 2007 Jan 24.

Sensing infection by adenovirus: Toll-like receptor-independent viral DNA
recognition signals activation of the interferon regulatory factor 3 master
regulator.

Nociari M(1), Ocheretina O, Schoggins JW, Falck-Pedersen E.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology Box 62, 1300 York Ave. New York, NY 10021, USA.

Infection with adenovirus vectors (AdV) results in rapid activation of innate
immunity, which serves the dual purpose of stimulating inflammatory antiviral
host defenses and the adaptive immune system. Viral recognition by macrophages,
dendritic cells, and other cell types requires an ability to sense the presence
of a foreign molecular pattern by "pattern recognition receptors." The nature of 
the adenoviral sensor, the target ligand of the sensor, and the downstream
antiviral signaling response triggered by virus infection have not been defined
for this nonenveloped double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) virus. We have identified four 
critical links involved in AdV recognition by murine antigen-presenting cells
(APC) and primary lung fibroblasts: (i) viral recognition occurs chiefly via a
Toll-like receptor (TLR)-independent nucleic acid-sensing mechanism recognizing
the viral dsDNA genome, (ii) the intact viral particle and capsid proteins are
required for efficient intracellular delivery of the viral genome, (iii) delivery
of the viral genome triggers interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)
phosphorylation, and (iv) IRF3 activation is the required dominant antiviral
signaling pathway used by APC, whereas the "primary" involvement of NF-kappaB,
mitogen-activated protein kinase, or Akt pathways is less prominent. In this
study we provide the first direct evidence that infection by a dsDNA virus
stimulates an IRF3-mediated interferon and proinflammatory response through a
TLR-independent DNA-sensing mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1866159
PMID: 17251283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Apr 1;100(5):1301-12.

TLR3 signaling in a hepatoma cell line is skewed towards apoptosis.

Khvalevsky E(1), Rivkin L, Rachmilewitz J, Galun E, Giladi H.

Author information: 
(1)The Goldyne Savad Institute of Gene Therapy, Hadassah University Hospital,
Jerusalem, Israel.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) recognize pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPS) leading to the activation of the innate immune response and subsequently 
to the shaping of the adaptive immune response. Of the known human TLRs, TLR3, 7,
8, and 9 were shown to recognize nucleic acid ligands. TLR3 signaling is induced 
by double-stranded (ds)RNA, a molecular signature of viruses, and is mediated by 
the TRIF (TIR domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFNbeta) adaptor molecule. Thus,
TLR3 plays an important role in the host response to viral infections. The liver 
is constantly exposed to a large variety of foreign substances, including
pathogens such as HBV (hepatitis B virus) and HCV (hepatitis C virus), which
frequently establish persistent liver infections. In this work, we investigated
the expression and signaling pathway of TLR3 in different hepatoma cell lines. We
show that hepatocyte lineage cells express relatively low levels of TLR3 mRNA.
TLR3 signaling in HEK293 cells (human embryonic kidney cells) activated NF-kappaB
and IRF3 (interferon regulatory factor 3) and induced IFNbeta (interferon beta)
promoter expression, which are known to lead to pro-inflammatory cytokine
secretion. In Huh7 cells, there was only a short-term IRF3 activation, and a very
low level of IFNbeta expression. In HepG2 cells on the other hand, while no
induction of pro-inflammatory factors was observed, signaling by TLR3 was skewed 
towards the induction of apoptosis. These results indicate preferential induction
of the apoptotic pathway over the cytokine induction pathway by TLR3 signaling in
hepatocellular carcinoma cells with potential implications for therapeutic
strategies.

c 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17243100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(7):3087-96. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

Classical swine fever virus Npro interacts with interferon regulatory factor 3
and induces its proteasomal degradation.

Bauhofer O(1), Summerfield A, Sakoda Y, Tratschin JD, Hofmann MA, Ruggli N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunoprophylaxis (IVI), Sensemattstrasse 293,
CH-3147 Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.

Viruses have evolved a multitude of strategies to subvert the innate immune
system by interfering with components of the alpha/beta interferon
(IFN-alpha/beta) induction and signaling pathway. It is well established that the
pestiviruses prevent IFN-alpha/beta induction in their primary target cells, such
as epitheloidal and endothelial cells, macrophages, and conventional dendritic
cells, a phenotype mediated by the viral protein N(pro). Central players in the
IFN-alpha/beta induction cascade are interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and
IRF7. Recently, it was proposed that classical swine fever virus (CSFV), the
porcine pestivirus, induced the loss of IRF3 by inhibiting the transcription of
IRF3 mRNA. In the present study, we show that endogenous IRF3 and IRF3 expressed 
from a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter are depleted in the presence of CSFV by
means of N(pro), while CSFV does not inhibit CMV promoter-driven protein
expression. We also demonstrate that CSFV does not reduce the transcriptional
activity of the IRF3 promoter and does not affect the stability of IRF3 mRNA. In 
fact, CSFV N(pro) induces proteasomal degradation of IRF3, as demonstrated by
proteasome inhibition studies. Furthermore, N(pro) coprecipitates with IRF3,
suggesting that the proteasomal degradation of IRF3 is induced by a direct or
indirect interaction with N(pro). Finally, we show that N(pro) does not
downregulate IRF7 expression.

PMCID: PMC1866024
PMID: 17215286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(7):3077-86. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

The infected cell protein 0 encoded by bovine herpesvirus 1 (bICP0) induces
degradation of interferon response factor 3 and, consequently, inhibits beta
interferon promoter activity.

Saira K(1), Zhou Y, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68503, USA.

The ICP0 protein (bICP0) encoded by bovine herpesvirus 1 is the major viral
regulatory protein because it stimulates all viral promoters and, consequently,
productive infection. Like other ICP0 analogues encoded by Alphaherpesvirinae
subfamily members, bICP0 contains a zinc RING finger near its amino terminus that
is necessary for activating transcription, regulating subcellular localization,
and inhibiting interferon-dependent transcription. In this study, we discovered
that sequences near the C terminus, and the zinc RING finger, are necessary for
inhibiting the human beta interferon (IFN-beta) promoter. In contrast to herpes
simplex virus type 1-encoded ICP0, bICP0 reduces interferon response factor 3
(IRF3), but not IRF7, protein levels in transiently transfected cells. The zinc
RING finger and sequences near the C terminus are necessary for bICP0-induced
degradation of IRF3. A proteasome inhibitor, lactacystin, interfered with
bICP0-induced degradation of IRF3, suggesting that bICP0, directly or indirectly,
targets IRF3 for proteasome-dependent degradation. IRF3, but not IRF7, is not
readily detectable in the nuclei of productively infected bovine cells during the
late stages of infection. In the context of productive infection, IRF3 and IRF7
are detected in the nucleus at early times after infection. At late times after
infection, IRF7, but not IRF3, is still detectable in the nuclei of infected
cells. Collectively, these studies suggest that the ability of bICP0 to reduce
IRF3 protein levels is important with respect to disarming the IFN response
during productive infection.

PMCID: PMC1866033
PMID: 17215277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 9;282(10):7576-81. Epub 2007 Jan 4.

Viral infections activate types I and III interferon genes through a common
mechanism.

Onoguchi K(1), Yoneyama M, Takemura A, Akira S, Taniguchi T, Namiki H, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Virus Research and Graduate
School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Viral infections trigger innate immune responses, including the production of
type I interferons (IFN-alpha and -beta) and other proinflammatory cytokines.
Novel antiviral cytokines IFN-lambda1, IFN-lambda2, and IFN-lambda3 are
classified as type III IFNs and have evolved independently of type I IFNs. Type
III IFN genes are regulated at the level of transcription and induced by viral
infection. Although the regulatory mechanism of type I IFNs is well elucidated,
the expression mechanism of IFN-lambdas is not well understood. Here, we analyzed
the mechanism by which IFN-lambda gene expression is induced by viral infections.
Loss- and gain-of-function experiments revealed the involvement of RIG-I
(retinoic acid-inducible gene I), IPS-1, TBK1, and interferon regulatory
factor-3, key regulators of the virus-induced activation of type I IFN genes.
Consistent with this, a search for the cis-regulatory element of the human
ifnlambda1 revealed a cluster of interferon regulatory factor-binding sites and a
NF-kappaB-binding site. Functional analysis demonstrated that all of these sites 
are essential for gene activation by the virus. These results strongly suggest
that types I and III IFN genes are regulated by a common mechanism.

PMID: 17204473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 1;178(1):253-61.

Multiple NF-kappaB and IFN regulatory factor family transcription factors
regulate CCL19 gene expression in human monocyte-derived dendritic cells.

Pietilä TE(1), Veckman V, Lehtonen A, Lin R, Hiscott J, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland. taija.pietila@ktl.fi

CCL19 chemokine has a central role in dendritic cell (DC) biology regulating DC
traffic and recruitment of naive T cells to the vicinity of activated DCs. In
this study, we have analyzed the regulation of CCL19 gene expression in human
monocyte-derived DCs. DCs infected with Salmonella enterica or Sendai virus
produced CCL19 at late times of infection. The CCL19 promoter was identified as
having two putative NF-kappaB binding sites and one IFN-stimulated response
element (ISRE). Transcription factor binding experiments demonstrated that
Salmonella or Sendai virus infection increased the binding of classical p50+p65
and alternative p52+RelB NF-kappaB proteins to both of the CCL19 promoter
NF-kappaB elements. Interestingly, Salmonella or Sendai virus infection also
increased the binding of multiple IFN regulatory factors (IRFs), STAT1, and
STAT2, to the ISRE element. Enhanced binding of IRF1, IRF3, IRF7, and IRF9 to the
CCL19 promoter ISRE site was detected in Salmonella or Sendai virus-infected cell
extracts. The CCL19 promoter in a luciferase reporter construct was activated by 
the expression of NF-kappaB p50+p65 or p52+RelB dimers. IRF1, IRF3, and IRF7
proteins also activated CCL19 promoter in the presence of Sendai virus infection.
CCL19 promoter constructs mutated at NF-kappaB and/or ISRE sites were only weakly
activated. Ectopic expression of RIG-I (DeltaRIG-I, CARDIF) or TLR3/4 (TRIF,
MyD88, IKKepsilon, or TBK1) signaling pathway components induced CCL19 promoter
activity, suggesting that these pathways are important in CCL19 gene expression. 
Our experiments reveal that expression of the CCL19 gene is regulated by a
combined action of several members of the NF-kappaB, IRF, and STAT family
transcription factors.

PMID: 17182562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Infect Immun. 2007 Mar;75(3):1280-90. Epub 2006 Dec 18.

Chlamydia muridarum infection elicits a beta interferon response in murine
oviduct epithelial cells dependent on interferon regulatory factor 3 and TRIF.

Derbigny WA(1), Hong SC, Kerr MS, Temkit M, Johnson RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
IN 46202, USA.

Chlamydia trachomatis is the most common sexually transmitted bacterial infection
in the United States. Utilizing cloned murine oviduct epithelial cell lines, we
previously identified Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) as the principal epithelial
pattern recognition receptor (PRR) for infection-triggered release of the acute
inflammatory cytokines interleukin-6 and granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor. The infected oviduct epithelial cell lines also
secreted the immunomodulatory cytokine beta interferon (IFN-beta) in a largely
MyD88-independent manner. Although TLR3 was the only IFN-beta production-capable 
TLR expressed by the oviduct cell lines, we were not able to determine whether
TLR3 was responsible for IFN-beta production because the epithelial cells were
unresponsive to the TLR3 ligand poly(I-C), and small interfering RNA (siRNA)
techniques were ineffective at knocking down TLR3 expression. To further
investigate the potential role of TLR3 in the infected epithelial cell secretion 
of IFN-beta, we examined the roles of its downstream signaling molecules TRIF and
IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) using a dominant-negative TRIF molecule and siRNA
specific for TRIF and IRF-3. Antagonism of either IRF-3 or TRIF signaling
significantly decreased IFN-beta production. These data implicate TLR3, or an
unknown PRR utilizing TRIF, as the source of IFN-beta production by
Chlamydia-infected oviduct epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC1828549
PMID: 17178782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Blood. 2007 Apr 15;109(8):3308-15. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

TLR agonists induce regulatory dendritic cells to recruit Th1 cells via
preferential IP-10 secretion and inhibit Th1 proliferation.

Qian C(1), An H, Yu Y, Liu S, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology and National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology,
Second Military Medical University, 800 Xiangyin Road, Shanghai 200433, People's 
Republic of China.

Dendritic cells (DCs) and chemokines are important mediators linking innate and
adaptive immunity on activation by Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists. We
previously identified a kind of regulatory DC subset (diffDCs) that
differentiated from mature DCs under splenic stroma and that inhibited T-cell
proliferation. The responsiveness of such regulatory DCs to TLR agonists and
their pattern of chemokine production remain to be determined. Here, we report
that the regulatory DCs secrete a higher level of CXCR3 chemokine
IFN-gamma-induced protein-10 (IP-10) than immature DCs (imDCs), and more IP-10 is
produced after stimulation with TLR-2, -4, -3, and -9 ligands. Blockade of
IFN-alpha/beta inhibits IP-10 production by TLR agonist-activated regulatory DCs.
We show that the increased IRF-3 and IFN-beta-induced STAT1 activation are
responsible for the autocrine IFN-beta-dependent preferential production of IP-10
by regulatory DCs. In addition, stimulation with recombinant mouse IFN-alpha/beta
induces more IP-10 production in regulatory DCs than that in imDCs. Moreover, the
regulatory DCs selectively recruit more Th1 cells through IP-10 and inhibit Th1
proliferation. Our results demonstrate a new manner for regulatory DCs to
down-regulate T-cell response by preferential IP-10 production and inhibition of 
recruited Th1 cell proliferation.

PMID: 17170125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Dec 26;103(52):19794-9. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Combinatorial pattern recognition receptor signaling alters the balance of life
and death in macrophages.

Seimon TA(1), Obstfeld A, Moore KJ, Golenbock DT, Tabas I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Anatomy, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032,
USA.

Macrophage pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) play key roles in innate
immunity, but they also may contribute to disease processes under certain
pathological conditions. We recently showed that engagement of the type A
scavenger receptor (SRA), a PRR, triggers JNK-dependent apoptosis in endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER)-stressed macrophages. In advanced atherosclerotic lesions, the
SRA, activated JNK, and ER stress are observed in macrophages, and macrophage
death in advanced atheromata leads to plaque necrosis. Herein, we show that SRA
ligands trigger apoptosis in ER-stressed macrophages by cooperating with another 
PRR, Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), to redirect TLR4 signaling from prosurvival to 
proapoptotic. Common SRA ligands activate both TLR4 signaling and engage the SRA.
The TLR4 effect results in activation of the proapoptotic MyD88-JNK branch of
TLR4, whereas the SRA effect silences the prosurvival IRF-3-IFN-beta branch of
TLR4. The normal cell-survival effect of LPS-induced TLR4 activation is converted
into an apoptosis response by immunoneutralization of IFN-beta, and the apoptosis
effect of SRA ligands is converted into a cell-survival response by
reconstitution with IFN-beta. Thus, combinatorial signaling between two distinct 
PRRs results in a functional outcome-macrophage apoptosis that does not occur
with either PRR alone. PRR-induced macrophage death may play important roles in
advanced atherosclerosis and in other innate immunity-related processes in which 
the balance between macrophage survival and death is critical.

PMCID: PMC1750881
PMID: 17167049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. BMC Cancer. 2006 Dec 8;6:281.

Intracellular expression of toll-like receptor 4 in neuroblastoma cells and their
unresponsiveness to lipopolysaccharide.

Hassan F(1), Islam S, Tumurkhuu G, Naiki Y, Koide N, Mori I, Yoshida T, Yokochi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi Medical University School of 
Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan. hassan@aichi-med-u.ac.jp
<hassan@aichi-med-u.ac.jp>

BACKGROUND: Recently it has been reported that, toll-like receptors (TLRs) are
expressed on a series of tumor cells, such as colon cancer, breast cancer,
prostate cancer, melanoma and lung cancer. Although some cancer cells like
melanoma cells are known to respond to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) via TLR4, not all
cancer cells are positive for TLR4. There is little information on the expression
and function of TLR4 in neuroblastoma cells. In this study, we investigated the
expression of TLR4 in human neuroblastoma NB-1 cell line.
METHODS: Expression and localization of TLR4 were detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and flow cytometric analysis,
respectively. Activation of nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB by LPS was detected by
degradation of IkappaB-alpha and NF-kappaB luciferase assay. Activation and
expression of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase and interferon regulatory
factor (IRF)-3 was detected by immunoblot analysis.
RESULTS: Human NB-1 neuroblastoma cells expressed intracellular form of TLR4, but
not the cell surface form. Further, NB-1 cells express CD14, MD2 and MyD88, which
are required for LPS response. However, LPS did not significantly induce
NF-kappaB activation in NB-1 cells although it slightly degraded IkappaB-alpha.
NB-1 cells expressed no IRF-3, which plays a pivotal role on the
MyD88-independent pathway of LPS signaling. Collectively, NB-1 cells are capable 
to avoid their response to LPS.
CONCLUSION: Although human NB-1 neuroblastoma cells possessed all the molecules
required for LPS response, they did not respond to LPS. It might be responsible
for intracellular expression of TLR4 or lack of IRF-3.

PMCID: PMC1705811
PMID: 17156435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Cell Microbiol. 2007 Apr;9(4):930-8. Epub 2006 Nov 28.

IFNbeta induction by influenza A virus is mediated by RIG-I which is regulated by
the viral NS1 protein.

Opitz B(1), Rejaibi A, Dauber B, Eckhard J, Vinzing M, Schmeck B, Hippenstiel S, 
Suttorp N, Wolff T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases and Pulmonary Medicine,
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin,
Germany. bastian.opitz@charite.de

Influenza A virus causes epidemics of respiratory diseases in humans leading to
thousands of death annually. One of its major virulence factors, the
non-structural protein 1 (NS1), exhibits interferon-antagonistic properties.
While epithelial cells of the respiratory tract are the primary targets of
influenza virus, the virus-sensing mechanisms in these cells eventually leading
to IFNbeta production are incompletely understood. Here we show that infection of
epithelial cells with NS1-deficient influenza A virus upregulated expression of
two molecules that have been previously implicated in sensing of RNA viruses, the
retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and the melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5). Gene silencing and overexpression
experiments demonstrated that RIG-I, its adapter interferon-beta promoter
stimulator 1 (IPS-1) and interferon-regulated factor 3 (IRF3) were involved in
influenza A virus-mediated production of the antiviral IFNbeta. In addition, we
showed that the NS1 protein is capable to inhibit the RIG-I-induced signalling, a
mechanism which corresponded to the observation that only NS1-deficient but not
the wild-type virus induced high-level production of IFNbeta. In conclusion, we
demonstrated a critical involvement of RIG-I, IPS-1 and IRF3 in influenza A virus
infection of epithelial cells.

PMID: 17140406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Blood. 2007 Apr 1;109(7):2887-93.

Interferon regulatory factor 3-dependent responses to lipopolysaccharide are
selectively blunted in cord blood cells.

Aksoy E(1), Albarani V, Nguyen M, Laes JF, Ruelle JL, De Wit D, Willems F,
Goldman M, Goriely S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology (IMI), Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Charleroi, Belgium.

The synthesis of interferon-beta (IFNbeta) and IFN-inducible factors elicited by 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) depends on the transcriptional activity of interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) downstream of Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4). To examine
the ability of human newborns to mount TLR4-mediated IRF-3-dependent responses,
we analyzed the pattern of genes expressed on the addition of LPS to cord blood
or cord blood monocyte-derived dendritic cells (moDCs). Expression of IFNbeta and
IFN-inducible genes was selectively impaired in neonatal blood and moDCs as
compared with their adult counterparts. This selective defect was confirmed by
microarray experiments on moDCs. Altered expression of IFN-inducible genes was
related to impaired IFNbeta synthesis because IFNbeta signaling was functional in
neonatal moDCs. However, addition of exogenous IFNbeta failed to restore
LPS-induced IL-12p70 synthesis which was previously shown to be defective in
neonatal moDCs. Although LPS-induced IRF-3 nuclear translocation was observed
both in adult and neonatal moDCs, IRF-3 DNA-binding activity and association with
the coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP) were decreased in neonatal as compared
with adult moDCs. We conclude that impaired IRF-3/CBP interaction in neonatal
blood cells exposed to LPS is associated with impaired expression of IFNbeta and 
IFN-inducible genes. Because IRF-3 activity is also required for IL-12p70
synthesis, our findings provide a molecular basis for the decreased ability of
LPS-stimulated neonatal moDCs to elicit Th1-type responses.

PMID: 17138826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Hepatology. 2006 Dec;44(6):1635-47.

The protein kinase IKKepsilon can inhibit HCV expression independently of IFN and
its own expression is downregulated in HCV-infected livers.

Vilasco M(1), Larrea E, Vitour D, Dabo S, Breiman A, Regnault B, Riezu JI, Eid P,
Prieto J, Meurs EF.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unit Hepacivirus, Paris, France.

During a viral infection, binding of viral double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs) to the
cytosolic RNA helicase RIG-1 leads to recruitment of the mitochondria-associated 
Cardif protein, involved in activation of the IRF3-phosphorylating
IKKepsilon/TBK1 kinases, interferon (IFN) induction, and development of the
innate immune response. The hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS3/4A protease cleaves
Cardif and abrogates both IKKepsilon/TBK1 activation and IFN induction. By using 
an HCV replicon model, we previously showed that ectopic overexpression of
IKKepsilon can inhibit HCV expression. Here, analysis of the IKKepsilon
transcriptome profile in these HCV replicon cells showed induction of several
genes associated with the antiviral action of IFN. Interestingly, IKKepsilon
still inhibits HCV expression in the presence of neutralizing antibodies to IFN
receptors or in the presence of a dominant negative STAT1alpha mutant. This
suggests that good IKKepsilon expression levels are important for rapid
activation of the cellular antiviral response in HCV-infected cells, in addition 
to provoking IFN induction. To determine the physiological importance of
IKKepsilon in HCV infection, we then analyzed its expression levels in liver
biopsy specimens from HCV-infected patients. This analysis also included genes of
the IFN induction pathway (RIG-I, MDA5, LGP2, Cardif, TBK1), and three
IKKepsilon-induced genes (IFN-beta, CCL3, and ISG15). The results show
significant inhibition of expression of IKKepsilon and of the RNA helicases
RIG-I/MDA5/LGP2 in the HCV-infected patients, whereas expression of TBK1 and
Cardif was not significantly altered. In conclusion, given the antiviral
potential of IKKepsilon and of the RNA helicases, these in vivo data strongly
support an important role for these genes in the control of HCV infection.

PMID: 17133498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Immunol. 2006 Dec 1;177(11):8008-16.

The IFN-independent response to virus particle entry provides a first line of
antiviral defense that is independent of TLRs and retinoic acid-inducible gene I.

Paladino P(1), Cummings DT, Noyce RS, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Center for Gene Therapeutics, 
McMaster University, 1200 Main Street West, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The innate immune system responds to pathogen infection by eliciting a
nonspecific immune response following the recognition of various
pathogen-associated molecular patterns. TLRs and the RNA helicases retinoic
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5
recognize foreign nucleic acid within endosomal and cytoplasmic compartments,
respectively, initiating a signaling cascade that involves the induction of type 
I IFN through the transcription factors IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and
NF-kappaB. However, a recent paradigm has emerged in which bacterial DNA and
double-stranded B-form DNA trigger type I IFN production through an
uncharacterized TLR- and RIG-I-independent pathway. We have previously described 
a response in primary fibroblasts wherein the entry of diverse RNA- and
DNA-enveloped virus particles is sufficient to induce a subset of IFN-stimulated 
genes and a complete antiviral response in an IRF3-dependent, IFN-independent
manner. In this study, we show that the innate immune response to virus particle 
entry is independent of both TLR and RIG-I pathways, confirming the existence of 
novel innate immune mechanisms that result in the activation of IRF3.
Furthermore, we propose a model of innate antiviral immunity in which exposure to
increasing numbers of virus particles elevates the complexity of the cellular
response from an intracellular, IFN-independent response to one involving
secretion of cytokines and activation of infiltrating immune cells.

PMID: 17114474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Virol. 2007 Feb;81(3):1401-11. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Retinoic acid-inducible gene I mediates early antiviral response and Toll-like
receptor 3 expression in respiratory syncytial virus-infected airway epithelial
cells.

Liu P(1), Jamaluddin M, Li K, Garofalo RP, Casola A, Brasier AR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas 
77555-1060, USA.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is one of the most common viral pathogens
causing severe lower respiratory tract infections in infants and young children. 
Infected host cells detect and respond to RNA viruses using different mechanisms 
in a cell-type-specific manner, including retinoic acid-inducible gene I
(RIG-I)-dependent and Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent pathways. Because the
relative contributions of these two pathways in the recognition of RSV infection 
are unknown, we examined their roles in this study. We found that RIG-I helicase 
binds RSV transcripts within 12 h of infection. Short interfering RNA
(siRNA)-mediated RIG-I "knockdown" significantly inhibited early nuclear
factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) and interferon response factor 3 (IRF3) activation 9 h 
postinfection (p.i.). Consistent with this finding, RSV-induced beta interferon
(IFN-beta), interferon-inducible protein 10 (IP-10), chemokine ligand 5 (CCL-5), 
and IFN-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) expression levels were decreased in
RIG-I-silenced cells during the early phase of infection but not at later times
(18 h p.i.). In contrast, siRNA-mediated TLR3 knockdown did not affect
RSV-induced NF-kappaB binding but did inhibit IFN-beta, IP-10, CCL-5, and ISG15
expression at late times of infection. Further studies revealed that TLR3
knockdown significantly reduced NF-kappaB/RelA transcription by its ability to
block the activating phosphorylation of NF-kappaB/RelA at serine residue 276. We 
further found that TLR3 induction following RSV infection was regulated by
RIG-I-dependent IFN-beta secreted from infected airway epithelial cells and was
mediated by both IFN response-stimulated element (ISRE) and signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) sites in its proximal promoter. Together these 
findings indicate distinct temporal roles of RIG-I and TLR3 in mediating
RSV-induced innate immune responses, which are coupled to distinct pathways
controlling NF-kappaB activation.

PMCID: PMC1797494
PMID: 17108032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Virol. 2007 Jan;81(2):548-57. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus open reading frame (ORF) 3b, ORF 6,
and nucleocapsid proteins function as interferon antagonists.

Kopecky-Bromberg SA(1), Martínez-Sobrido L, Frieman M, Baric RA, Palese P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY
10029-6574, USA.

The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) is highly pathogenic
in humans, with a death rate near 10%. This high pathogenicity suggests that
SARS-CoV has developed mechanisms to overcome the host innate immune response. It
has now been determined that SARS-CoV open reading frame (ORF) 3b, ORF 6, and N
proteins antagonize interferon, a key component of the innate immune response.
All three proteins inhibit the expression of beta interferon (IFN-beta), and
further examination revealed that these SARS-CoV proteins inhibit a key protein
necessary for the expression of IFN-beta, IRF-3. N protein dramatically inhibited
expression from an NF-kappaB-responsive promoter. All three proteins were able to
inhibit expression from an interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) promoter
after infection with Sendai virus, while only ORF 3b and ORF 6 proteins were able
to inhibit expression from the ISRE promoter after treatment with interferon.
This indicates that N protein inhibits only the synthesis of interferon, while
ORF 3b and ORF 6 proteins inhibit both interferon synthesis and signaling. ORF 6 
protein, but not ORF 3b or N protein, inhibited nuclear translocation but not
phosphorylation of STAT1. Thus, it appears that these three interferon
antagonists of SARS-CoV inhibit the interferon response by different mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC1797484
PMID: 17108024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Virol. 2007 Jan;81(2):964-76. Epub 2006 Nov 8.

GB virus B disrupts RIG-I signaling by NS3/4A-mediated cleavage of the adaptor
protein MAVS.

Chen Z(1), Benureau Y, Rijnbrand R, Yi J, Wang T, Warter L, Lanford RE, Weinman
SA, Lemon SM, Martin A, Li K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Center for Hepatitis Research,
Institute for Human Infections & Immunity, University of Texas Medical Branch,
301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-1019, USA.

Understanding the mechanisms of hepatitis C virus (HCV) pathogenesis and
persistence has been hampered by the lack of small, convenient animal models. GB 
virus B (GBV-B) is phylogenetically the closest related virus to HCV. It causes
generally acute and occasionally chronic hepatitis in small primates and is used 
as a surrogate model for HCV. It is not known, however, whether GBV-B has evolved
strategies to circumvent host innate defenses similar to those of HCV, a property
that may contribute to HCV persistence in vivo. We show here in cultured tamarin 
hepatocytes that GBV-B NS3/4A protease, but not a related catalytically inactive 
mutant, effectively blocks innate intracellular antiviral responses signaled
through the RNA helicase, retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I), an essential
sensor molecule that initiates host defenses against many RNA viruses, including 
HCV. GBV-B NS3/4A protease specifically cleaves mitochondrial antiviral signaling
protein (MAVS; also known as IPS-1/Cardif/VISA) and dislodges it from
mitochondria, thereby disrupting its function as a RIG-I adaptor and blocking
downstream activation of both interferon regulatory factor 3 and nuclear factor
kappa B. MAVS cleavage and abrogation of virus-induced interferon responses were 
also observed in Huh7 cells supporting autonomous replication of subgenomic GBV-B
RNAs. Our data indicate that, as in the case of HCV, GBV-B has evolved to utilize
its major protease to disrupt RIG-I signaling and impede innate antiviral
defenses. These data provide further support for the use of GBV-B infection in
small primates as an accurate surrogate model for deciphering virus-host
interactions in hepacivirus pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1797450
PMID: 17093192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;66(21):10576-85.

Distinct roles for IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF-7 in the activation of
antitumor properties of human macrophages.

Romieu-Mourez R(1), Solis M, Nardin A, Goubau D, Baron-Bodo V, Lin R, Massie B,
Salcedo M, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

When properly activated, macrophages can be tumoricidal, thus making them
attractive additions to standard cancer therapies. To this end, tolerance and
activity of human autologous IFN-gamma-activated macrophages, produced in large
scale for clinical use (MAK cells), have been assessed in pilot trials in cancer 
patients. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that activation of IFN
regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF-7, with subsequent type I IFN production, may
be involved in the acquisition of new antitumor functions by macrophages.
Adenoviral vectors were generated for the delivery of constitutively active forms
of IRF-3 (Ad-IRF-3) or IRF-7 (Ad-IRF-7) into primary human macrophages. Cell
death was observed in Ad-IRF-3-transduced macrophages, whereas
Ad-IRF-7-transduced macrophages produced type I IFNs and displayed increased
expression of genes encoding tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand, interleukin (IL)-12, IL-15, and CD80, persisting for
at least 96 hours. Expression of iNOS, TNF-alpha, FasL, IL-1, and IL-6 genes was 
unaltered by Ad-IRF-7 transduction. Interestingly, Ad-IRF-3 or Ad-IRF-7
transduction negatively regulated the transcription of protumorigenic genes
encoding vascular endothelial growth factor and matrix metalloproteinase-2.
Furthermore, Ad-IRF-7-transduced macrophages exerted a cytostatic activity on
different cancer cell lines, including SK-BR-3, MCF-7, and COLO-205; the latter
cells were shown previously to be insensitive to MAK cells. In conclusion,
transduction of active forms of IRF-3 or IRF-7 differentially modulate the
apoptotic and antitumor properties of primary macrophages, with active IRF-7
leading to the acquisition of novel antitumor effector functions.

PMID: 17079482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Lab Invest. 2006 Dec;86(12):1243-60. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

Early pathogenic events associated with Sjögren's syndrome (SjS)-like disease of 
the NOD mouse using microarray analysis.

Killedar SJ(1), Eckenrode SE, McIndoe RA, She JX, Nguyen CQ, Peck AB, Cha S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Erratum in
    Lab Invest. 2007 Apr;87(4):398. Cha, Seunghee R [corrected to Cha, Seunghee];
Killedar, Smruti Y [corrected to Killedar, Smruti J].

Recently, we reported development of the C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse carrying two 
genetic intervals derived from the NOD mouse. These two genetic regions confer
full Sjögren's syndrome (SjS)-like disease in SjS-non-susceptible C57BL/6 mice.
The current study was undertaken to apply microarray technology to define the
molecular basis underlying onset of SjS-disease in C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mice.
Using oligonucleotide microarrays, gene expression profiles of submandibular
glands derived from 8- to 12-week-old C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mice and 8-week-old
C57BL/6 mice were performed for comparison. Significant differential expressions 
were determined using the Mann-Whitney U test. Hybridizations using submandibular
cDNA probes revealed 75 differentially expressed genes at 8 weeks and 105
differentially expressed genes at 12 weeks of age in C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mice
compared to 8-week-old C57BL/6 mice. These genes were related generally to basic 
cellular activities such as transcription, translation, DNA replication, and
protein folding. During the predisease phase, genes upregulated encode proteins
associated with the IFN-gamma signal-transduction-pathway (Jak/Stat1), TLR-3
(Irf3 and Traf6) and apoptosis (casp11 and casp3), indicative of chronic
proinflammatory stimuli, especially IL-1. Between 8 and 12 weeks of age, sets of 
clustered genes were upregulated that are associated with adaptive immune
responses, especially B cell activation, proliferation and differentiation
(Baffr, Taci, Bcma, Blys, April, CD70, CD40L, Traf1, Traf3, Pax5, c-Jun, Elk1 and
Nf-kB), and neural receptors (Taj/Troy). Altered gene expressions of TLR3 and
TNF-superfamily-receptors and ligands during this early phase of SjS suggest a
possible viral etiology in the altered glandular homeostasis with an upregulated,
possibly overstimulated, B-lymphocyte activation in the early autoimmune response
present in the submandibular glands. The importance of NF-kappaB as a critical
signal transduction pathway is also suggested but its link is not yet clear.

PMID: 17075579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Exp Med. 2006 Nov 27;203(12):2589-602. Epub 2006 Oct 30.

A role for IRF3-dependent RXRalpha repression in hepatotoxicity associated with
viral infections.

Chow EK(1), Castrillo A, Shahangian A, Pei L, O'Connell RM, Modlin RL, Tontonoz
P, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 
Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University 
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Viral infections and antiviral responses have been linked to several metabolic
diseases, including Reye's syndrome, which is aspirin-induced hepatotoxicity in
the context of a viral infection. We identify an interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3)-dependent but type I interferon-independent pathway that strongly inhibits
the expression of retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha) and suppresses the
induction of its downstream target genes, including those involved in hepatic
detoxification. Activation of IRF3 by viral infection in vivo greatly enhances
bile acid- and aspirin-induced hepatotoxicity. Our results provide a critical
link between the innate immune response and host metabolism, identifying
IRF3-mediated down-regulation of RXRalpha as a molecular mechanism for
pathogen-associated metabolic diseases.

PMCID: PMC2118146
PMID: 17074929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Virol. 2007 Jan;81(1):332-48. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Cytomegalovirus induces interferon-stimulated gene expression and is attenuated
by interferon in the developing brain.

van den Pol AN(1), Robek MD, Ghosh PK, Ozduman K, Bandi P, Whim MD, Wollmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar St.,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA. anthony.vandenpol@yale.edu

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is considered the most common infectious agent causing
permanent neurological dysfunction in the developing brain. We have previously
shown that CMV infects developing brain cells more easily than it infects mature 
brain cells and that this preference is independent of the host B- and T-cell
responses. In the present study, we examined the innate antiviral defenses
against mouse (m) and human (h) CMVs in developing and mature brain and brain
cells. mCMV infection induced interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene expression by 10- 
to 100-fold in both glia- and neuron-enriched cultures. Treatment of primary
brain cultures with IFN-alpha, -beta, and -gamma or a synthetic RNA, poly(I:C),
reduced the number of mCMV-infected cells, both in older cells and in fresh
cultures from embryonic mouse brains. When a viral dose that killed almost all
unprotected cells was used, IFN-protected cells had a natural appearance, and
when they were tested with whole-cell patch clamp recording, they appeared
physiologically normal with typical resting membrane potentials and action
potentials. mCMV infection increased expression of representative IFN-stimulated 
genes (IFIT3, OAS, LMP2, TGTP, and USP18) in both neonatal and adult brains to
similarly large degrees. The robust upregulation of gene expression in the
neonatal brain was associated with a much higher degree of viral replication at
this stage of development. In contrast to the case for downstream gene induction,
CMV upregulated IFN-alpha/beta expression to a greater degree in the adult brain 
than in the neonatal brain. Similar to the case with cultured brain cells, IFN
treatment of the developing brain in vivo depressed mCMV replication. In parallel
work with cultured primary human brain cells, IFN and poly(I:C) treatment reduced
hCMV infection and prevented virus-mediated cell death. These results suggest
that coupling IFN administration with current treatments may reduce CMV
infections in the developing brain.

PMCID: PMC1797251
PMID: 17065212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Sci STKE. 2006 Oct 17;2006(357):re13.

Regulation and function of IKK and IKK-related kinases.

Häcker H(1), Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 
North Lauderdale Street, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. hans.haecker@stjude.org

Members of the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) family of dimeric transcription
factors (TFs) regulate expression of a large number of genes involved in immune
responses, inflammation, cell survival, and cancer. NF-kappaB TFs are rapidly
activated in response to various stimuli, including cytokines, infectious agents,
and radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks. In nonstimulated cells, some
NF-kappaB TFs are bound to inhibitory IkappaB proteins and are thereby
sequestered in the cytoplasm. Activation leads to phosphorylation of IkappaB
proteins and their subsequent recognition by ubiquitinating enzymes. The
resulting proteasomal degradation of IkappaB proteins liberates IkappaB-bound
NF-kappaB TFs, which translocate to the nucleus to drive expression of target
genes. Two protein kinases with a high degree of sequence similarity, IKKalpha
and IKKbeta, mediate phosphorylation of IkappaB proteins and represent a
convergence point for most signal transduction pathways leading to NF-kappaB
activation. Most of the IKKalpha and IKKbeta molecules in the cell are part of
IKK complexes that also contain a regulatory subunit called IKKgamma or NEMO.
Despite extensive sequence similarity, IKKalpha and IKKbeta have largely distinct
functions, due to their different substrate specificities and modes of
regulation. IKKbeta (and IKKgamma) are essential for rapid NF-kappaB activation
by proinflammatory signaling cascades, such as those triggered by tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNFalpha) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS). In contrast, IKKalpha
functions in the activation of a specific form of NF-kappaB in response to a
subset of TNF family members and may also serve to attenuate IKKbeta-driven
NF-kappaB activation. Moreover, IKKalpha is involved in keratinocyte
differentiation, but this function is independent of its kinase activity. Several
years ago, two protein kinases, one called IKKepsilon or IKK-i and one variously 
named TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase), NAK (NF-kappaB-activated kinase), or T2K
(TRAF2-associated kinase), were identified that exhibit structural similarity to 
IKKalpha and IKKbeta. These protein kinases are important for the activation of
interferon response factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7, TFs that play key roles in the
induction of type I interferon (IFN-I). Together, the IKKs and IKK-related
kinases are instrumental for activation of the host defense system. This Review
focuses on the functions of IKK and IKK-related kinases and the molecular
mechanisms that regulate their activities.

PMID: 17047224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Nat Genet. 2006 Nov;38(11):1335-40. Epub 2006 Oct 15.

Abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial morphogenesis in mice deficient for
interferon regulatory factor 6 (Irf6).

Ingraham CR(1), Kinoshita A, Kondo S, Yang B, Sajan S, Trout KJ, Malik MI,
Dunnwald M, Goudy SL, Lovett M, Murray JC, Schutte BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Transcription factor paralogs may share a common role in staged or overlapping
expression in specific tissues, as in the Hox family. In other cases, family
members have distinct roles in a range of embryologic, differentiation or
response pathways (as in the Tbx and Pax families). For the interferon regulatory
factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, mice deficient in Irf1, Irf2, Irf3,
Irf4, Irf5, Irf7, Irf8 or Irf9 have defects in the immune response but show no
embryologic abnormalities. Mice deficient for Irf6 have not been reported, but in
humans, mutations in IRF6 cause two mendelian orofacial clefting syndromes, and
genetic variation in IRF6 confers risk for isolated cleft lip and palate. Here we
report that mice deficient for Irf6 have abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial
development. Histological and gene expression analyses indicate that the primary 
defect is in keratinocyte differentiation and proliferation. This study describes
a new role for an IRF family member in epidermal development.

PMCID: PMC2082114
PMID: 17041601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Dec 1;350(4):866-71. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Auranofin, as an anti-rheumatic gold compound, suppresses LPS-induced
homodimerization of TLR4.

Youn HS(1), Lee JY, Saitoh SI, Miyake K, Hwang DH.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, Western Human Nutrition Research Center, Department of Nutrition,
University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA. hyoun@suv.ac.kr

Toll-like receptors (TLRs), which are activated by invading microorganisms or
endogenous molecules, evoke immune and inflammatory responses. TLR activation is 
closely linked to the development of many chronic inflammatory diseases including
rheumatoid arthritis. Auranofin, an Au(I) compound, is a well-known and long-used
anti-rheumatic drug. However, the mechanism as to how auranofin relieves the
symptom of rheumatoid arthritis has not been fully clarified. Our results
demonstrated that auranofin suppressed TLR4-mediated activation of transcription 
factors, NF-kappaB and IRF3, and expression of COX-2, a pro-inflammatory enzyme. 
This suppression was well correlated with the inhibitory effect of auranofin on
the homodimerization of TLR4 induced by an agonist. Furthermore, auranofin
inhibited NF-kappaB activation induced by MyD88-dependent downstream signaling
components of TLR4, MyD88, IKKbeta, and p65. IRF3 activation induced by
MyD88-independent signaling components, TRIF and TBK1, was also downregulated by 
auranofin. Our results first demonstrate that auranofin suppresses the multiple
steps in TLR4 signaling, especially the homodimerization of TLR4. The results
suggest that the suppression of TLR4 activity by auranofin may be the molecular
mechanism through which auranofin exerts anti-rheumatic activity.

PMCID: PMC2668920
PMID: 17034761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2007;39(2):287-91. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

VISA--a pass to innate immunity.

Qi B(1), Huang Y, Rowe D, Halliday G.

Author information: 
(1)Harbin Medical University, Harbin 150086, China.

Virus-induced signaling adaptor (VISA) is essential for host innate immune
responses against double-stranded RNA viral infection and viral replication. It
is an adaptor that activates the transcription factors nuclear factor kappaB
(NF-kappaB) and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) that regulate the
expression of type I interferons. The localization of VISA to the outer membrane 
of mitochondria and the cellular consequences of its activation implicate this
protein in the cellular etiology of neurodegenerative disorders.

PMID: 17029998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Arch Virol. 2007 Feb;152(2):345-68. Epub 2006 Oct 6.

Post-translational regulation of rotavirus protein NSP1 expression in mammalian
cells.

Piña-Vázquez C(1), De Nova-Ocampo M, Guzmán-León S, Padilla-Noriega L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Biotecnología, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City,
Mexico.

The nonstructural rotavirus protein NSP1 binds specifically to viral mRNAs and to
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), inducing IRF3 degradation through a
proteasome-dependent pathway. By using a vaccinia virus expression system in
mammalian cells, we found that the yield of NSP1 was 8- and 13-fold lower than
the viral proteins VP2 or NSP3, respectively; while in the presence of proteasome
inhibitors such difference could be reduced to 2- to 2.5-fold, respectively. The 
susceptibility of NSP1 to proteasome degradation was fully reversed in a
dose-dependent manner by transfection with the full complement of 11 molecules of
translation-competent rotavirus mRNAs, but this effect was abrogated by the
protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide. These results demonstrate that NSP1 is
degraded through a proteasome-dependent pathway, and viral proteins, alone or in 
combination with viral mRNAs, interfere with such degradation.

PMID: 17019530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Immunol. 2006 Oct 15;177(8):5059-67.

Involvement of the IkappaB kinase (IKK)-related kinases tank-binding kinase
1/IKKi and cullin-based ubiquitin ligases in IFN regulatory factor-3 degradation.

Bibeau-Poirier A(1), Gravel SP, Clément JF, Rolland S, Rodier G, Coulombe P,
Hiscott J, Grandvaux N, Meloche S, Servant MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Montreal, Montreal, Canada.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2006 Dec 15;177(12):8878-9.

Activation of the innate arm of the immune system following pathogen infection
relies on the recruitment of latent transcription factors involved in the
induction of a subset of genes responsible for viral clearance. One of these
transcription factors, IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), is targeted for
proteosomal degradation following virus infection. However, the molecular
mechanisms involved in this process are still unknown. In this study, we show
that polyubiquitination of IRF-3 increases in response to Sendai virus infection.
Using an E1 temperature-sensitive cell line, we demonstrate that
polyubiquitination is required for the observed degradation of IRF-3.
Inactivation of NEDD8-activating E1 enzyme also results in stabilization of IRF-3
suggesting the NEDDylation also plays a role in IRF-3 degradation following
Sendai virus infection. In agreement with this observation, IRF-3 is recruited to
Cullin1 following virus infection and overexpression of a dominant-negative
mutant of Cullin1 significantly inhibits the degradation of IRF-3 observed in
infected cells. We also asked whether the C-terminal cluster of phosphoacceptor
sites of IRF-3 could serve as a destabilization signal and we therefore measured 
the half-life of C-terminal phosphomimetic IRF-3 mutants. Interestingly, we found
them to be short-lived in contrast to wild-type IRF-3. In addition, no
degradation of IRF-3 was observed in TBK1(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts. All
together, these data demonstrate that virus infection stimulates a host cell
signaling pathway that modulates the expression level of IRF-3 through its
C-terminal phosphorylation by the IkappaB kinase-related kinases followed by its 
polyubiquitination, which is mediated in part by a Cullin-based ubiquitin ligase.

PMID: 17015689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 24;281(47):36173-9. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

Legionella pneumophila induces IFNbeta in lung epithelial cells via IPS-1 and
IRF3, which also control bacterial replication.

Opitz B(1), Vinzing M, van Laak V, Schmeck B, Heine G, Günther S, Preissner R,
Slevogt H, N'Guessan PD, Eitel J, Goldmann T, Flieger A, Suttorp N, Hippenstiel
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine/Infectious Diseases and Pulmonary Medicine,
Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353 Berlin,
Germany. bastian.opitz@charite.de

Legionella pneumophila, a Gram-negative facultative intracellular bacterium,
causes severe pneumonia (Legionnaires' disease). Type I interferons (IFNs) were
so far associated with antiviral immunity, but recent studies also indicated a
role of these cytokines in immune responses against (intracellular) bacteria.
Here we show that wild-type L. pneumophila and flagellin-deficient Legionella,
but not L. pneumophila lacking a functional type IV secretion system Dot/Icm, or 
heat-inactivated Legionella induced IFNbeta expression in human lung epithelial
cells. We found that factor (IRF)-3 and NF-kappaB-p65 translocated into the
nucleus and bound to the IFNbeta gene enhancer after L. pneumophila infection of 
lung epithelial cells. RNA interference demonstrated that in addition to IRF3,
the caspase recruitment domain (CARD)-containing adapter molecule IPS-1
(interferon-beta promoter stimulator 1) is crucial for L. pneumophila-induced
IFNbeta expression, whereas other CARD-possessing molecules, such as RIG-I
(retinoic acid-inducible protein I), MDA5 (melanoma differentiation-associated
gene 5), Nod27 (nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain protein 27), and ASC
(apoptosis-associated speck-like protein containing a CARD) seemed not to be
involved. Finally, bacterial multiplication assays in small interfering
RNA-treated cells indicated that IPS-1, IRF3, and IFNbeta were essential for the 
control of intracellular replication of L. pneumophila in lung epithelial cells. 
In conclusion, we demonstrated a critical role of IPS-1, IRF3, and IFNbeta in
Legionella infection of lung epithelium.

PMID: 16984921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Glia. 2006 Dec;54(8):775-85.

The TLR3 ligand polyI: C downregulates connexin 43 expression and function in
astrocytes by a mechanism involving the NF-kappaB and PI3 kinase pathways.

Zhao Y(1), Rivieccio MA, Lutz S, Scemes E, Brosnan CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10464,
USA.

Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) is a component of the innate immune response that
responds to dsRNA viruses and virus replication intermediates. In this study we
show that activation of astrocytes with the dsRNA mimetic polyinosinic-cytidylic 
acid (pI:C) results in loss of expression of connexin43 (Cx43) mRNA and protein
while upregulating the expression of the ionotropic P2 receptor P2X(4)R. Analysis
of the signaling pathways involved failed to demonstrate a role for the p38 MAP
kinase, ERK, or JNK signaling pathways whereas an inhibitor of the PI3 kinase/Akt
pathway effectively blocked the action of pI:C. Using adenoviral vectors
containing a super-repressor of NF-kappaB (NF-kappaB SR) construct or a dominant 
negative interferon regulatory factor 3 (dnIRF3) construct showed that inhibition
of both transcription factors also blocked the effects of pI:C. To explore the
functional consequences of pI:C activation we used a pore-forming assay for
P2X(4)R activity and a scrape loading assay for gap junction intercellular
communication (GJIC). No pore-forming activity consistent with functional P2X(4)R
expression was detected in either control or activated astrocytes. In contrast,
robust Lucifer yellow transfer indicative of GJIC was detected in resting cells
that was lost following pI:C activation. The dnIRF3 construct failed to restore
GJIC whereas the NF-kappaB SR or the NF-kappaB inhibitor BAY11-7082 and the PI3K 
inhibitor LY294002 all significantly reversed the effect of pI:C on GJ
connectivity. We conclude that activation of the innate immune response in
astrocytes is associated with functional loss of GJIC through a pathway involving
NF-kappaB and PI3 kinase.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2701309
PMID: 16958087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Nov;26(22):8551-61. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Binding of YY1 to the proximal region of the murine beta interferon promoter is
essential to allow CBP recruitment and K8H4/K14H3 acetylation on the promoter
region after virus infection.

Mokrani H(1), Sharaf el Dein O, Mansuroglu Z, Bonnefoy E.

Author information: 
(1)Régulation de la Transcription et Maladies Génétiques, CNRS UPR2228, UFR
Biomédicale, 45 rue des Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris cedex 06, France.

Virus-induced activation of the beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene requires orderly 
recruitment of chromatin-remodeling complexes and time-regulated acetylation of
histone residues K8H4 and K14H3 on the promoter region. We have previously shown 
that transcription factor Yin Yang 1 (YY1) binds the murine IFN-beta promoter at 
two sites (-122 and -90) regulating promoter transcriptional capacity with a dual
activator/repressor role. In this work we demonstrate that both YY1 -122 and -90 
sites are required for CBP recruitment and K8H4/K14H3 acetylation to take place
on the IFN-beta promoter region after virus infection. A single point mutation
introduced at either one of these two sites inhibiting YY1 binding completely
disrupted CBP recruitment and K8H4/K14H3 acetylation independently of HMGI or
IRF3 binding to the promoter. We have previously demonstrated that YY1 represses 
the transcriptional capacity of the IFN-beta promoter through its -90 site via
histone deacetylation. Here we demonstrate that, in vivo, the binding of YY1 to
the -90 site is constant all through virus infection whereas the binding of YY1
to the -122 site is activated after infection. We discuss here the capacity of
YY1 to either repress (through histone deacetylase recruitment) or activate
(through CBP recruitment) IFN-beta gene expression according to the occupancy of 
either only its -90 site or both its -122 and -90 sites.

PMCID: PMC1636788
PMID: 16954376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Endotoxin Res. 2006;12(4):246-50.

The interferon response to bacterial and viral infections.

Pietras EM(1), Saha SK, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California Los Angeles, 90095, USA.

Type I interferons (IFNs) were first described several decades ago as soluble
factors that were capable of 'interfering' with viral replication when added to
infected cells. Type I IFNs have been shown to be induced by recognition of viral
DNA and RNA via three distinct pathways: (i) a TRIF-dependent pathway in
macrophages via TLRs 3 and 4; (ii) a MyD88-dependent pathway in plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs) via TLRs 7/8 and 9; and (iii) an intracellular recognition
pathway utilizing the cytoplasmic receptors RIG-I/MDA5. Interestingly, these
viral recognition pathways converge on TRAF3, which induces interferon through
the activation of IRF3 or IRF7 by the TBK-1 and IKKi complexes. While type I IFN 
has been traditionally associated with antiviral responses, recent studies have
demonstrated that many bacteria also induce type I interferon responses. The
mechanisms of type I IFN induction and its role in host defense, however, are
largely unclear. Studies with the Gram-positive intracellular bacterium Listeria 
monocytogenes indicated that it may trigger type I IFN induction through novel
TLR-independent intracellular receptors and type I IFN may play a detrimental
role to host response against listerial infection. In this article, we summarize 
some of these findings and discuss the functional differences of type I IFNs in
bacterial and viral infections.

PMID: 16953977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. EMBO J. 2006 Sep 20;25(18):4207-14. Epub 2006 Aug 31.

EB virus-encoded RNAs are recognized by RIG-I and activate signaling to induce
type I IFN.

Samanta M(1), Iwakiri D, Kanda T, Imaizumi T, Takada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-encoded small RNAs (EBERs) are nonpolyadenylated,
untranslated RNAs, exist most abundantly in latently EBV-infected cells, and are 
expected to show secondary structures with many short stem-loops. Retinoic
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) is a cytosolic protein that detects viral
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) inside the cell and initiates signaling pathways
leading to the induction of protective cellular genes, including type I
interferons (IFNs). We investigated whether EBERs were recognized by RIG-I as
dsRNA. Transfection of RIG-I plasmid induced IFNs and IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs)
in EBV-positive Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) cells, but not in their EBV-negative
counterparts or EBER-knockout EBV-infected BL cells. Transfection of EBER plasmid
or in vitro-synthesized EBERs induced expression of type I IFNs and ISGs in
RIG-I-expressing, EBV-negative BL cells, but not in RIG-I-minus counterparts.
EBERs activated RIG-I's substrates, NF-kappaB and IFN regulatory factor 3, which 
were necessary for type I IFN activation. It was also shown that EBERs
co-precipitated with RIG-I. These results indicate that EBERs are recognized by
RIG-I and activate signaling to induce type I IFN in EBV-infected cells.

PMCID: PMC1570431
PMID: 16946700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Aug 22;103(34):12885-90. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus nsp1 protein suppresses host gene
expression by promoting host mRNA degradation.

Kamitani W(1), Narayanan K, Huang C, Lokugamage K, Ikegami T, Ito N, Kubo H,
Makino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 
77555-1019, USA.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus (SCoV) causes a recently
emerged human disease associated with pneumonia. The 5' end two-thirds of the
single-stranded positive-sense viral genomic RNA, gene 1, encodes 16 mature
proteins. Expression of nsp1, the most N-terminal gene 1 protein, prevented
Sendai virus-induced endogenous IFN-beta mRNA accumulation without inhibiting
dimerization of IFN regulatory factor 3, a protein that is essential for
activation of the IFN-beta promoter. Furthermore, nsp1 expression promoted
degradation of expressed RNA transcripts and host endogenous mRNAs, leading to a 
strong host protein synthesis inhibition. SCoV replication also promoted
degradation of expressed RNA transcripts and host mRNAs, suggesting that nsp1
exerted its mRNA destabilization function in infected cells. In contrast to
nsp1-induced mRNA destablization, no degradation of the 28S and 18S rRNAs
occurred in either nsp1-expressing cells or SCoV-infected cells. These data
suggested that, in infected cells, nsp1 promotes host mRNA degradation and
thereby suppresses host gene expression, including proteins involved in host
innate immune functions. SCoV nsp1-mediated promotion of host mRNA degradation
may play an important role in SCoV pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1568942
PMID: 16912115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Clin Exp Allergy. 2006 Aug;36(8):1049-62.

Synthetic double-stranded RNA induces multiple genes related to inflammation
through Toll-like receptor 3 depending on NF-kappaB and/or IRF-3 in airway
epithelial cells.

Matsukura S(1), Kokubu F, Kurokawa M, Kawaguchi M, Ieki K, Kuga H, Odaka M,
Suzuki S, Watanabe S, Takeuchi H, Kasama T, Adachi M.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Showa University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan. smatsuku@med.showa-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: We hypothesized that synthetic double-stranded (ds)RNA may mimic
viral infection and induce expression of genes related to inflammation in airway 
epithelial cells.
OBJECTIVE: We analysed what gene was up-regulated by synthetic dsRNA poly I : C
and then focused this study on the role of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), a
receptor of dsRNA and its transcriptional pathway.
METHODS: Airway epithelial cell BEAS-2B and normal human bronchial epithelial
cells were cultured in vitro. Expression of targets RNA and protein were analysed
by PCR and ELISA. Localization of TLR3 expression in the cells was analysed with 
flow cytometry. To analyse the role of TLR3 and transcription factors, knockdown 
of these genes was performed with short interfering RNA (siRNA).
RESULTS: Real-time PCR revealed that poly I : C significantly increased the
expression of mRNAs for chemokines IP-10, RANTES, LARC, MIP-1alpha, IL-8,
GRO-alpha and ENA-78 and cytokines IL-1beta, GM-CSF, IL-6 and the cell adhesion
molecule ICAM-1 in both cell types. Increases in protein levels were also
observed. Expression of these genes was significantly inhibited in BEAS-2B cells 
in which TLR3 expression was knocked down. However, pre-treatment with anti-TLR3 
mAb, which interferes with the function of TLR3 expressed on the cell surface,
did not inhibit the genes expression and these data were concordant with the
results that TLR3 was expressed inside airway epithelial cells. The study of
siRNA for NF-kappaB and IRF3 showed that they transduce the signal of poly I : C,
but their roles were different in each target gene.
CONCLUSION: TLR3 is expressed inside airway epithelial cells and transduces
synthetic dsRNA signals. These signals may increase expression of inflammatory
cytokines, chemokines and ICAM-1 through activation of transcription factors
NF-kappaB and/or IRF3 in airway epithelial cells.

PMID: 16911361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006 Sep 28;72(7):850-9. Epub 2006 Aug 4.

Suppression of MyD88- and TRIF-dependent signaling pathways of Toll-like receptor
by (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate, a polyphenol component of green tea.

Youn HS(1), Lee JY, Saitoh SI, Miyake K, Kang KW, Choi YJ, Hwang DH.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, Western Human Nutrition Research Center, and Department of
Nutrition, University of California, Davis, Meyer Hall, One Shields Ave., CA
95616, USA. hyoun@suv.ac.kr

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in recognition of microbial
components and induction of innate immunity. The microbial components trigger the
activation of two downstream signaling pathways of TLRs; MyD88- and/or
TRIF-dependent pathways leading to activation of NF-kappaB.
(-)-Epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), a flavonoid found in green tea, is known
to inhibit NF-kappaB activation induced by many pro-inflammatory stimuli. EGCG
was shown to inhibit the activity of IKKbeta which is the key kinase in the
canonical pathway for NF-kappaB activation in MyD88-dependent pathway of TLRs.
However, it is not known whether EGCG inhibits TRIF-dependent pathway through
which more than 70% of lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced genes are regulated.
Therefore, we attempted to identify the molecular target of EGCG in
TRIF-dependent pathways of TLR3 and TLR4. EGCG inhibited the activation of IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) induced by LPS, poly[I:C], or the overexpression of
TRIF. The inhibition of IRF3 activation by EGCG was mediated through the
suppression of the kinase activity of TBK1. However, EGCG did not inhibit
activation of IRF3 induced by overexpression of constitutively active IRF3. These
results suggest that the molecular target of EGCG is TBK1 in TRIF-dependent
signaling pathways of TLR3 and TLR4. Therefore, our results suggest that green
tea flavonoids can modulate both MyD88- and TRIF-dependent signaling pathways of 
TLRs and subsequent inflammatory target gene expression.

PMID: 16890209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 8;281(36):26188-95. Epub 2006 Jul 18.

Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent viperin gene expression and
counter-regulation by PRDI-binding factor-1/BLIMP1.

Severa M(1), Coccia EM, Fitzgerald KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease and Immunology, Department of Medicine, The
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Here we identify Viperin as a highly inducible gene in response to
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), double-stranded RNA (poly(I-C)) or Sendai virus (SV).
The only known function of Viperin relates to its ability to inhibit human
Cytomegalovirus replication. Very little data are available on the regulation of 
this gene. In silico analysis of the promoter identified two interferon
(IFN)-stimulated response elements (ISRE), which in other genes bind IRF3 or the 
IFN-stimulated gene factor-3 (ISGF3) complex. LPS and poly(I-C) induce very high 
levels of Viperin in wild type cells but not in cells deficient in TRIF, TBK1,
IRF3, or the type I IFNalpha/betaR. SV-induced Viperin gene expression was
mediated independently of Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling by retinoic
acid-inducible gene (RIG-I) and the downstream adapter, mitochondrial anti-viral 
signaling (MAVS). Virus-induced Viperin expression was not attenuated in
macrophages deficient in either TBK1 or IKKepsilon alone. Moreover,
IRF3-deficient, but not IFNalpha/betaR deficient, macrophages still induced
Viperin in response to SV. Promoter reporter studies combined with DNA
immunoprecipitation assays identified the ISGF3 complex as the key regulator of
Viperin gene expression. Moreover, positive regulatory domain I-binding factor 1 
(PRDI-BF1, also called BLIMP1) binds the ISRE sites and competes with ISGF3
binding in a virus inducible manner to inhibit Viperin transcription.
Collectively, these studies identify Viperin as a tightly regulated ISGF3 target 
gene, which is counter-regulated by PRDI-BF1.

PMID: 16849320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jul;64(7):1231-5.

[Role of IPS-1 in type I IFN induction].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawai T(1), Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Akira Innate Immunity Project, ERATO, JST.

Type I interferons (IFNalpha/beta) are central mediators for antiviral responses.
Using a functional cloning strategy, we have identified a molecule designated
IPS-1. IPS-1 overexpression caused antiviral responses by producing type I IFN
and IFN-inducible genes through activation of IRF3, IRF7 and NF-kappaB. TBK1 and 
IKKi protein kinases were required for the IPS-1-mediated IFN induction. IPS-1
contains an N-terminal caspase recruiting domain (CARD)-like structure that
mediates interaction with the CARD of RIG-I and Mda5, cytoplasmic RNA helicases
sensing RNA viruses. Reduction of IPS-1 by siRNA blocked IFN induction by virus
infection. Thus, IPS-1 is an adapter that mediates RIG-I- and Mda5-dependent
antiviral responses.

PMID: 16841392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Blood. 2006 Nov 15;108(10):3387-96. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

Pentraxin 3 protects from MCMV infection and reactivation through TLR sensing
pathways leading to IRF3 activation.

Bozza S(1), Bistoni F, Gaziano R, Pitzurra L, Zelante T, Bonifazi P, Perruccio K,
Bellocchio S, Neri M, Iorio AM, Salvatori G, De Santis R, Calvitti M, Doni A,
Garlanda C, Mantovani A, Romani L.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical
Sciences, University of Perugia, Via del Giochetto, 06122 Perugia, Italy.

Reactivation of latent human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) following allogeneic
transplantation is a major cause of morbidity and mortality and predisposes to
severe complications, including superinfection by Aspergillus species (spp).
Antimicrobial polypeptides, including defensins and mannan-binding lectin, are
known to block viral fusion by cross-linking sugars on cell surface. Pentraxin 3 
(PTX3), a member of the long pentraxin family, successfully restored antifungal
immunity in experimental hematopoietic transplantation. We assessed here whether 
PTX3 binds HCMV and murine virus (MCMV) and the impact on viral infectivity and
superinfection in vivo. We found that PTX3 bound both viruses, reduced viral
entry and infectivity in vitro, and protected from MCMV primary infection and
reactivation as well as Aspergillus superinfection. This occurred through the
activation of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) in dendritic cells via 
the TLR9/MyD88-independent viral recognition sensing and the promotion of the
interleukin-12 (IL-12)/IFN-gamma-dependent effector pathway.

PMID: 16840729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jul;64(7):1244-7.

[Cell type specific involvement of RIG-I in antiviral responses].

[Article in Japanese]

Kato H(1), Takeuchi O, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of innate immunity, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in antiviral response by
recognizing viral components. Recently, a RNA helicase, RIG-I, is also suggested 
to recognize viral double-stranded RNA. However, how these molecules contribute
to viral recognition in vivo is poorly understood. Here we would like to show
that RIG-I is essential for induction of type I interferons (IFNs) after
infection with RNA viruses in fibroblasts and conventional dendritic cells (DCs).
RIG-I induces type I IFNs by activating IRF3 via IkappaB kinase related kinases. 
In contrast, plasmacytoid DC, which produce large amounts of IFN-alpha, use the
TLR system rather than RIG-I for viral detection. Taken together, RIG-I and the
TLR system exert antiviral responses in a cell type specific manner.

PMID: 16838639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Oncogene. 2007 Jan 18;26(3):328-38. Epub 2006 Jul 10.

Single-stranded RNA viruses inactivate the transcriptional activity of p53 but
induce NOXA-dependent apoptosis via post-translational modifications of IRF-1,
IRF-3 and CREB.

Lallemand C(1), Blanchard B, Palmieri M, Lebon P, May E, Tovey MG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Oncology, UPR CNRS 9045, Institut André Lwoff, Villejuif, 
France. lalleman@vjf.cnrs.fr

To characterize the mechanisms underlying apoptosis induced by viral infection,
transcriptional activation of genes encoding members of the 'BH3-only' family of 
proteins was analysed during the course of virus infection. Among these genes,
only NOXA is transcriptionally activated by vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV),
sendai virus (SV), measles virus, herpes simplex virus, or dsRNA and required for
efficient apoptosis of cells. Transcriptional activation of NOXA by VSV or SV is 
independent of p53, but requires the presence of interferon regulatory factor 1
(IRF-1), IRF-3 and cAMP-responsive element binding protein (CREB). Binding to and
transactivation of the NOXA promoter by each of these transcription factors is
governed by post-translational modification involving different pathways for each
factor. Thus, SV infection activates IRF-3 and CREB by phosphorylation triggered 
by Toll like receptor 3 signalling, and a pathway involving calcium-independent
phopholipase A2, respectively. In addition transactivation induced by IRF-1
during viral infection correlates with a 10 kDa increase in its molecular weight,
suggesting a covalent linkage with a previously unknown regulatory polypeptide.

PMID: 16832344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Virol. 2006 Jul;80(13):6430-40.

Reverse genetic generation of recombinant Zaire Ebola viruses containing
disrupted IRF-3 inhibitory domains results in attenuated virus growth in vitro
and higher levels of IRF-3 activation without inhibiting viral transcription or
replication.

Hartman AL(1), Dover JE, Towner JS, Nichol ST.

Author information: 
(1)Special Pathogens Branch, Division of Viral and Rickettsial Diseases, National
Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 1600 
Clifton Road, MS G-14, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.

The VP35 protein of Zaire Ebola virus is an essential component of the viral RNA 
polymerase complex and also functions to antagonize the cellular type I
interferon (IFN) response by blocking activation of the transcription factor
IRF-3. We previously mapped the IRF-3 inhibitory domain within the C terminus of 
VP35. In the present study, we show that mutations that disrupt the IRF-3
inhibitory function of VP35 do not disrupt viral transcription/replication,
suggesting that the two functions of VP35 are separable. Second, using reverse
genetics, we successfully recovered recombinant Ebola viruses containing
mutations within the IRF-3 inhibitory domain. Importantly, we show that the
recombinant viruses were attenuated for growth in cell culture and that they
activated IRF-3 and IRF-3-inducible gene expression at levels higher than that
for Ebola virus containing wild-type VP35. In the context of Ebola virus
pathogenesis, VP35 may function to limit early IFN-beta production and other
antiviral signals generated from cells at the primary site of infection, thereby 
slowing down the host's ability to curb virus replication and induce adaptive
immunity.

PMCID: PMC1488969
PMID: 16775331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Virology. 2006 Aug 15;352(1):14-21. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Innate immune responses: crosstalk of signaling and regulation of gene
transcription.

Zhong B(1), Tien P, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China.

Innate immune responses to pathogens such as bacteria and viruses are triggered
by recognition of specific structures of invading pathogens called
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) by cellular pattern recognition
receptors (PRRs) that are located at plasma membrane or inside cells. Stimulation
of different PAMPs activates Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent 
signaling pathways that lead to activation of transcription factors nuclear
factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB), interferon regulatory factor 3/7 (IRF3/7) and/or
activator protein-1 (AP-1), which collaborate to induce transcription of a large 
number of downstream genes. This review focuses on the rapid progress that has
recently improved our understanding of the crosstalk among the pathways and the
precise regulation of transcription of the downstream genes.

PMID: 16753195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Immunol. 2006 Jun 15;176(12):7462-70.

Differential activation of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF-5 transcription 
factors during viral infection.

Cheng TF(1), Brzostek S, Ando O, Van Scoy S, Kumar KP, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University, NY 
11794, USA.

Members of the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family regulate gene expression
critical to immune response, hemopoiesis, and proliferation. Although related by 
homology at their N-terminal DNA-binding domain, they display individual
functional properties. The distinct properties result from differences in
regulated expression, response to activating signals, and interaction with DNA
regulatory elements. IRF-3 is expressed ubiquitously and is activated by serine
phosphorylation in response to viral infection or TLR signaling. Evidence
indicates that the kinases TANK-binding kinase 1 and inhibitor of NF-kappaB
kinase-epsilon specifically phosphorylate and thereby activate IRF-3. We
evaluated the contribution of another member of the IRF family, IRF-5, during
viral infection since prior studies provided varied results. Analysis of
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, dimerization, binding to CREB-binding
protein, recognition of DNA, and induction of gene expression were used
comparatively with IRF-3 as a measure of IRF-5 activation. IRF-5 was not
activated by viral infection; however, expression of TANK-binding kinase 1 or
inhibitor of NF-kappaB kinase-epsilon did provide clear activation of IRF-5.
IRF-5 is therefore distinct in its activation profile from IRF-3. However,
similar to the biological effects of IRF-3 activation, a constitutively active
mutation of IRF-5 promoted apoptosis. The apoptosis was inhibited by expression
of Bcl-x(L) but not a dominant-negative mutation of the Fas-associated death
domain. These studies support the distinct activation profiles of IRF-3 in
comparison to IRF-5, but reveal a potential shared biological effect.

PMID: 16751392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nat Immunol. 2006 Jun;7(6):555-7.

Pin-ning down immune responses to RNA viruses.

Goutagny N, Severa M, Fitzgerald KA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Jun;7(6):598-605.

PMID: 16715065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Immunity. 2006 May;24(5):633-42.

The specific and essential role of MAVS in antiviral innate immune responses.

Sun Q(1), Sun L, Liu HH, Chen X, Seth RB, Forman J, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2006 May;24(5):510-2.

The mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) mediates the activation of
NFkappaB and IRFs and the induction of interferons in response to viral
infection. In vitro studies have also suggested that MAVS is required for
interferon induction by cytosolic DNA, but the in vivo evidence is lacking. By
generating MAVS-deficient mice, here we show that loss of MAVS abolished viral
induction of interferons and prevented the activation of NFkappaB and IRF3 in
multiple cell types, except plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). However, MAVS
was not required for interferon induction by cytosolic DNA or by Listeria
monocytogenes. Mice lacking MAVS were viable and fertile, but they failed to
induce interferons in response to poly(I:C) stimulation and were severely
compromised in immune defense against viral infection. These results provide the 
in vivo evidence that the cytosolic viral signaling pathway through MAVS is
specifically required for innate immune responses against viral infection.

PMID: 16713980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Nat Immunol. 2006 Jun;7(6):598-605. Epub 2006 May 14.

Negative regulation of interferon-regulatory factor 3-dependent innate antiviral 
response by the prolyl isomerase Pin1.

Saitoh T(1), Tun-Kyi A, Ryo A, Yamamoto M, Finn G, Fujita T, Akira S, Yamamoto N,
Lu KP, Yamaoka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Jun;7(6):555-7.

Recognition of double-stranded RNA activates interferon-regulatory factor 3
(IRF3)-dependent expression of antiviral factors. Although the molecular
mechanisms underlying the activation of IRF3 have been studied, the mechanisms by
which IRF3 activity is reduced have not. Here we report that activation of IRF3
is negatively regulated by the peptidyl-prolyl isomerase Pin1. After stimulation 
by double-stranded RNA, induced phosphorylation of the Ser339-Pro340 motif of
IRF3 led to its interaction with Pin1 and finally polyubiquitination and then
proteasome-dependent degradation of IRF3. Suppression of Pin1 by RNA interference
or genetic deletion resulted in enhanced IRF-3-dependent production of
interferon-beta, with consequent reduction of virus replication. These results
elucidate a previously unknown mechanism for controlling innate antiviral
responses by negatively regulating IRF3 activity via Pin1.

PMID: 16699525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006 Jun 28;72(1):62-9. Epub 2006 Apr 1.

Inhibition of homodimerization of Toll-like receptor 4 by curcumin.

Youn HS(1), Saitoh SI, Miyake K, Hwang DH.

Author information: 
(1)USDA, ARS, Western Human Nutrition Research Center, and Department of
Nutrition, University of California, Davis, Meyer Hall, One Shields Ave., CA
95616, USA.

Toll-like receptors play a key role in sensing microbial components and inducing 
innate immune responses. Ligand-induced dimerization of TLR4 is required for the 
activation of downstream signaling pathways. Thus, the receptor dimerization may 
be one of the first lines of regulation in activating TLR-mediated signaling
pathways and induction of subsequent immune responses. LPS induces the activation
of NF-kappaB and IRF3 through MyD88- or TRIF-dependent pathways. Curcumin, a
polyphenol found in the plant Curcuma longa, has been shown to suppress the
activation of NF-kappaB induced by various pro-inflammatory stimuli by inhibiting
IKKbeta kinase activity in MyD88-dependent pathway. Curcumin also inhibited
LPS-induced IRF3 activation. These results imply that curcumin inhibits both
MyD88- and TRIF-dependent pathways in LPS-induced TLR4 signaling. However, in
TRIF-dependent pathway, curcumin did not inhibit IRF3 activation induced by
overexpression of TRIF in 293T cells. These results suggest that TLR4 receptor
complex is the molecular target of curcumin in addition to IKKbeta. Here, we
report biochemical evidence that phytochemicals (curcumin and sesquiterpene
lactone) inhibit both ligand-induced and ligand-independent dimerization of TLR4.
Furthermore, these results demonstrate that small molecules with non-microbial
origin can directly inhibit TLRs-mediated signaling pathways at the receptor
level. These results imply that the activation of TLRs and subsequent
immune/inflammatory responses induced by endogenous molecules or chronic
infection can be modulated by certain dietary phytochemicals we consume daily.

PMID: 16678799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Immunol. 2006 May 15;176(10):5720-4.

Cutting edge: apoptosis-regulating signal kinase 1 is required for reactive
oxygen species-mediated activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 by
lipopolysaccharide.

Chiang E(1), Dang O, Anderson K, Matsuzawa A, Ichijo H, David M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences and University of California San Diego Cancer 
Center, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 participates in the transcriptional induction of
IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, and a subset of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) as a result of
viral infection. In addition, bacterial cell wall components such as LPS activate
IRF3 in a p38-dependent manner. In this study we show that IRF3-mediated ISG
induction by LPS requires the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) by the 
NADPH-dependent oxidase NOX4. Furthermore, we present evidence that LPS-mediated 
ROS production leads to activation of apoptosis-regulating-signal kinase (ASK) 1,
a MAPK kinase kinase family member capable of activating the MAP kinase 6/p38
axis. ASK1 kinase activity proved essential for IRF3-mediated ISG induction by
LPS. Thus, our results presented here suggest a novel role for ROS and ASK1 in
the innate immune response as signaling intermediates in the IRF3 activation
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2749679
PMID: 16670275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Virol. 2006 May;80(10):5021-31.

Human rhinovirus attenuates the type I interferon response by disrupting
activation of interferon regulatory factor 3.

Peng T(1), Kotla S, Bumgarner RE, Gustin KE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School Of Medicine, University of Washington,
Moscow, Idaho 83844-3052, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2006 Jul;80(13):6722.

Retraction in
    Peng T, Kotla S, Bumgarner RE, Gustin KE. J Virol. 2007 Jun;81(11):6161.

The type I interferon (IFN) response requires the coordinated activation of the
latent transcription factors NF-kappaB, interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3),
and ATF-2, which in turn activate transcription from the IFN-beta promoter.
Synthesis and subsequent secretion of IFN-beta activate the Jak/STAT signaling
pathway, resulting in the transcriptional induction of the full spectrum of
antiviral gene products. We utilized high-density microarrays to examine the
transcriptional response to rhinovirus type 14 (RV14) infection in HeLa cells,
with particular emphasis on the type I interferon response and production of
IFN-beta. We found that, although RV14 infection results in altered levels of a
wide variety of host mRNAs, induction of IFN-beta mRNA or activation of the
Jak/STAT pathway is not seen. Prior work has shown, and our results have
confirmed, that NF-kappaB and ATF-2 are activated following infection. Since many
viruses are known to target IRF-3 to inhibit the induction of IFN-beta mRNA, we
analyzed the status of IRF-3 in infected cells. IRF-3 was translocated to the
nucleus and phosphorylated in RV14-infected cells. Despite this apparent
activation, very little homodimerization of IRF-3 was evident following
infection. Similar results in A549 lung alveolar epithelial cells demonstrated
the biological relevance of these findings to RV14 pathogenesis. In addition,
prior infection of cells with RV14 prevented the induction of IFN-beta mRNA
following treatment with double-stranded RNA, indicating that RV14 encodes an
activity that specifically inhibits this innate host defense pathway.
Collectively, these results indicate that RV14 infection inhibits the host type I
interferon response by interfering with IRF-3 activation.

PMCID: PMC1472094
PMID: 16641293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jun 2;344(2):667-74. Epub 2006 Apr 7.

Expression analysis and prognostic significance of the SRA1 gene, in ovarian
cancer.

Leoutsakou T(1), Talieri M, Scorilas A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biology,
University of Athens, 15711 Panepistimioupoli, Athens, Greece.

The SR-related-CTD-associated-factors (SCAFs) have the ability to interact with
the C-terminal domain of the RNA polymerase II, linking this way transcription to
splicing. SRA1 (SR-A1) gene, encoding for a human high-molecular weight SCAF
protein, is located on chromosome 19, between the IRF3 and the R-RAS oncogene and
it has been demonstrated from members of our group that SRA1 is constitutively
expressed in most of the human tissues, while it is overexpressed in a subset of 
ovarian tumors. In this study, we examine the expression of SRA1 gene in 111
ovarian malignant tissues and in the human ovarian carcinoma cell lines OVCAR-3, 
TOV21-G, and ES-2, using a semi-quantitative RT-PCR method. SRA1 gene was
overexpressed in 61/111 (55%) of ovarian carcinomas. This higher expression was
positively associated to the size of the tumor (p<0.001), the grade and the stage
of the disease (p=0.003 and p=0.006, respectively), and the debulking success
(p<0.001). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed that lower SRA1 expression
increases the probability of both the longer overall and the progression free
survival of the patients. Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that SRA1
may be used as an independent prognostic biomarker in ovarian cancer. Our results
suggest that SRA1 is associated with cancer progression and may possibly be
characterized as a new marker of unfavorable prognosis for ovarian cancer.

PMID: 16631123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Genes Dev. 2006 Apr 15;20(8):1028-42.

Cross-regulation between Notch and p63 in keratinocyte commitment to
differentiation.

Nguyen BC(1), Lefort K, Mandinova A, Antonini D, Devgan V, Della Gatta G, Koster 
MI, Zhang Z, Wang J, Tommasi di Vignano A, Kitajewski J, Chiorino G, Roop DR,
Missero C, Dotto GP.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA, and Department of Biochemistry, University
of Lausanne, Switzerland.

Notch signaling promotes commitment of keratinocytes to differentiation and
suppresses tumorigenesis. p63, a p53 family member, has been implicated in
establishment of the keratinocyte cell fate and/or maintenance of epithelial
self-renewal. Here we show that p63 expression is suppressed by Notch1 activation
in both mouse and human keratinocytes through a mechanism independent of cell
cycle withdrawal and requiring down-modulation of selected interferon-responsive 
genes, including IRF7 and/or IRF3. In turn, elevated p63 expression counteracts
the ability of Notch1 to restrict growth and promote differentiation. p63
functions as a selective modulator of Notch1-dependent transcription and
function, with the Hes-1 gene as one of its direct negative targets. Thus, a
complex cross-talk between Notch and p63 is involved in the balance between
keratinocyte self-renewal and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1472299
PMID: 16618808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. FEBS Lett. 2006 Apr 17;580(9):2341-2346.

Cytoplasmic Listeria monocytogenes stimulates IFN-beta synthesis without
requiring the adapter protein MAVS.

Soulat D(1), Bauch A, Stockinger S, Superti-Furga G, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Austria.

The mitochondria-associated adapter protein MAVS (also called IPS-1, VISA or
CARDIF, designated MAVS for reasons of simplicity in our manuscript) relays
signals from cytoplasmic sensors of viral RNA to the IRF3 kinase complex and the 
interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene. Using siRNA-mediated knock-down in macrophages
we show that IFN-beta synthesis in response to transfected, intracellular
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), a pathogen-associated molecular pattern of viruses, 
is decreased in absence of MAVS. By contrast, the Gram-positive bacterium
Listeria monocytogenes targets the IFN-beta gene without detectable MAVS
requirement. The data show that MAVS is not a central adapter protein for all
cytoplasmic pathogen sensors that stimulate IFN-beta synthesis.

PMID: 16616525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Apr;26(8):3106-13.

Positive and negative regulation of the innate antiviral response and beta
interferon gene expression by deacetylation.

Nusinzon I(1), Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Pancoe-ENH Research Pavilion, Northwestern University, 2200 Campus Drive,
Evanston, IL 60208, USA.

Beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene expression in response to virus infection relies 
on the dynamic assembly of a multiprotein enhanceosome complex that is initiated 
by the activation of two inducible transcription factors, interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-kappaB. Virus or double-stranded RNA-induced activation of
IFN-beta gene expression is prevented by the addition of protein deacetylase
inhibitors. The isolated IRF-responsive positive regulatory domain was found to
require deacetylation for its activity, but IRF3 protein activation leading to
its nuclear translocation and DNA binding was not impaired by deacetylase
inhibition. In contrast, NF-kappaB activity was not affected by deacetylase
inhibitors. RNA interference indicated that several deacetylase enzymes,
including histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1), HDAC8, and HDAC6, influence IFN-beta
gene expression with opposing effects. While HDAC1 and HDAC8 repress IFN-beta
expression, HDAC6 acts as a coactivator essential for enhancer activity. Virus
replication is enhanced in HDAC6-depleted cells, demonstrating HDAC6 is an
essential component of innate antiviral immunity.

PMCID: PMC1446935
PMID: 16581785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 14;103(11):4240-5. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

Identification of proangiogenic genes and pathways by high-throughput functional 
genomics: TBK1 and the IRF3 pathway.

Korherr C(1), Gille H, Schäfer R, Koenig-Hoffmann K, Dixelius J, Egland KA,
Pastan I, Brinkmann U.

Author information: 
(1)Xantos Biomedicine AG, Max-Lebsche-Platz 31, D-81377 München, Germany.
c.korherr@xantos.de

A genome-wide phenotype screen was used to identify factors and pathways that
induce proliferation of human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC). HUVEC
proliferation is a recognized marker for factors that modulate vascularization.
Screening "hits" included known proangiogenic factors, such as VEGF, FGF1, and
FGF2 and additional factors for which a direct association with angiogenesis was 
not previously described. These include the kinase TBK1 as well as Toll-like
receptor adaptor molecule and IFN regulatory factor 3. All three proteins belong 
to one signaling pathway that mediates induction of gene expression, including a 
mixture of secreted factors, which, in concert, mediate proliferative activity
toward endothelial cells. TBK1 as the "trigger" of this pathway is induced under 
hypoxic conditions and expressed at significant levels in many solid tumors. This
pattern of expression and the decreased expression of angiogenic factors in
cultured cells upon RNA-interference-mediated ablation suggests that TBK1 is
important for vascularization and subsequent tumor growth and a target for cancer
therapy.

PMCID: PMC1449677
PMID: 16537515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cancer Lett. 2006 Oct 28;242(2):215-21. Epub 2006 Mar 2.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 activates p53-dependent cell growth inhibition.

Kim TK(1), Lee JS, Jung JE, Oh SY, Kwak S, Jin X, Lee SY, Lee JB, Chung YG, Choi 
YK, You S, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)The Laboratory of Cell Growth and Function Regulation, Division of Bioscience 
and Technology, College of Life & Environmental Sciences, Korea University,
Seoul, South Korea.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is a transcriptional factor that plays a
crucial role in activation of innate immunity and inflammation in response to
viral infection. We investigated the biological function of IRF3 overexpressed in
somatic cells such as fibroblasts and astrocytes. Similar to overexpression of
oncogenic H-ras in the normal human fibroblast, overexpression of IRF3 in human
fibroblast BJ cells was shown to decrease cell growth and increase
senescence-associated beta-galactosidase activity by activating a p53 tumor
suppressor. BCNU, a DNA damage agent, further accelerated p53 function and cell
death in the IRF3-overexpressed BJ cells compared to control BJ cells, without
increased expression of IRF3 target genes. IRF3 failed to activate p53 function
and cell growth inhibition in BJ cells downregulating p53 by RNAi-mediated p53
knockdown. Furthermore, enforced expression of IRF3 did not show any effect of
cell growth inhibition in astrocytes or embryonic fibroblasts derived from the
p53(-/-) mouse. When compared to control BJ cells, BJ cells which downregulated
IRF3 by RNAi-mediated IRF3 knockdown showed extended in vitro life span. Taken
together, the present study indicates that IRF3 should be a novel inducer of cell
growth inhibition and cellular senescence through activation of p53 tumor
suppressor.

PMID: 16513254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Virol. 2006 Mar;80(6):2913-23.

West Nile virus evades activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 through
RIG-I-dependent and -independent pathways without antagonizing host defense
signaling.

Fredericksen BL(1), Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, USA.

The ability of viruses to control and/or evade the host antiviral response is
critical to the establishment of a productive infection. We have previously shown
that West Nile virus NY (WNV-NY) delays activation of interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF-3), a transcription factor critical to the initiation of the
antiviral response. Here we demonstrate that the delayed activation of IRF-3 is
essential for WNV-NY to achieve maximum virus production. Furthermore, WNV-NY
utilizes a unique mechanism to control activation of IRF-3. In contrast to many
other viruses that impose a nonspecific block to the IRF-3 pathway, WNV-NY eludes
detection by the host cell at early times postinfection. To better understand
this process, we assessed the role of the pathogen recognition receptor (PRR)
retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) in sensing WNV-NY infection. RIG-I null
mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) retained the ability to respond to WNV-NY
infection; however, the onset of the host response was delayed compared to
wild-type (WT) MEFs. This suggests that RIG-I is involved in initially sensing
WNV-NY infection, while other PRRs sustain and/or amplify the host response later
in infection. The delayed initiation of the host response correlated with an
increase in WNV-NY replication in RIG-I null MEFs compared to WT MEFs. Our data
suggest that activation of the host response by RIG-I early in infection is
important for controlling replication of WNV-NY. Furthermore, pathogenic strains 
of WNV may have evolved to circumvent stimulation of the host response until
after replication is well under way.

PMCID: PMC1395472
PMID: 16501100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Cell Res. 2006 Feb;16(2):141-7.

Antiviral innate immunity pathways.

Seth RB(1), Sun L, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Recent studies have uncovered two signaling pathways that activate the host
innate immunity against viral infection. One of the pathways utilizes members of 
the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family to detect viruses that enter the endosome
through endocytosis. The TLR pathway induces interferon production through
several signaling proteins that ultimately lead to the activation of the
transcription factors NF-kappaB, IRF3 and IRF7. The other antiviral pathway uses 
the RNA helicase RIG-I as the receptor for intracellular viral double-stranded
RNA. RIG-I activates NF-kappaB and IRFs through the recently identified adaptor
protein MAVS, a CARD domain containing protein that resides in the mitochondrial 
membrane. MAVS is essential for antiviral innate immunity, but it also serves as 
a target of Hepatitis C virus (HCV), which employs a viral protease to cleave
MAVS off the mitochondria, thereby allowing HCV to escape the host immune system.

PMID: 16474426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Mar 31;342(1):50-6. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Regulation of IRF7 through cell type-specific protein stability.

Prakash A(1), Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, NYU Cancer Institute, New York University School of
Medicine, 550 1(st) Ave MSB548, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a key component of the cellular response
to virus infection that culminates in physiologically relevant IFNalpha
production. We studied molecular mechanisms governing responses to respiratory
viral infection that are characterized by transient induction and subsequent
shut-off of interferon (IFN) gene expression. We asked whether alterations in
IRF7 protein stability occurred during virus infection that might contribute to
this regulation. To this end, we measured IRF7 half-life in various cell types
and found it to be short-lived, in marked contrast to the pronounced stability of
the related transcription factor, IRF3. Furthermore, virus infection accelerated 
IRF7 degradation in a proteosome-dependent manner in most cell types. However,
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC), which constitute the major circulating IFN
producing cell type, displayed a distinct pattern of regulation. Infection of
lymphoid tissues, where the majority of IRF7 is expressed in pDC, attenuated the 
normal proteosome-mediated degradation of IRF7, resulting in a long-lived
protein. Stabilization was partially stimulated by autocrine IFN as a positive
feedback mechanism, but was partially IFN independent. Thus, two distinct
posttranslational mechanisms regulate IRF7 activity in response to viral
infection, with protein turnover attenuating responses postinfection in most cell
types while infection-induced protein stabilization contributes to the heightened
IFN production characteristic of pDC.

PMCID: PMC1647301
PMID: 16472772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Immunol Methods. 2006 Feb 20;309(1-2):130-8. Epub 2005 Dec 21.

Application to immunoassays of the fusion protein between protein ZZ and enhanced
green fluorescent protein.

Huang QL(1), Chen C, Chen YZ, Gong CG, Cao L, Wang J, Hua ZC.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology and Department of
Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Nanjing University, 22 Hankou Road,
Nanjing 210093, P.R. China.

Enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) from Aequorea victoria was fused to the
C terminal region of protein ZZ, an artificial synthetic IgG Fc fragment binding 
protein derived from tandem repeats of the B domain of protein A. The ZZ-EGFP
fusion protein was expressed in Escherichia coli with a His(6) tag and purified
in high yield by one-step Ni(2+) chelating affinity chromatography. It was then
used in the immunoblot analysis of GST and TNFalpha as well as in
immunofluorescent assays of 293T cells transfected with IRF3, an interferon
regulatory factor which localized in cytoplasm without virus infection. The
fusion protein also performed effectively in FACS analysis of surface integrin
beta3 subunit on 293 T cells. The chimeric protein bound various antibodies from 
different animal sources, directed against a variety of proteins. Thus, ZZ-EGFP
showed broad promise in potential immunological applications.

PMID: 16445935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Immunity. 2006 Jan;24(1):93-103.

Recognition of cytosolic DNA activates an IRF3-dependent innate immune response.

Stetson DB(1), Medzhitov R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Section of Immunobiology, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Nucleic acid recognition upon viral infection triggers type I interferon
production. Viral RNA is detected by both endosomal, TLR-dependent and cytosolic,
RIG-I/MDA5-dependent pathways. TLR9 is the only known sensor of foreign DNA; it
is unknown whether innate immune recognition of DNA exists in the cytosol. Here
we present evidence that cytosolic DNA activates a potent type I interferon
response to the invasive bacterium Listeria monocytogenes. The noninvasive
Legionella pneumophila triggers an identical response through its type IV
secretion system. Activation of type I interferons by cytosolic DNA is TLR
independent and requires IRF3 but occurs without detectable activation of
NF-kappaB and MAP kinases. Microarray analyses reveal a unique but overlapping
gene-expression program activated by cytosolic DNA compared to TLR9- and
RIG-I/MDA5-dependent responses. These findings define an innate immune response
to DNA linked to type I interferon production.

PMID: 16413926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Biol Cell. 2006 Mar;17(3):1461-71. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Hsp90 regulates activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 and TBK-1
stabilization in Sendai virus-infected cells.

Yang K(1), Shi H, Qi R, Sun S, Tang Y, Zhang B, Wang C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, People's Republic of China.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) plays a crucial role in mediating cellular 
responses to virus intrusion. The protein kinase TBK1 is a key regulator inducing
phosphorylation of IRF3. The regulatory mechanisms during IRF3 activation remain 
poorly characterized. In the present study, we have identified by yeast
two-hybrid approach a specific interaction between IRF3 and chaperone heat-shock 
protein of 90 kDa (Hsp90). The C-terminal truncation mutant of Hsp90 is a strong 
dominant-negative inhibitor of IRF3 activation. Knockdown of endogenous Hsp90 by 
RNA interference attenuates IRF3 activation and its target gene expressions.
Alternatively, Hsp90-specific inhibitor geldanamycin (GA) dramatically reduces
expression of IRF3-regulated interferon-stimulated genes and abolishes the
cytoplasm-to-nucleus translocation and DNA binding activity of IRF3 in Sendai
virus-infected cells. Significantly, virus-induced IRF3 phosphorylation is
blocked by GA, whereas GA does not affect the protein level of IRF3. In addition,
TBK1 is found to be a client protein of Hsp90 in vivo. Treatment of 293 cells
with GA interferes with the interaction of TBK1 and Hsp90, resulting in TBK1
destabilization and its subsequent proteasome-mediated degradation. Besides
maintaining stability of TBK1, Hsp90 also forms a novel complex with TBK1 and
IRF3, which brings TBK1 and IRF3 dynamically into proximity and facilitates
signal transduction from TBK1 to IRF3. Our study uncovers an essential role of
Hsp90 in the virus-induced activation of IRF3.

PMCID: PMC1382332
PMID: 16394098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Virol. 2006 Jan;80(2):1032-7.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 is necessary for induction of antiviral genes
during human cytomegalovirus infection.

DeFilippis VR(1), Robinson B, Keck TM, Hansen SG, Nelson JA, Früh KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Health and Science University, West Campus, Vaccine and Gene Therapy
Institute, 505 NW 185th Ave., Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.

Viral infection activates interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a cofactor for
the induction of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). The role of IRF3 in the
activation of ISGs by human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is controversial despite the
fact that HCMV has consistently been shown to induce ISGs during infection of
fibroblasts. To address the function of IRF3 in HCMV-mediated ISG induction, we
monitored ISG expression and global gene expression in HCMV-infected cells in
which IRF3 function had been depleted by small interfering RNA or blocked by
dominant negative IRF3. A specific reduction of ISG induction was observed,
whereas other transcripts were unaffected. We therefore conclude that IRF3
specifically regulates ISG induction during the initial phase of HCMV infection.

PMCID: PMC1346858
PMID: 16379004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. EMBO J. 2006 Jan 11;25(1):108-17. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

The GRIP1:IRF3 interaction as a target for glucocorticoid receptor-mediated
immunosuppression.

Reily MM(1), Pantoja C, Hu X, Chinenov Y, Rogatsky I.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Special Surgery, Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Glucocorticoids dramatically inhibit cytokine and chemokine production. They act 
through the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), a ligand-dependent transcription factor
that binds to and represses activities of other DNA-bound regulators, activator
protein 1 and nuclear factor kappaB, utilizing a p160 GRIP1 as a corepressor. A
yeast two-hybrid screen with the GRIP1 corepression domain (RD) yielded
interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF)3-a downstream effector of Toll-like
receptors (TLR) 3/4 and an essential activator of several IFN and chemokine
genes. We defined the GRIP1:IRF3 interface and showed that endogenous GRIP1 and
IRF3 interact in mammalian cells. Interestingly, GR and IRF3 competed for GRIP1
binding; GR activation or GRIP1 knockdown in macrophages blocked whereas GRIP1
overexpression rescued IRF3-dependent gene expression. GR interference persisted 
in MyD88- and IFNA receptor-deficient mice, suggesting a specific disruption of
TLR3-IRF3 pathway, not of autocrine IFN signaling. Finally, IRF3-stimulated
response elements were necessary and sufficient for TLR3-dependent induction and 
glucocorticoid inhibition. Thus, GRIP1 plays a cofactor role in innate immunity. 
Competition with GR for GRIP1 antagonizes IRF3-mediated transcription,
identifying the GRIP1:IRF3 interaction as a novel target for glucocorticoid
immunosuppression.

PMCID: PMC1356362
PMID: 16362036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Curr Opin Immunol. 2006 Feb;18(1):3-9. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

How Toll-like receptors signal: what we know and what we don't know.

O'Neill LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.
laoneill@tcd.ie

Signal transduction pathways activated by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have
continued to be a major focus of research for investigators interested in the
initiation of innate immune responses and the induction of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and type I interferons during infection. Biochemical details of the
major signalling pathways have now been obtained, and the specific signalling
pathways activated by different TLRs are being elucidated. New insights into the 
activation of IRF family members, notably IRF3, IRF5 and IRF7, have been
obtained, and interesting spatiotemporal aspects of signalling by MyD88 leading
to IRF7 activation revealed. Adapters in TLR signalling are targets for
inhibition, both by endogenous regulators and by virally derived proteins.
Selective targeting of pathways by anti-inflammatory glucocorticoids also
indicates the potential for modulating TLR signalling therapeutically.

PMID: 16343886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Nature. 2006 Jan 12;439(7073):208-11. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Critical role of TRAF3 in the Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent
antiviral response.

Oganesyan G(1), Saha SK, Guo B, He JQ, Shahangian A, Zarnegar B, Perry A, Cheng
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California, Los Angeles, 609 Charles E. Young Dr. East, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

Type I interferon (IFN) production is a critical component of the innate defence 
against viral infections. Viral products induce strong type I IFN responses
through the activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and intracellular
cytoplasmic receptors such as protein kinase R (PKR). Here we demonstrate that
cells lacking TRAF3, a member of the TNF receptor-associated factor family, are
defective in type I IFN responses activated by several different TLRs.
Furthermore, we show that TRAF3 associates with the TLR adaptors TRIF and IRAK1, 
as well as downstream IRF3/7 kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon, suggesting that TRAF3 
serves as a critical link between TLR adaptors and downstream regulatory kinases 
important for IRF activation. In addition to TLR stimulation, we also show that
TRAF3-deficient fibroblasts are defective in their type I IFN response to direct 
infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, indicating that TRAF3 is also an
important component of TLR-independent viral recognition pathways. Our data
demonstrate that TRAF3 is a major regulator of type I IFN production and the
innate antiviral response.

PMID: 16306936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 27;281(4):2095-103. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Negative regulation of the retinoic acid-inducible gene I-induced antiviral state
by the ubiquitin-editing protein A20.

Lin R(1), Yang L, Nakhaei P, Sun Q, Sharif-Askari E, Julkunen I, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
and Department of Microbiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1E2,
Canada. rongtuan.lin@mcgill.ca

Activation of the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 3 and 7 transcription
factors is essential for the induction of type I interferon (IFN) and development
of the innate antiviral response. Retinoic acid-inducible gene I has been shown
to contribute to virus-induced IFN production independent of the Toll-like
receptor pathways in response to a variety of RNA viruses and double-stranded
RNA. In the present study, we demonstrate that the NF-kappaB-inducible,
anti-apoptotic protein A20 efficiently blocks RIG-I-mediated activation of
NF-kappaB-, IRF-3-, and IRF-7-dependent promoters but only weakly interferes with
TRIF-TLR-3-mediated IFN activation. Expression of A20 completely blocked CARD
domain containing DeltaRIG-I-induced IRF-3 Ser-396 phosphorylation,
homodimerization, and DNA binding. The level of A20 inhibition was upstream of
the TBK1/IKKepsilon kinases that phosphorylate IRF3 and IRF7 and paradoxically,
A20 selectively degraded the TRIF protein but not RIG-I. A20 possesses two
ubiquitin-editing domains, an N-terminal deubiquitination domain and a C-terminal
ubiquitin ligase domain consisting of seven zinc finger domains. Deletion of the 
N-terminal de-ubiquitination domain had no significant effect on the inhibitory
effect of A20, whereas deletion or mutation of zinc finger motif 7 ablated the
inhibitory function of A20 on IRF- or NF-kappaB-mediated gene expression.
Furthermore, cells stably expressing the active form of RIG-I induced an
antiviral state that interfered with replication of vesicular stomatitis virus,
an effect that was reversed by stable co-expression of A20. These results suggest
that the virus-inducible, NF-kappaB-dependent activation of A20 functions as a
negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated induction of the antiviral state.

PMID: 16306043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Nat Immunol. 2006 Jan;7(1):40-8. Epub 2005 Nov 13.

A Toll-like receptor-independent antiviral response induced by double-stranded
B-form DNA.

Ishii KJ(1), Coban C, Kato H, Takahashi K, Torii Y, Takeshita F, Ludwig H, Sutter
G, Suzuki K, Hemmi H, Sato S, Yamamoto M, Uematsu S, Kawai T, Takeuchi O, Akira
S.

Author information: 
(1)Exploratory Research for Advanced Technology, Japan Science and Technology
Agency, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, Osaka
565-0871, Japan.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Apr;7(4):427.

The innate immune system recognizes nucleic acids during infection or tissue
damage; however, the mechanisms of intracellular recognition of DNA have not been
fully elucidated. Here we show that intracellular administration of
double-stranded B-form DNA (B-DNA) triggered antiviral responses including
production of type I interferons and chemokines independently of Toll-like
receptors or the helicase RIG-I. B-DNA activated transcription factor IRF3 and
the promoter of the gene encoding interferon-beta through a signaling pathway
that required the kinases TBK1 and IKKi, whereas there was substantial activation
of transcription factor NF-kappaB independent of both TBK and IKKi. IPS-1, an
adaptor molecule linking RIG-I and TBK1, was involved in B-DNA-induced activation
of interferon-beta and NF-kappaB. B-DNA signaling by this pathway conferred
resistance to viral infection in a way dependent on both TBK1 and IKKi. These
results suggest that both TBK1 and IKKi are required for innate immune activation
by B-DNA, which might be important in antiviral innate immunity and other
DNA-associated immune disorders.

PMID: 16286919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. EMBO J. 2005 Dec 7;24(23):4018-28. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

SIKE is an IKK epsilon/TBK1-associated suppressor of TLR3- and virus-triggered
IRF-3 activation pathways.

Huang J(1), Liu T, Xu LG, Chen D, Zhai Z, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Viral infection or TLR3 engagement causes activation of the transcription factors
IRF-3 and NF-kappaB, which collaborate to induce transcription of type I IFN
genes. IKKepsilon and TBK1 are two IKK-related kinases critically involved in
virus- and TLR3-triggered activation of IRF-3. We identified a protein termed
SIKE (for Suppressor of IKKepsilon) that interacts with IKKepsilon and TBK1. SIKE
is associated with TBK1 under physiological condition and dissociated from TBK1
upon viral infection or TLR3 stimulation. Overexpression of SIKE disrupted the
interactions of IKKepsilon or TBK1 with TRIF, RIG-I and IRF-3, components in
virus- and TLR3-triggered IRF-3 activation pathways, but did not disrupt the
interactions of TRIF with TRAF6 and RIP, components in TLR3-triggered NF-kappaB
activation pathway. Consistently, overexpression of SIKE inhibited virus- and
TLR3-triggered interferon-stimulated response elements (ISRE) but not NF-kappaB
activation. Knockdown of SIKE potentiated virus- and TLR3-triggered ISRE but not 
NF-kappaB activation. Moreover, overexpression of SIKE inhibited IKKepsilon- and 
TBK1-mediated antiviral response. These findings suggest that SIKE is a
physiological suppressor of IKKepsilon and TBK1 and plays an inhibitory role in
virus- and TLR3-triggered IRF-3 but not NF-kappaB activation pathways.

PMCID: PMC1356304
PMID: 16281057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Blood. 2006 Mar 1;107(5):2112-22. Epub 2005 Nov 3.

A distinct and unique transcriptional program expressed by tumor-associated
macrophages (defective NF-kappaB and enhanced IRF-3/STAT1 activation).

Biswas SK(1), Gangi L, Paul S, Schioppa T, Saccani A, Sironi M, Bottazzi B, Doni 
A, Vincenzo B, Pasqualini F, Vago L, Nebuloni M, Mantovani A, Sica A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan, Italy.

To identify the molecular basis underlying the functions of tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs), we characterized the gene expression profile of TAMs isolated
from a murine fibrosarcoma in comparison with peritoneal macrophages (PECs) and
myeloid suppressor cells (MSCs), using a cDNA microarray technology. Among the
differentially expressed genes, 15 genes relevant to inflammation and immunity
were validated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and protein
production. Resting TAMs showed a characteristic gene expression pattern with
higher expression of genes coding for the immunosuppressive cytokine IL-10,
phagocytosis-related receptors/molecules (Msr2 and C1q), and inflammatory
chemokines (CCL2 and CCL5) as expected, as well as, unexpectedly, IFN-inducible
chemokines (CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL16). Immunohistology confirmed and extended the in
vitro analysis by showing that TAMs express M2-associated molecules (eg, IL-10
and MGL1), as well as CCL2, CCL5, CXCL9, CXCL10, and CXCL16, but no appreciable
NOS2. Lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-mediated activation of TAMs resulted in defective 
expression of several proinflammatory cytokines (eg, IL-1beta, IL-6, TNF-alpha)
and chemokines (eg, CCL3), as opposed to a strong up-regulation of
immunosuppressive cytokines (IL-10, TGFbeta) and IFN-inducible chemokines (CCL5, 
CXCL9, CXCL10, CXCL16). Thus, profiling of TAMs from a murine sarcoma revealed
unexpected expression of IFN-inducible chemokines, associated with an M2
phenotype (IL-10high, IL-12low), and divergent regulation of the NF-kappaB versus
the IRF-3/STAT1 pathway.

PMID: 16269622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Virology. 2006 Feb 5;345(1):96-104. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

TNF-alpha and IFN-alpha enhance influenza-A-virus-induced chemokine gene
expression in human A549 lung epithelial cells.

Veckman V(1), Osterlund P, Fagerlund R, Melén K, Matikainen S, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Mannerheimintie 166, FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland. ville.veckman@ktl.fi

Lung epithelial cells are the primary cellular targets for respiratory virus
pathogens such as influenza and parainfluenza viruses. Here, we have analyzed
influenza A, influenza B and Sendai virus-induced chemokine response in human
A549 lung epithelial cells. Influenza virus infection resulted in low CCL2/MCP-1,
CCL5/RANTES, CXCL8/IL-8 and CXCL10/IP-10 production at late times of infection.
However, when cells were pretreated with TNF-alpha or IFN-alpha,
influenza-A-virus-induced chemokine production was greatly enhanced. Cytokine
pretreatment resulted in enhanced expression of RIG-I, IKKepsilon, interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)1, IRF7 and p50 proteins. Most importantly,
influenza-A-virus-induced DNA binding of IRF1, IRF3, IRF7 and NF-kappaB onto
CXCL10 ISRE and NF-kappaB elements, respectively, was markedly enhanced in
cytokine-pretreated cells. Our results suggest that IFN-alpha and TNF-alpha have 
a significant role in priming epithelial cells for higher cytokine and chemokine 
production in influenza A virus infection.

PMID: 16253303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Blood. 2006 Feb 1;107(3):1078-84. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 is involved in Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)- and
TLR3-induced IL-12p35 gene activation.

Goriely S(1), Molle C, Nguyen M, Albarani V, Haddou NO, Lin R, De Wit D, Flamand 
V, Willems F, Goldman M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology (IMI), Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Charleroi, Belgium.

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is a heterodimeric cytokine produced by dendritic cells
(DCs) in response to Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligation. While the mechanisms
regulating IL-12p40 chain gene expression are well characterized, molecular
events involved in IL-12p35 chain gene activation remain to be clarified. Since
IL-12p35 mRNA was induced in human DCs activated through TLR3 or TLR4 but not
TLR2, we investigated the potential role of interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF-3) in IL-12p35 gene transactivation. First, a binding site for IRF-3 named
interferon-stimulated response element-1 (ISRE-1) was identified in the human
IL-12p35 promoter region between nucleotides -251 and -240. The ISRE-1 site was
required for IL-12p35 gene activation in RAW 264.7 cells stimulated by
lipopolysaccharide (LPS) or PolyI:C. Ectopic expression of IRF-3 was found to
up-regulate IL-12p35 gene activation in the same system. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) studies demonstrated that IRF-3 is recruited to ISRE-1
site in TLR4- or TLR3-stimulated human DCs. Finally, experiments on DCs from
IRF-3-deficient mice established that TLR4-induced IL-12p35 mRNA and IL-12p70
synthesis are impaired in absence of IRF-3. We conclude that IRF-3 binds to a
critical cis-acting element in the IL-12p35 gene promoter and thereby represents 
a key factor for the induction of IL-12p70 synthesis in DCs.

PMID: 16219795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Cell Signal. 2006 Jul;18(7):982-93. Epub 2005 Sep 30.

IKK-i signals through IRF3 and NFkappaB to mediate the production of inflammatory
cytokines.

Sankar S(1), Chan H, Romanow WJ, Li J, Bates RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Therapeutics (Inflammation), Celgene, 4550 Towne Centre Court,
San Diego, CA 92121, United States. ssankar@celgene.com

IKK-i and TBK1 were recently identified as IKK-related kinases that are activated
by toll-like receptors TLR3 and TLR4. These kinases were identified as essential 
components of the virus-activated as well as LPS-MyD88 independent kinase complex
that phosphorylates IRF3 and results in the production of cytokines involved in
innate immunity. Both IKK-i and TBK1 have also been implicated in the activation 
of the NFkappaB pathway but the precise mechanism is not clear. Although the
literature to date suggests that IKK-i and TBK1 play redundant roles in TLR3 and 
TLR4 signaling, recent data suggest that there may be subtle differences in the
signaling pathways affected by these kinases. We have generated
tetracycline-inducible stable cell lines that express a wild type or
kinase-inactive mutant form of IKK-i. Our data suggest that expression of IKK-i
can activate both NFkappaB and IRF3, leading to the production of several
cytokines including interferon beta. IKK-i most likely acts upstream of IKK2 to
activate NFkappaB in these cells since expression of the kinase-inactive version 
of IKK-i did not inhibit TNFalpha mediated production of inflammatory cytokines. 
The data suggest that IKK-i is not involved in TNF-alpha mediated signaling but
instead could likely play a role in activating IKK2 downstream of Toll-like
receptor signaling. We also identified STAT1, Tyk2, and JAK1 as secondary
mediators of IKK-i signaling as a result of interferon beta production in these
cells.

PMID: 16199137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Gen Virol. 2005 Oct;86(Pt 10):2697-702.

The Bovine herpesvirus 1 gene encoding infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) can
inhibit interferon-dependent transcription in the absence of other viral genes.

Henderson G(1), Zhang Y, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68503, USA.

The infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) encoded by Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1)
stimulates viral gene expression and productive infection. As bICP0 is expressed 
constitutively during productive infection, it is considered to be the major
viral regulatory protein. Like other alphaherpesvirus ICP0 homologues, bICP0
contains a zinc RING finger near its N terminus that activates transcription and 
regulates subcellular localization. In this study, evidence is provided that
bICP0 represses the human beta interferon (IFN-beta) promoter and a simple
promoter with consensus IFN-stimulated response elements following stimulation
with double-stranded RNA (polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid), IFN regulatory factor
3 (IRF3) or IRF7. bICP0 also inhibits the ability of two protein kinases (TBK1
and IKK epsilon) to activate IFN-beta promoter activity. The zinc RING finger is 
necessary for inhibiting IFN-dependent transcription in certain cell types.
Collectively, these studies suggest that bICP0 activates productive infection by 
stimulating viral gene expression and inhibiting IFN-dependent transcription.

PMID: 16186222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Nature. 2005 Oct 20;437(7062):1167-72. Epub 2005 Sep 21.

Cardif is an adaptor protein in the RIG-I antiviral pathway and is targeted by
hepatitis C virus.

Meylan E(1), Curran J, Hofmann K, Moradpour D, Binder M, Bartenschlager R,
Tschopp J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Lausanne, BIL Biomedical Research
Center, Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

Antiviral immunity against a pathogen is mounted upon recognition by the host of 
virally associated structures. One of these viral 'signatures', double-stranded
(ds) RNA, is a replication product of most viruses within infected cells and is
sensed by Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) and the recently identified cytosolic RNA
helicases RIG-I (retinoic acid inducible gene I, also known as Ddx58) and Mda5
(melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5, also known as Ifih1 or Helicard).
Both helicases detect dsRNA, and through their protein-interacting CARD domains, 
relay an undefined signal resulting in the activation of the transcription
factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-kappaB. Here we describe
Cardif, a new CARD-containing adaptor protein that interacts with RIG-I and
recruits IKKalpha, IKKbeta and IKKvarepsilon kinases by means of its C-terminal
region, leading to the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3. Overexpression of Cardif
results in interferon-beta and NF-kappaB promoter activation, and knockdown of
Cardif by short interfering RNA inhibits RIG-I-dependent antiviral responses.
Cardif is targeted and inactivated by NS3-4A, a serine protease from hepatitis C 
virus known to block interferon-beta production. Cardif thus functions as an
adaptor, linking the cytoplasmic dsRNA receptor RIG-I to the initiation of
antiviral programmes.

PMID: 16177806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Science. 2005 Sep 16;309(5742):1854-7.

Achieving stability of lipopolysaccharide-induced NF-kappaB activation.

Covert MW(1), Leung TH, Gaston JE, Baltimore D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

The activation dynamics of the transcription factor NF-kappaB exhibit damped
oscillatory behavior when cells are stimulated by tumor necrosis factor-alpha
(TNFalpha) but stable behavior when stimulated by lipopolysaccharide (LPS). LPS
binding to Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) causes activation of NF-kappaB that
requires two downstream pathways, each of which when isolated exhibits damped
oscillatory behavior. Computational modeling of the two TLR4-dependent signaling 
pathways suggests that one pathway requires a time delay to establish early
anti-phase activation of NF-kappaB by the two pathways. The MyD88-independent
pathway required Inferon regulatory factor 3-dependent expression of TNFalpha to 
activate NF-kappaB, and the time required for TNFalpha synthesis established the 
delay.

PMID: 16166516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 20;102(38):13640-5. Epub 2005 Sep 9.

Viral targeting of the interferon-{beta}-inducing Traf family member-associated
NF-{kappa}B activator (TANK)-binding kinase-1.

Unterstab G(1), Ludwig S, Anton A, Planz O, Dauber B, Krappmann D, Heins G,
Ehrhardt C, Wolff T.

Author information: 
(1)Robert Koch Institute, FG12, Nordufer 20, 13353 Berlin, Germany.

Expression of the antiviral cytokines IFN-alpha/beta is among the most potent
innate defenses of higher vertebrates to virus infections, which is controlled by
the inducible transcription factor IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3. Borna disease
virus (BDV) establishes persistent noncytolytic infections in animals and tissue 
culture cells, indicating that it can circumvent this antiviral reaction by an
unexplained activity. In this study, we identify the BDV P protein as microbial
gene product that associates with and inhibits the principal regulatory kinase of
IRF3, Traf family member-associated NF-kappaB activator (TANK)-binding kinase 1
(TBK-1). We demonstrate that the P protein counteracts TBK-1-dependent IFN-beta
expression in cells and, hence, the establishment of an antiviral state.
Furthermore, our data show that the BDV P protein itself is phosphorylated by
TBK-1, suggesting that P functions as a viral decoy substrate that prevents
activation of cellular target proteins of TBK-1. Thus, our findings provide
evidence for a previously undescribed mechanism by which a viral protein
interferes with the induction of the antiviral IFN cascade.

PMCID: PMC1224622
PMID: 16155125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cell. 2005 Sep 9;122(5):707-21.

Molecular determinants of crosstalk between nuclear receptors and toll-like
receptors.

Ogawa S(1), Lozach J, Benner C, Pascual G, Tangirala RK, Westin S, Hoffmann A,
Subramaniam S, David M, Rosenfeld MG, Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

Nuclear receptors (NRs) repress transcriptional responses to diverse signaling
pathways as an essential aspect of their biological activities, but mechanisms
determining the specificity and functional consequences of transrepression remain
poorly understood. Here, we report signal- and gene-specific repression of
transcriptional responses initiated by engagement of toll-like receptors (TLR) 3,
4, and 9 in macrophages. The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) represses a large set
of functionally related inflammatory response genes by disrupting p65/interferon 
regulatory factor (IRF) complexes required for TLR4- or TLR9-dependent, but not
TLR3-dependent, transcriptional activation. This mechanism requires signaling
through MyD88 and enables the GR to differentially regulate pathogen-specific
programs of gene expression. PPARgamma and LXRs repress overlapping
transcriptional targets by p65/IRF3-independent mechanisms and cooperate with the
GR to synergistically transrepress distinct subsets of TLR-responsive genes.
These findings reveal combinatorial control of homeostasis and immune responses
by nuclear receptors and suggest new approaches for treatment of inflammatory
diseases.

PMCID: PMC1430687
PMID: 16143103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):981-8. Epub 2005 Aug 28.

IPS-1, an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon
induction.

Kawai T(1), Takahashi K, Sato S, Coban C, Kumar H, Kato H, Ishii KJ, Takeuchi O, 
Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Exploratory Research for Advanced Technology, Japan Science and Technology
Agency.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Nov;6(11):1074-6.

Type I interferons are central mediators for antiviral responses. Using
high-throughput functional screening of interferon inducers, we have identified
here a molecule we call interferon-beta promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1).
Overexpression of IPS-1 induced type I interferon and interferon-inducible genes 
through activation of IRF3, IRF7 and NF-kappaB transcription factors. TBK1 and
IKKi protein kinases were required for the IPS-1-mediated interferon induction.
IPS-1 contained an N-terminal CARD-like structure that mediated interaction with 
the CARD of RIG-I and Mda5, which are cytoplasmic RNA helicases that sense viral 
infection. 'Knockdown' of IPS-1 by small interfering RNA blocked interferon
induction by virus infection. Thus, IPS-1 is an adaptor involved in RIG-I- and
Mda5-mediated antiviral immune responses.

PMID: 16127453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cell. 2005 Sep 9;122(5):669-82.

Identification and characterization of MAVS, a mitochondrial antiviral signaling 
protein that activates NF-kappaB and IRF 3.

Seth RB(1), Sun L, Ea CK, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Sep 9;122(5):645-7.

Viral infection triggers host innate immune responses through activation of the
transcription factors NF-kappaB and IRF 3, which coordinately regulate the
expression of type-I interferons such as interferon-beta (IFN-beta). Herein, we
report the identification of a novel protein termed MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral
signaling), which mediates the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF 3 in response to
viral infection. Silencing of MAVS expression through RNA interference abolishes 
the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF 3 by viruses, thereby permitting viral
replication. Conversely, overexpression of MAVS induces the expression of
IFN-beta through activation of NF-kappaB and IRF 3, thus boosting antiviral
immunity. Epistasis experiments show that MAVS is required for the
phosphorylation of IRF 3 and IkappaB and functions downstream of RIG-I, an
intracellular receptor for viral RNA. MAVS contains an N-terminal CARD-like
domain and a C-terminal transmembrane domain, both of which are essential for
MAVS signaling. The transmembrane domain targets MAVS to the mitochondria,
implicating a new role of mitochondria in innate immunity.

PMID: 16125763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Virology. 2005 Nov 10;342(1):77-87. Epub 2005 Aug 18.

West Nile virus replication interferes with both poly(I:C)-induced interferon
gene transcription and response to interferon treatment.

Scholle F(1), Mason PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, 3.206B Mary Moody Northen Pavilion, University of
Texas Medical Branch, 301 University Boulevard, Galveston, TX 77555-0436, USA.

West Nile virus (WNV), the leading cause of viral encephalitis in the United
States, is an arthropod-transmitted member of the family Flaviviridae. We have
explored the interaction of this positive-strand RNA virus with signaling
pathways involved in induction of the host's innate immune response.
Phosphorylation of STAT-1 in response to interferon (IFN) treatment and the
ability of IFN to establish an antiviral state were reduced in WNV
replicon-bearing cell lines. Similarly, the activation of IRF3 and stimulation of
IFN-beta transcription in response to the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) mimetic
poly(I:C) were inhibited in replicon-bearing and WNV-infected HeLa cells. In
contrast, WNV replicons did not affect IRF3 activation by Sendai virus infection,
suggesting that not all IRF3 activating pathways are inhibited by WNV. Taken
together, these findings demonstrate that WNV replication in cultured cells
interferes with both the response to IFN and synthesis of IFN-beta in response to
dsRNA.

PMID: 16111732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Virol. 2005 Sep;79(17):10968-77.

Hepatitis A virus suppresses RIG-I-mediated IRF-3 activation to block induction
of beta interferon.

Fensterl V(1), Grotheer D, Berk I, Schlemminger S, Vallbracht A, Dotzauer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Bremen, Germany.

Hepatitis A virus (HAV) antagonizes the innate immune response by inhibition of
double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)-induced beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene expression.
In this report, we show that this is due to an interaction of HAV with the
intracellular dsRNA-induced retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-mediated
signaling pathway upstream of the kinases responsible for interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF-3) phosphorylation (TBK1 and IKKepsilon). In consequence, IRF-3 is 
not activated for nuclear translocation and gene induction. In addition, we found
that HAV reduces TRIF (TIR domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta)-mediated 
IRF-3 activation, which is part of the Toll-like receptor 3 signaling pathway. As
IRF-3 is necessary for IFN-beta transcription, inhibition of this factor results 
in efficient suppression of IFN-beta synthesis. This ability of HAV seems to be
of considerable importance for HAV replication, as HAV is not resistant to
IFN-beta, and it may allow the virus to establish infection and preserve the
sites of virus production in later stages of the infection.

PMCID: PMC1193608
PMID: 16103148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Virol. 2005 Aug;79(16):10376-85.

Early alpha/beta interferon production by myeloid dendritic cells in response to 
UV-inactivated virus requires viral entry and interferon regulatory factor 3 but 
not MyD88.

Hidmark AS(1), McInerney GM, Nordström EK, Douagi I, Werner KM, Liljeström P,
Karlsson Hedestam GB.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology and Tumor Biology Center, Karolinska Institutet, Box 280, S-171
77 Stockholm, Sweden.

Alpha/beta interferons (IFN-alpha/beta) are key mediators of innate immunity and 
important modulators of adaptive immunity. The mechanisms by which IFN-alpha/beta
are induced are becoming increasingly well understood. Recent studies showed that
Toll-like receptors 7 and 8 expressed by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs)
mediate the endosomal recognition of incoming viral RNA genomes, a process which 
requires myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88). Here we investigate the
requirements for virus-induced IFN-alpha/beta production in cultures of bone
marrow-derived murine myeloid DCs (mDCs). Using recombinant Semliki Forest virus 
blocked at different steps in the viral life cycle, we show that
replication-defective virus induced IFN-alpha/beta in mDCs while fusion-defective
virus did not induce IFN-alpha/beta. The response to replication-defective virus 
was largely intact in MyD88-/- mDC cultures but was severely reduced in mDC
cultures from mice lacking IFN regulatory factor 3. Our observations suggest that
mDCs respond to incoming virus via a pathway that differs from the
fusion-independent, MyD88-mediated endosomal pathway described for the induction 
of IFN-alpha/beta in pDCs. We propose that events during or downstream of viral
fusion, but prior to replication, can activate IFN-alpha/beta in mDCs. Thus, mDCs
may contribute to the antiviral response activated by the immune system at early 
time points after infection.

PMCID: PMC1182635
PMID: 16051830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Immunity. 2005 Jul;23(1):19-28.

Cell type-specific involvement of RIG-I in antiviral response.

Kato H(1), Sato S, Yoneyama M, Yamamoto M, Uematsu S, Matsui K, Tsujimura T,
Takeda K, Fujita T, Takeuchi O, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in antiviral response by
recognizing viral components. Recently, a RNA helicase, RIG-I, was also suggested
to recognize viral double-stranded RNA. However, how these molecules contribute
to viral recognition in vivo is poorly understood. We show by gene targeting that
RIG-I is essential for induction of type I interferons (IFNs) after infection
with RNA viruses in fibroblasts and conventional dendritic cells (DCs). RIG-I
induces type I IFNs by activating IRF3 via IkappaB kinase-related kinases. In
contrast, plasmacytoid DCs, which produce large amounts of IFN-alpha, use the TLR
system rather than RIG-I for viral detection. Taken together, RIG-I and the TLR
system exert antiviral responses in a cell type-specific manner.

PMID: 16039576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Viral Immunol. 2005;18(2):267-81.

Herpesviruses and the innate immune response.

Mossman KL(1), Ashkar AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Centre for Gene Therapeutics, 
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. mossk@mcmaster.ca

Herpesvirus infection leads to the rapid induction of an innate immune response. 
A central aspect of this host response is the production and secretion of type I 
interferon. The current model of virus-mediated interferon production includes
three stages: sensitization, induction, and amplification. A key mediator of all 
three stages is the cellular transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 3 
(IRF3). Although the precise details of IRF3 activation and interferon production
in response to herpesvirus infection are still being elucidated, viral proteins
that block components of the interferon pathway, particularly IRF3, have been
identified and characterized. In vivo studies have shown that in addition to type
I interferon, interleukin-15 (IL-15) and natural killer (NK) cells also play an
important role in mediating resistance to herpesvirus infection. Recent
investigations have demonstrated a strong association between IRF3, interferon,
IL-15, and NK cells. This review will focus on herpesvirus-mediated induction of 
innate immunity, the central role of the type I interferon response and
mechanisms used by herpesviruses to block host antiviral immunity.

PMID: 16035939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Virol. 2005 Aug;79(15):9608-17.

Gene expression and antiviral activity of alpha/beta interferons and
interleukin-29 in virus-infected human myeloid dendritic cells.

Osterlund P(1), Veckman V, Sirén J, Klucher KM, Hiscott J, Matikainen S, Julkunen
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland.

Dendritic cells (DCs) respond to microbial infections by undergoing phenotypic
maturation and by producing multiple cytokines. In the present study, we analyzed
the ability of influenza A and Sendai viruses to induce DC maturation and
activate tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), alpha/beta interferon
(IFN-alpha/beta), and IFN-like interleukin-28A/B (IFN-lambda2/3) and IL-29
(IFN-lambda1) gene expression in human monocyte-derived myeloid DCs (mDC). The
ability of influenza A virus to induce mDC maturation or enhance the expression
of TNF-alpha, IFN-alpha/beta, interleukin-28 (IL-28), and IL-29 genes was
limited, whereas Sendai virus efficiently induced mDC maturation and enhanced
cytokine gene expression. Influenza A virus-induced expression of TNF-alpha,
IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, IL-28, and IL-29 genes was, however, dramatically enhanced
when cells were pretreated with IFN-alpha. IFN-alpha priming led to increased
expression of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), TLR7, TLR8, MyD88, TRIF, and IFN
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) genes and enhanced influenza-induced phosphorylation
and DNA binding of IRF3. Influenza A virus also enhanced the binding of NF-kappaB
to the respective NF-kappaB elements of the promoters of IFN-beta and IL-29
genes. In mDC IL-29 induced MxA protein expression and possessed antiviral
activity against influenza A virus, although this activity was lower than that of
IFN-alpha or IFN-beta. Our results show that in human mDCs viruses can readily
induce the expression of IL-28 and IL-29 genes whose gene products are likely to 
contribute to the host antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC1181545
PMID: 16014923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Genomics. 2005 Sep;86(3):365-77.

Modulation of NB4 promyelocytic leukemic cell machinery by Anaplasma
phagocytophilum.

Pedra JH(1), Sukumaran B, Carlyon JA, Berliner N, Fikrig E.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, The Anlyan Center for Medical Research and Education, 300
Cedar St., Room 525A P.O. Box 208031, New Haven, CT 06520-8031, USA.

Anaplasma phagocytophilum is a gram-negative obligate intracellular bacterium
that persists within neutrophils. We assessed the impact of A. phagocytophilum
infection in NB4 promyelocytic leukemic cells using high-density oligoarray,
two-dimensional differential gel electrophoresis and liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry. Our Affymetrix data revealed that A. phagocytophilum altered the
expression of transcription factors, cell adhesion molecules, signal transduction
genes, and proinflammatory cytokines. However, the expression of Toll-like
receptors, MYD88, RNF36, IRF3, and TBK1 and inhibitors of the NF-kappaB gene was 
not altered. A. phagocytophilum infection also altered the apoptotic program of
NB4 cells and resulted in increased transcription of antiapoptotic genes (MCL1
and BFL1). The transcription and translation of iron-metabolism genes (light
polypeptide ferritin chain, transferrin, and the transferrin receptor) were
significantly altered, suggesting a possible link between A. phagocytophilum
infection and iron metabolism. Our study clearly demonstrates multifactorial
effects of A. phagocytophilum infection on NB4 promyelocytic leukemic cell
machinery.

PMID: 16005178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Virol. 2005 Jul;79(14):9320-4.

Identification of TRAIL as an interferon regulatory factor 3 transcriptional
target.

Kirshner JR(1), Karpova AY, Kops M, Howley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Interferon production and apoptosis in virus-infected cells are necessary to
prevent progeny virus production and to eliminate infected cells. Paramyxovirus
infection induces apoptosis through interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), but
the exact mechanism of how IRF-3 functions is unknown. We show that IRF-3 is
involved in the transcriptional induction of TRAIL, a key player in the apoptosis
pathway. IRF-3 upregulates TRAIL transcription following viral infection and
binds an interferon-stimulated response element in the TRAIL promoter. The mRNA
for TRAIL and its receptor, DR5, are induced following viral infection. These
studies identify TRAIL as a novel IRF-3 transcriptional target.

PMCID: PMC1168760
PMID: 15994827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cell Res. 2005 Jun;15(6):407-22.

The host type I interferon response to viral and bacterial infections.

Perry AK(1), Chen G, Zheng D, Tang H, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Type I interferons (IFN) are well studied cytokines with anti-viral and
immune-modulating functions. Type I IFNs are produced following viral infections,
but until recently, the mechanisms of viral recognition leading to IFN production
were largely unknown. Toll like receptors (TLRs) have emerged as key transducers 
of type I IFN during viral infections by recognizing various viral components.
Furthermore, much progress has been made in defining the signaling pathways
downstream of TLRs for type I IFN production. TLR7 and TLR9 have become apparent 
as universally important in inducing type I IFN during infection with most
viruses, particularly by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. New intracellular viral
pattern recognition receptors leading to type I IFN production have been
identified. Many bacteria can also induce the up-regulation of these cytokines.
Interestingly, recent studies have found a detrimental effect on host cells if
type I IFN is produced during infection with the intracellular gram-positive
bacterial pathogen, Listeria monocytogenes. This review will discuss the recent
advances made in defining the signaling pathways leading to type I IFN
production.

PMID: 15987599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Immunol. 2005 Jul 1;175(1):494-500.

Differential involvement of BB loops of toll-IL-1 resistance (TIR)
domain-containing adapter proteins in TLR4- versus TLR2-mediated signal
transduction.

Toshchakov VU(1), Basu S, Fenton MJ, Vogel SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, 
MD 21201, USA.

TLRs sense pathogens and transmit intracellular signals via the use of specific
adapter proteins. We designed a set of "blocking peptides" (BPs) comprised of the
14 aa that correspond to the sequences of the BB loops of the four known
Toll-IL-1 resistance (TIR) domain-containing adapter proteins (i.e., MyD88, TIR
domain-containing adapter inducing IFN-beta (TRIF), TRIF-related adapter molecule
(TRAM), and TIR-domain containing adapter protein (TIRAP)) linked to the
cell-penetrating segment of the antennapedia homeodomain. LPS (TLR4)-mediated
gene expression, as well as MAPK and transcription factor activation associated
with both MyD88-dependent and -independent signaling pathways, were disrupted by 
all four BPs (TRAM approximately MyD88 > TRIF > TIRAP), but not by a control
peptide. In contrast, none of the BPs inhibited TLR2-mediated activation of
MAPKs. Only the MyD88 BP significantly blocked Pam3Cys-induced IL-1beta mRNA;
however, the inhibitory effect was much less than observed for LPS. Our data
suggest that the interactions required for a fully functional TLR4 signaling
"platform" are disrupted by these BPs, and that the adapter BB loops may serve
distinct roles in TLR4 and TLR2 signalosome assembly.

PMID: 15972684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. FEBS J. 2005 Jun;272(12):3120-31.

Regulation of arginase II by interferon regulatory factor 3 and the involvement
of polyamines in the antiviral response.

Grandvaux N(1), Gaboriau F, Harris J, tenOever BR, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Montreal, Canada.

The innate antiviral response requires the induction of genes and proteins with
activities that limit virus replication. Among these, the well-characterized
interferon beta (IFNB) gene is regulated through the cooperation of AP-1,
NF-kappaB and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) transcription factors. Using
a constitutively active form of IRF-3, IRF-3 5D, we showed previously that IRF-3 
also regulates an IFN-independent antiviral response through the direct induction
of IFN-stimulated genes. In this study, we report that the arginase II gene
(ArgII) as well as ArgII protein concentrations and enzymatic activity are
induced in IRF-3 5D-expressing and Sendai virus-infected Jurkat cells in an
IFN-independent manner. ArgII is a critical enzyme in the polyamine-biosynthetic 
pathway. Of the natural polyamines, spermine possesses antiviral activity and
mediates apoptosis at physiological concentrations. Measurement of intracellular 
polyamine content revealed that expression of IRF-3 5D induces polyamine
production, but that Sendai virus and vesicular stomatitis virus infections do
not. These results show for the first time that the ArgII gene is an early
IRF-3-regulated gene, which participates in the IFN-independent antiviral
response through polyamine production and induction of apoptosis.

PMID: 15955070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Eur J Immunol. 2005 Jul;35(7):2200-9.

Inhibition of phosphoinositide 3-kinase enhances TRIF-dependent NF-kappa B
activation and IFN-beta synthesis downstream of Toll-like receptor 3 and 4.

Aksoy E(1), Vanden Berghe W, Detienne S, Amraoui Z, Fitzgerald KA, Haegeman G,
Goldman M, Willems F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Charleroi,
Belgium.

Phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3K) are known to regulate Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-mediated inflammatory responses, but their impact on the different pathways
of TLR signaling remains to be clarified. Here, we investigated the consequences 
of pharmacological inhibition of PI3K on Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing
adapter-inducing IFN-beta (TRIF)-dependent signaling, which induces IFN-beta gene
expression downstream of TLR3 and TLR4. First, treatment of monocyte-derived
dendritic cells (DC) with wortmannin or LY294002 was found to enhance IFN-beta
expression upon TLR3 or TLR4 engagement. In the same models of DC activation,
PI3K inhibition increased DNA-binding activity of NF-kappaB, but not interferon
response factor (IRF)-3, the key transcription factors required for TLR-mediated 
IFN-beta synthesis. In parallel, wortmannin-treated DC exhibited enhanced levels 
of IkappaB kinase (IKK)-alpha/beta phosphorylation and IkappaB-alpha degradation 
with a concomitant increase in NF-kappaB nuclear translocation. Experiments
carried out in HEK 293T cells stably expressing TLR3 or TLR4 confirmed that
inhibition of PI3K activity enhances NF-kappaB-dependent promoters as well as
IFN-beta promoter activities without interfering with transcription at the
positive regulatory domain III-I. Furthermore, wortmannin enhanced NF-kappaB
activity induced by TRIF overexpression in HEK 293T cells, while overexpression
of catalytically active PI3K selectively attenuated TRIF-mediated NF-kappaB
transcriptional activity. Finally, in co-immunoprecipitation experiments, we
showed that PI3K physically interacted with TRIF. We conclude that inhibition of 
PI3K activity enhances TRIF-dependent NF-kappaB activity, and thereby increases
IFN-beta synthesis elicited by TLR3 or TLR4 ligands.

PMID: 15940673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Gene. 2005 Jun 20;353(1):118-33.

Genomic structure and functional characterization of the promoter region of human
IkappaB kinase-related kinase IKKi/IKKvarepsilon gene.

Wang N(1), Ahmed S, Haqqi TM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatic Diseases, Department of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

The inducible IkappaB kinase (IKKi/IKKepsilon) is a recently described
serine-threonine kinase that activates the transcription factors NFkappaB,
interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF3) and CCAAA/enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBPdelta). Several inflammatory agents have been shown to induce the
expression of the IKKi gene in macrophages and other cell types but the mechanism
is unknown. We have found that the IKKi expression was constitutive in human
chondrocytes from OA cartilage and a human chondrocytic cell line C28/I2 but was 
up-regulated by the inflammatory cytokines TNFalpha or IL-1betain an
NFkappaB-dependent manner. To understand the constitutive and inducible
expression of the IKKi gene we localized the transcription start site (TSS),
cloned and sequenced a 2 kb genomic DNA fragment 5' of the TSS and characterized 
the putative promoter region (PPR), and identified the motifs therein that are
required for basal and cytokine-induced IKKi gene promoter activity. We found
that IKKi core promoter was TATA-less and by using PCR generated deletion mutants
of the PPR we found that the cis-elements responsible for basal transcriptional
activity were located between -51 and -100 bp upstream of the TSS while the
cytokine response elements were located distally between -501 and -1000 bp
upstream of the TSS. The DNA region containing the cytokine response elements had
two kappaB sites as the most relevant regulatory motifs. The results of
site-directed mutagenesis revealed that the kappaB site located between -833 and 
-847 bp upstream of the TSS was biologically functional and required for
cytokine-induced IKKi promoter activity in human chondrocytes and HeLa cells. The
silence of the other kappaB site (-816/-802) was positional, rather than
sequence-specific. Over-expression of NFkappaB p65 mimics the TNFalpha-induced
activation of the IKKi promoter. Also the gel shift assay suggested that NFkappaB
p65 is responsible for activation of the IKKi promoter. These data for the first 
time characterize the promoter region and provide further insights into the
transcriptional regulation of IKKi in human chondrocytes and other cell types.

PMCID: PMC1266289
PMID: 15939554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Virol. 2005 Jun;79(12):7673-81.

Identification of the rabies virus alpha/beta interferon antagonist:
phosphoprotein P interferes with phosphorylation of interferon regulatory factor 
3.

Brzózka K(1), Finke S, Conzelmann KK.

Author information: 
(1)Max-von-Pettenkofer Institute & Gene Center, Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25, D-81377
Munich, Germany.

Rabies virus (RV) of the Rhabdoviridae family grows in alpha/beta interferon
(IFN)-competent cells, suggesting the existence of viral mechanisms preventing
IFN gene expression. We here identify the viral phosphoprotein P as the
responsible IFN antagonist. The critical involvement of P was first suggested by 
the observation that an RV expressing an enhanced green fluorescent protein
(eGFP)-P fusion protein (SAD eGFP-P) (S. Finke, K. Brzozka, and K. K. Conzelmann,
J. Virol. 78:12333-12343, 2004) was eliminated in IFN-competent HEp-2 cell
cultures, in contrast to wild-type (wt) RV or an RV replicon lacking the genes
for matrix protein and glycoprotein. SAD eGFP-P induced transcription of the
IFN-beta gene and expression of the IFN-responsive MxA and STAT-1 genes.
Similarly, an RV expressing low levels of P, which was generated by moving the P 
gene to a promoter-distal gene position (SAD DeltaPLP), lost the ability to
prevent IFN induction. The analysis of RV mutants lacking expression of truncated
P proteins P2, P3, or P4, which are expressed from internal AUG codons of the wt 
RV P open reading frame, further showed that full-length P is competent in
suppressing IFN-beta gene expression. In contrast to wt RV, the IFN-inducing SAD 
DeltaPLP caused S386 phosphorylation, dimerization, and transcriptional activity 
of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). Phosphorylation of IRF-3 by TANK-binding
kinase-1 expressed from transfected plasmids was abolished in wt RV-infected
cells or by cotransfection of P-encoding plasmids. Thus, RV P is necessary and
sufficient to prevent a critical IFN response in virus-infected cells by
targeting activation of IRF-3 by an upstream kinase.

PMCID: PMC1143667
PMID: 15919920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Cancer Ther. 2005 May;4(5):799-805.

The role of IFN regulatory factor-3 in the cytotoxic activity of NS-9, a
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid/cationic liposome complex, against tumor cells.

Uno T(1), Hirabayashi K, Murai M, Yano J, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Research Laboratories, Nippon Shinyaku Co., Ltd., 14
Nishinosho-Monguchi-cho, Kisshoin, Minami, Kyoto 601-8550, Japan.
t.uno@po.nippon-shinyaku.co.jp

NS-9 is a complex of polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid and a novel cationic
liposome, LIC-101. The complex has strong cytotoxic activity against tumor cells 
derived from epithelial or fibroblastic cells. We have investigated the mechanism
of the cytotoxic activity of NS-9 using knockdown cells in which the expression
of proteins of interest was inhibited by RNA interference. NS-9 showed strong
cytotoxic activity against knockdown cells with reduced expression of
double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase, RNase L, or IFN-alpha/beta
receptor, but showed no cytotoxic activity against IFN regulatory factor-3 (IRF3)
knockdown cells. In IRF3-knockdown cells, NS-9 also did not induce either the DNA
fragmentation or the rRNA degradation observed in negative control cells. We
conclude that IRF3 plays a crucial role in the cytotoxic activity of NS-9 against
tumor cells, whereas RNA-dependent protein kinase, RNase L, or type I IFNs are
not important for its activity.

PMID: 15897244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Virol. 2005 Jun;79(11):7239-47.

Loss of interferon regulatory factor 3 in cells infected with classical swine
fever virus involves the N-terminal protease, Npro.

La Rocca SA(1), Herbert RJ, Crooke H, Drew TW, Wileman TE, Powell PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, BBSRC Institute for Animal Health, Ash Road,
Pirbright, Surrey GU24 0NF, United Kingdom.

We show that cells infected with the pestivirus classical swine fever virus
(CSFV) fail to produce alpha/beta interferon not only following treatment with
double-stranded RNA but also after superinfection with a heterologous virus, the 
alphavirus Sindbis virus, a virus shown to normally induce interferon. We
investigated whether the inhibition of interferon synthesis by CSFV involved a
block in interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) activity. Cells infected with CSFV
exhibited a lack of translocation of green fluorescent protein-IRF3 to the
nucleus; however, constitutive shuttling of IRF3 was not blocked, since it could 
still accumulate in the nucleus in the presence of leptomycin B. Interestingly
subcellular fractionation analysis showed that IRF3 was lost from the cytoplasm
of infected cells from 18 h postinfection onwards. Using IRF3 promoter-luciferase
reporter constructs, we demonstrate that loss of IRF3 was due to an inhibition of
transcription of the IRF3 gene in CSFV-infected cells. Further, we investigated
which viral protein may be responsible for the inhibition of interferon and loss 
of IRF3. We used cell lines expressing the CSFV N-terminal protease (Npro) to
show that this single viral protein, unique to pestiviruses, inhibited interferon
production in response to Sindbis virus. In addition to being lost from
CSFV-infected cells, IRF3 was lost from Npro-expressing cells. The results
demonstrate a novel viral evasion of innate host defenses, where interferon
synthesis is prevented by inhibiting transcription of IRF3 in CSFV-infected
cells.

PMCID: PMC1112113
PMID: 15890962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Immunol. 2005 May 15;174(10):6467-76.

TLR4, but not TLR2, signals autoregulatory apoptosis of cultured microglia: a
critical role of IFN-beta as a decision maker.

Jung DY(1), Lee H, Jung BY, Ock J, Lee MS, Lee WH, Suk K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, 
Daegu, Korea.

TLRs mediate diverse signaling after recognition of evolutionary conserved
pathogen-associated molecular patterns such as LPS and lipopeptides. Both TLR2
and TLR4 are known to trigger a protective immune response as well as cellular
apoptosis. In this study, we present evidence that TLR4, but not TLR2, mediates
an autoregulatory apoptosis of activated microglia. Brain microglia underwent
apoptosis upon stimulation with TLR4 ligand (LPS), but not TLR2 ligands
(Pam(3)Cys-Ser-Lys(4), peptidoglycan, and lipoteichoic acid). Based on studies
using TLR2-deficient or TLR4 mutant mice and TLR dominant-negative mutants, we
also demonstrated that TLR4, but not TLR2, is necessary for microglial apoptosis.
The critical difference between TLR2 and TLR4 signalings in microglia was IFN
regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) activation, followed by IFN-beta expression: while
TLR4 agonist induced the activation of IRF-3/IFN-beta pathway, TLR2 did not.
Nevertheless, both TLR2 and TLR4 agonists strongly induced NF-kappaB activation
and NO production in microglia. Neutralizing Ab against IFN-beta attenuated
TLR4-mediated microglial apoptosis. IFN-beta alone, however, did not induce a
significant cell death. Meanwhile, TLR2 activation induced microglial apoptosis
with help of IFN-beta, indicating that IFN-beta production following IRF-3
activation determines the apoptogenic action of TLR signaling. TLR4-mediated
microglial apoptosis was mediated by MyD88 and Toll/IL-1R domain-containing
adaptor-inducing IFN-beta, and was associated with caspase-11 and -3 activation
rather than Fas-associated death domain protein/caspase-8 pathway. Taken
together, TLR4 appears to signal a microglial apoptosis via autocrine/paracrine
IFN-beta production, which may act as an apoptotic sensitizer.

PMID: 15879150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Immunol Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;83(3):224-8.

Detection of foreign RNA: implications for RNAi.

de Veer MJ(1), Sledz CA, Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Animal Biotechnology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

RNA interference (RNAi) is an exciting technology with applications in basic
research, in elucidation and validation of drug targets, and as a direct
therapeutic. In mammalian settings, it is based on the introduction or expression
of small interfering RNA (siRNA) that guide the cleavage of a complementary
target messenger RNA. While siRNA certainly directs specific silencing of genes
in mammalian cells, longer RNA typically used to silence genes in other organisms
potently activate mammalian cell defence mechanisms leading to a non-specific
halt in translation, to activation of transcription and often, to cell death.
Recent research has revealed that siRNA in certain settings can also activate
these RNA-responsive pathways. With the recent advances in RNAi technology and
its first forays into the in vivo setting now coming to light, it is pertinent to
review the cellular response to ribonucleic acids typically used in RNAi methods.

PMID: 15877599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Apr;63 Suppl 4:109-14.

[Signal transduction of Toll-like receptors].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsuguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Dentistry, Department of Developmental 
Medicine, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences.

PMID: 15861643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Virol. 2005 May;79(10):6419-31.

Rhesus cytomegalovirus particles prevent activation of interferon regulatory
factor 3.

DeFilippis V(1), Früh K.

Author information: 
(1)Vaccine and Gene Therapy Institute, Oregon Health and Science University, 505 
NW 185th Ave., Beaverton, OR 97006, USA.

One of the most important innate host defense mechanisms against viral infection 
is the induction of interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes (ISGs). Immediately upon
entry, viruses activate interferon-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), as well as nuclear
factor kappaB (NF-kappaB), which transactivate a subset of ISGs, proinflammatory 
genes, as well as IFN genes. Most large DNA viruses exhibit countermeasures
against induction of this response. However, whereas human cytomegalovirus (HCMV)
inhibits IFN-dependent induction of ISGs, IFN-independent induction of ISGs is
observed both in the presence and, even moreso, in the absence of viral gene
expression. Rhesus CMV (RhCMV) is an emerging animal model for HCMV sharing
important similarities in primary structure, epidemiology, and pathogenesis. To
determine whether RhCMV would similarly induce ISGs, we performed DNA microarray 
and quantitative PCR analysis of ISG expression in rhesus fibroblasts infected
with RhCMV or HCMV. In contrast to HCMV, however, RhCMV did not induce expression
of ISGs or proinflammatory genes at any time after infection. Moreover,
dimerization and nuclear accumulation of IRF3, readily observed in HCMV-infected 
cells, was absent from RhCMV-infected cells, whereas neither virus seemed to
activate NFkappaB. RhCMV also blocked IRF3 activation by live or UV-inactivated
HCMV, suggesting that RhCMV inhibits viral IRF3 activation and the resultant ISG 
induction with extraordinary efficiency. Since infection during inhibition of
protein expression by cycloheximide or inactivation of viral gene expression by
UV treatment did not trigger IRF3 activation or ISG expression by RhCMV, we
conclude that RhCMV virions contain a novel inhibitor of IFN-independent viral
induction of ISG expression by IRF3.

PMCID: PMC1091669
PMID: 15858025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Virol. 2005 May;79(10):6078-88.

Nuclear localization of the Nipah virus W protein allows for inhibition of both
virus- and toll-like receptor 3-triggered signaling pathways.

Shaw ML(1), Cardenas WB, Zamarin D, Palese P, Basler CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Box 1124, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One
Gustave L. Levy Pl., New York, NY 10029, USA. megan.shaw@mssm.edu

The Nipah virus V and W proteins, which are encoded by the P gene via RNA
editing, have a common N-terminal domain but unique C-terminal domains. They
localize to the cytoplasm and nucleus, respectively, and have both been shown to 
function as inhibitors of JAK/STAT signaling. Here we report that V and W
proteins also block virus activation of the beta interferon (IFN-beta) promoter
and the IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)-responsive IFN-stimulated gene 54
promoter. Surprisingly, only W protein shows strong inhibition of promoter
activation in response to stimulation of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) by
extracellular double-stranded RNA. This activity is dependent on the nuclear
localization of W protein. Within the unique C-terminal domain of W protein, we
have identified a nuclear localization signal (NLS) that requires basic residues 
at positions 439, 440, and 442. This NLS is responsible for mediating the
preferential interaction of W protein with karyopherin-alpha 3 and
karyopherin-alpha 4. Nuclear localization of W protein therefore enables it to
target both virus and TLR3 pathways, whereas the cytoplasmic V protein is
restricted to inhibiting the virus pathway. We propose that this discrepancy is
in part due to the V protein being less able to block signaling in response to
the kinase, TBK-1, whereas both V and W can prevent promoter activation in
response to IKKepsilon. We demonstrate that, when the TLR3 pathway is stimulated,
the levels of phosphorylated IRF3 are reduced in the presence of W protein but
not V protein, confirming the differential effects of these proteins and
illustrating that W protein-mediated inhibition is due to a loss of active IRF3.

PMCID: PMC1091709
PMID: 15857993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Virol. 2005 May;79(10):6043-51.

Constitutive activation of the transcription factor NF-kappaB results in impaired
borna disease virus replication.

Bourteele S(1), Oesterle K, Pleschka S, Unterstab G, Ehrhardt C, Wolff T, Ludwig 
S, Planz O.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Immunologie, Friedrich Loeffler Institut,
Bundesforschungsinstitut für Tiergesundheit, Paul Ehrlich Str. 28, 72076
Tübingen, Germany.

The inducible transcription factor NF-kappaB is commonly activated upon RNA virus
infection and is a key player in the induction and regulation of the innate
immune response. Borna disease virus (BDV) is a neurotropic negative-strand RNA
virus, which replicates in the nucleus of the infected cell and causes a
persistent infection that can lead to severe neurological disorders. To
investigate the activation and function of NF-kappaB in BDV-infected cells, we
stably transfected the highly susceptible neuronal guinea pig cell line CRL with 
a constitutively active (IKK EE) or dominant-negative (IKK KD) regulator of the
IKK/NF-kappaB signaling pathway. While BDV titers were not affected in cells with
impaired NF-kappaB signaling, the expression of an activated mutant of IkappaB
kinase (IKK) resulted in a strong reduction in the intracellular viral titer in
CRL cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and luciferase reporter gene
assays revealed that neither NF-kappaB nor interferon regulatory factors (IRFs)
were activated upon acute BDV infection of wild-type or vector-transfected CRL
cells. However, when IKK EE-transfected cells were used as target cells for BDV
infection, DNA binding to an IRF3/7-responsive DNA element was detectable. Since 
IRF3/7 is a key player in the antiviral interferon response, our data indicate
that enhanced NF-kappaB activity in the presence of BDV leads to the induction of
antiviral pathways resulting in reduced virus titers. Consistent with this
observation, the anti-BDV activity of NF-kappaB preferentially spread to areas of
the brains of infected rats where activated NF-kappaB was not detectable.

PMCID: PMC1091684
PMID: 15857990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Exp Med. 2005 May 2;201(9):1435-46. Epub 2005 Apr 25.

A type I interferon autocrine-paracrine loop is involved in Toll-like
receptor-induced interleukin-12p70 secretion by dendritic cells.

Gautier G(1), Humbert M, Deauvieau F, Scuiller M, Hiscott J, Bates EE, Trinchieri
G, Caux C, Garrone P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immunological Research, Schering-Plough, 69571 Dardilly,
France.

Dendritic cells (DC) produce interleukin-12 (IL-12) in response to Toll-like
receptor (TLR) activation. Two major TLR signaling pathways participate in the
response to pathogens: the nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)-dependent pathway
leading to inflammatory cytokine secretion including IL-12 and the interferon
(IFN)-dependent pathway inducing type I IFN and IFN-regulated genes. Here we show
that the two pathways cooperate and are likely both necessary for inducing an
optimal response to pathogens. R-848/Resiquimod (TLR7 ligand in the mouse and
TLR7/8 ligand in human) synergized with poly(I:C) (TLR3 ligand) or
lipopolysaccharide (LPS; TLR4 ligand) in inducing high levels of bioactive
IL-12p70 secretion and IFN-beta mRNA accumulation by mouse bone marrow-derived DC
(BM-DC). Strikingly, IL-12p70 but not IL-12p40 secretion was strongly reduced in 
BM-DC from STAT1(-/-) and IFNAR(-/-) mice. STAT1 tyrosine-phosphorylation,
IL-12p35, and IFN-beta mRNA accumulation were strongly inhibited in IFNAR(-/-)
BM-DC activated with the TLR ligand combinations. Similar observation were
obtained in human TLR8-expressing monocyte-derived DC (moDC) using neutralizing
anti-IFNAR2 antibodies, although results also pointed to a possible involvement
of IFN-lambda1 (also known as IL-29). This suggests that TLR engagement on DC
induces endogenous IFNs that further synergize with the NF-kappaB pathway for
optimal IL-12p70 secretion. Moreover, analysis of interferon regulatory factors
(IRF) regulation in moDC suggests a role for IRF7/8 in mediating IRF3-independent
type I IFN and possibly IL-12p35 synthesis in response to TLR7/8.

PMCID: PMC2213193
PMID: 15851485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Hepatology. 2005 May;41(5):1004-12.

Interaction between the HCV NS3 protein and the host TBK1 protein leads to
inhibition of cellular antiviral responses.

Otsuka M(1), Kato N, Moriyama M, Taniguchi H, Wang Y, Dharel N, Kawabe T, Omata
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

The persistent nature of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection suggests that HCV
encodes proteins that enable it to overcome host antiviral responses. Toll-like
receptor 3 (TLR3)-mediated signaling, which recognizes the double-stranded RNA
that is produced during viral replication and induces type I interferons,
including interferon beta (IFN-beta), is crucial to the host defense against
viruses. Recent studies suggest that a TIR domain-containing adaptor protein,
TRIF, and two protein kinases, TANK-binding kinase-1 (TBK1) and IkappaB
kinase-epsilon (IKKepsilon), play essential roles in TLR3-mediated IFN-beta
production through the activation of the transcriptional factor interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). We report that the HCV NS3 protein interacts
directly with TBK1, and that this binding results in the inhibition of the
association between TBK1 and IRF-3, which leads to the inhibition of IRF-3
activation. In conclusion, these results suggest the mechanisms of the inhibition
of the innate immune responses of HCV infection by NS3 protein.

PMID: 15841462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Mol Immunol. 2005 May;42(8):859-67. Epub 2005 Jan 6.

The role of Toll-like receptors in the host response to viruses.

Bowie AG(1), Haga IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland. agbowie@tcd.id

The discovery of Toll-like receptors (TLR) has revolutionised our understanding
of innate immunity. Numerous reviews have been written on the subject in the past
few years. Here, we review the evidence that TLRs are involved in sensing and
initiating anti-viral responses. There are now three strong lines of evidence
that support such a role for TLRs. Firstly, TLRs 'recognise' virally derived
molecules and are required for various virus-induced cellular effects. Secondly, 
TLRs trigger anti-viral signalling pathways leading to the induction of the
interferon response. Thirdly, viral immune strategies employed against TLRs have 
been identified.

PMID: 15829275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Virol. 2005 May;79(9):5353-62.

Effects of nonstructural proteins NS1 and NS2 of human respiratory syncytial
virus on interferon regulatory factor 3, NF-kappaB, and proinflammatory
cytokines.

Spann KM(1), Tran KC, Collins PL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, NIAID, Building 50, Room 6503, 50 South
Dr., MSC 8007, Bethesda, MD 20892-8007, USA.

Human respiratory syncytial virus (HRSV) is the leading cause of serious
pediatric acute respiratory tract infections, and a better understanding is
needed of the host response to HRSV and its attenuated vaccine derivatives. It
has been shown previously that HRSV nonstructural proteins 1 and 2 (NS1 and NS2) 
inhibit the induction of alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) in A549 cells and
human macrophages. Two principal transcription factors for the early IFN-beta and
-alpha1 response are interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and nuclear factor
kappaB (NF-kappaB). At early times postinfection, wild-type HRSV and the NS1/NS2 
deletion mutants were very similar in the ability to activate IRF-3. However,
once NS1 and NS2 were expressed significantly, they acted cooperatively to
suppress activation and nuclear translocation of IRF-3. Since these viruses
differed greatly in the induction of IFN-alpha/beta, NF-kappaB activation was
evaluated in Vero cells, which lack the structural genes for IFN-alpha/beta and
would preclude confounding effects of IFN-alpha/beta. This showed that deletion
of the NS2 gene sharply reduced the ability of HRSV to induce activation of
NF-kappaB. Since recombinant HRSVs from which the NS1 or NS2 genes have been
deleted are being developed as vaccine candidates, we investigated whether the
changes in activation of host transcription factors and increased IFN-alpha/beta 
production had an effect on the epithelial production of proinflammatory factors.
Viruses lacking NS1 and/or NS2 stimulated modestly lower production of RANTES
(Regulated on Activation Normal T-cell Expressed and Secreted), interleukin 8,
and tumor necrosis factor alpha compared to wild-type recombinant RSV, supporting
their use as attenuated vaccine candidates.

PMCID: PMC1082743
PMID: 15827150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Virol. 2005 May;79(9):5241-8.

Transcriptional activation of alpha/beta interferon genes: interference by
nonsegmented negative-strand RNA viruses.

Conzelmann KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max-von-Pettenkofer Institute and Gene Center, Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25, D-81377
Munich, Germany. conzelma@lmb.uni-muenchen.de

PMCID: PMC1082782
PMID: 15827138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Immunol. 2005 Apr 15;174(8):4942-52.

Apoptosis induced by the toll-like receptor adaptor TRIF is dependent on its
receptor interacting protein homotypic interaction motif.

Kaiser WJ(1), Offermann MK.

Author information: 
(1)Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

TLRs detect specific molecular features of microorganisms and subsequently engage
distinct signaling networks through the differential use of Toll/IL-1R
(TIR)-domain-containing adapter proteins. In this study, we investigated the
control of apoptosis by the TIR domain-containing adapter proteins MyD88,
TIR-domain containing adapter protein (TIRAP), TIR-domain-containing
adapter-inducing IFN-beta (TRIF), TRIF-related adapter molecule (TRAM), and
sterile alpha motifs and beta-catenin/armadillo repeats (SARM). Upon
overexpression, TRIF was the sole TIR-adapter to potently engage mammalian cell
death signaling pathways. TRIF-induced cell death required caspase activity
initiated by the Fas/Apo-1-associated DD protein-caspase-8 axis and was
unaffected by inhibitors of the intrinsic apoptotic machinery. The proapoptotic
potential of TRIF mapped to the C-terminal region that was found to harbor a
receptor interacting protein (RIP) homotypic interaction motif (RHIM). TRIF
physically interacted with the RHIM-containing proteins RIP1 and RIP3, and
deletion and mutational analyses revealed that the RHIM in TRIF was essential for
TRIF-induced apoptosis and contributed to TRIF-induced NF-kappa B activation. The
domain that was required for induction of apoptosis could activate NF-kappa B but
not IFN regulatory factor-3, yet the activation of NF-kappa B could be blocked by
superrepressor I kappa B alpha without blocking apoptosis. Thus, the ability of
TRIF to induce apoptosis was not dependent on its ability to activate either IFN 
regulatory factor-3 or NF-kappa B but was dependent on the presence of an intact 
RHIM. TRIF serves as an adaptor for both TLR3 and TLR4, receptors that are
activated by dsRNA and LPS, respectively. These molecular motifs are encountered 
during viral and bacterial infection, and the apoptosis that occurs when TRIF is 
engaged represents an important host defense to limit the spread of infection.

PMID: 15814722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(8):5027-34.

Characterization of the elements and proteins responsible for
interferon-stimulated gene induction by human cytomegalovirus.

Yang S(1), Netterwald J, Wang W, Zhu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical
School, 225 Warren St., Newark, NJ 07101-1709, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection of human fibroblast cells activates a
large number of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) in a viral envelope-cell
membrane fusion-dependent mechanism. In this study, we identified two interferon 
response elements, the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) and the
gamma interferon-activated site (GAS), which act as HCMV response sites (VRS).
Gel mobility shift assays showed that cellular proteins form specific and
identical complexes with ISRE and GAS elements, and the binding of these
complexes to ISRE and GAS is stimulated by HCMV infection. Point mutations in the
consensus sequences of ISRE and GAS completely abolished their activities in
response to HCMV-mediated transactivation, as well as their abilities to interact
with HCMV-activated VRS-binding proteins. Interferon regulatory factor 3 does not
appear to be present in the VRS-binding complexes or to be involved directly in
HCMV-mediated ISG activation. Using ProteinChip technology, four potential
proteins were identified, ranging from 20 to 42 kDa, in the VRS-binding
complexes. The data suggest that HCMV infection activates VRS-binding proteins,
which then bind to the VRS and stimulate ISG expression.

PMCID: PMC1069545
PMID: 15795288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):3969-78.

Inhibition of RIG-I-dependent signaling to the interferon pathway during
hepatitis C virus expression and restoration of signaling by IKKepsilon.

Breiman A(1), Grandvaux N, Lin R, Ottone C, Akira S, Yoneyama M, Fujita T,
Hiscott J, Meurs EF.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Hépacivirus, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Interferon (IFN) is one important effector of the innate immune response, induced
by different viral or bacterial components through Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-dependent and -independent mechanisms. As part of its pathogenic strategy, 
hepatitis C virus (HCV) interferes with the innate immune response and induction 
of IFN-beta via the HCV NS3/4A protease activity which inhibits phosphorylation
of IRF-3, a key transcriptional regulator of the IFN response. In the present
study, we demonstrate that inhibition by the protease occurs upstream of the
noncanonical IKK-related kinases IKKepsilon and TBK-1, which phosphorylate IRF-3,
through partial inhibition of the TLR adapter protein TRIF/TICAM1-dependent
pathway. Use of TRIF(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts however revealed the presence 
of a TRIF-independent pathway involved in IFN induction that was also inhibited
by NS3/4A. Importantly, we show that NS3/4A can strongly inhibit the ability of
the recently described RIG-I protein to activate IFN, suggesting that RIG-I is a 
key factor in the TRIF-independent, NS3/4A-sensitive pathway. Expression of IFN
signaling components including IKKepsilon, TBK-1, TRIF, and wild type or
constitutively active forms of RIG-I in the HCV replicon cells resulted in
IFN-beta promoter transactivation, with IKKepsilon displaying the highest
efficiency. Subsequently, overexpression of IKKepsilon resulted in 80% inhibition
of both the positive and negative replicative strands of the HCV replicon. The
partial restoration of the capacity of the host cell to transcribe IFN-beta
indicates that IKKepsilon expression is able to bypass the HCV-mediated
inhibition and restore the innate antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC1061556
PMID: 15767399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Virol. 2005 Apr;79(7):3920-9.

Analysis of genes induced by Sendai virus infection of mutant cell lines reveals 
essential roles of interferon regulatory factor 3, NF-kappaB, and interferon but 
not toll-like receptor 3.

Elco CP(1), Guenther JM, Williams BR, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Ave., Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Sendai virus (SeV) infection causes the transcriptional induction of many
cellular genes that are also induced by interferon (IFN) or double-stranded RNA
(dsRNA). We took advantage of various mutant cell lines to investigate the
putative roles of the components of the IFN and dsRNA signaling pathways in the
induction of those genes by SeV. Profiling the patterns of gene expression in
SeV-infected cells demonstrated that Toll-like receptor 3, although essential for
gene induction by dsRNA, was dispensable for gene induction by SeV. In contrast, 
Jak1, which mediates IFN signaling, was required for the induction of a small
subset of genes by SeV. NF-kappaB and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), the
two major transcription factors activated by virus infection, were essential for 
the induction of two sets of genes by SeV. As expected, some of the
IRF-3-dependent genes, such as ISG56, were more strongly induced by SeV in
IRF-3-overexpressing cells. Surprisingly, in those cells, a number of
NF-kappaB-dependent genes, such as the A20 gene, were induced poorly. Using a
series of cell lines expressing increasing levels of IRF-3, we demonstrated that 
the degree of induction of A20 mRNA, upon SeV infection, was inversely
proportional to the cellular level of IRF-3, whereas that of ISG56 mRNA was
directly proportional. Thus, IRF-3 can suppress the expression of
NF-kappaB-dependent genes in SeV-infected cells.

PMCID: PMC1061568
PMID: 15767394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Exp Med. 2005 Mar 21;201(6):1007-18. Epub 2005 Mar 14.

Vaccinia virus protein A46R targets multiple Toll-like-interleukin-1 receptor
adaptors and contributes to virulence.

Stack J(1), Haga IR, Schröder M, Bartlett NW, Maloney G, Reading PC, Fitzgerald
KA, Smith GL, Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland.

Viral immune evasion strategies target key aspects of the host antiviral
response. Recently, it has been recognized that Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have a
role in innate defense against viruses. Here, we define the function of the
vaccinia virus (VV) protein A46R and show it inhibits intracellular signalling by
a range of TLRs. TLR signalling is triggered by homotypic interactions between
the Toll-like-interleukin-1 resistance (TIR) domains of the receptors and adaptor
molecules. A46R contains a TIR domain and is the only viral TIR domain-containing
protein identified to date. We demonstrate that A46R targets the host TIR
adaptors myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88), MyD88 adaptor-like, TIR
domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta (TRIF), and the TRIF-related adaptor 
molecule and thereby interferes with downstream activation of mitogen-activated
protein kinases and nuclear factor kappaB. TRIF mediates activation of interferon
(IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and induction of IFN-beta by TLR3 and TLR4 and
suppresses VV replication in macrophages. Here, A46R disrupted TRIF-induced IRF3 
activation and induction of the TRIF-dependent gene regulated on activation,
normal T cell expressed and secreted. Furthermore, we show that A46R is
functionally distinct from another described VV TLR inhibitor, A52R. Importantly,
VV lacking the A46R gene was attenuated in a murine intranasal model,
demonstrating the importance of A46R for VV virulence.

PMCID: PMC2213104
PMID: 15767367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):18355-60. Epub 2005 Mar 10.

Role of cyclophilin B in activation of interferon regulatory factor-3.

Obata Y(1), Yamamoto K, Miyazaki M, Shimotohno K, Kohno S, Matsuyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Nagasaki University
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki, Japan.

IRF-3 is a member of the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) and plays a
principal role in the induction of interferon-beta (IFN-beta) by virus infection.
Virus infection results in the phosphorylation of IRF-3 by IkappaB kinase epsilon
and TANK-binding kinase 1, leading to its dimerization and association with the
coactivators CREB-binding protein/p300. The IRF-3 holocomplex translocates to the
nucleus, where it induces IFN-beta. In the present study, we examined the
molecular mechanism of IRF-3 activation. Using bacterial two-hybrid screening, we
isolated molecules that interact with IRF-3. One of these was cyclophilin B, a
member of the immunophilins with a cis-trans peptidyl-prolyl isomerase activity. 
A GST pull-down assay suggested that one of the autoinhibition domains of IRF-3
and the peptidyl-prolyl isomerase domain of cyclophilin B are required for the
binding. A knockdown of cyclophilin B expression by RNA interference resulted in 
the suppression of virus-induced IRF-3 phosphorylation, leading to the inhibition
of the subsequent dimerization, association with CREB-binding protein, binding to
the target DNA element, and induction of IFN-beta. These findings indicate that
cyclophilin B plays a critical role in IRF-3 activation.

PMID: 15764595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Immunol. 2005 Mar 15;174(6):3719-26.

The cytokine IL-1beta activates IFN response factor 3 in human fetal astrocytes
in culture.

Rivieccio MA(1), John GR, Song X, Suh HS, Zhao Y, Lee SC, Brosnan CF.

Author information: 
(1)Sue Golding Graduate Division, Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. mriviecc@aecom.yu.edu

The cytokine IL-1beta is a major activator of primary human fetal astrocytes in
culture, leading to the production of a wide range of cytokines and chemokines
important in the host defense against pathogens. IL-1beta, like TLR4, signals via
the MyD88/IL-1betaR-associated kinase-1 pathway linked to activation of NF-kappaB
and AP-1. Recent studies have shown that TLR4 also signals independently of
MyD88, resulting in the activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a
transcription factor required for the production of primary antiviral response
genes such as IFN-beta. Using a functional genomics approach, we observed that
IL-1beta induced in astrocytes a group of genes considered to be IFN-stimulated
genes (ISG), suggesting that IL-1beta may also signal via IRF3 in these cells. We
now show, using real-time PCR, that in astrocytes IL-1beta induces the expression
of IFN-beta, IRF7, CXCL10/IFN-gamma-inducible protein-10, and CCL5/RANTES.
Chemokine expression was confirmed by ELISA. We also show that IL-1beta induces
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF3 and delayed phosphorylation of 
STAT1. The dependency of IFN-beta, IRF7, and CXCL10/IFN-gamma-inducible
protein-10 gene expression on IRF3 was confirmed using a dominant negative
IRF3-expressing adenovirus. The robust induction by IL-1beta of additional ISG
noted on the microarrays, such as STAT1, 2'5'-oligoadenylate synthetase 2, and
ISG15, also supports an active signaling role for IL-1beta via this pathway in
human fetal astrocytes. These data are the first to show that IL-1beta, in
addition to TLRs, can stimulate IRF3, implicating this cytokine as an activator
of genes involved in innate antiviral responses in astrocytes.

PMID: 15749911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Uirusu. 2004 Dec;54(2):197-204.

[Mechanism of persistence in HCV infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Kohara M(1), Inoue K.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology of Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
3-18-22, Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613 Japan. mkohara@rinshoken.or.jp

One of the prominent features of hepatitis C virus (HCV) is persistent infection,
which is assumed to be a crucial event as a result of evading host defense
system. Type I interferon beta (IFN- beta) system is induced rapidly after viral 
infection and plays a central role in innate immunity. Upon immediate induction
of type I IFN as host first defense line, interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) 
is phosphorylated, formed of homodimer and translocates to nucleus. IFN-beta
induction due to new castle disease virus (NDV) was significantly decreasd after 
the expression of full HCV genome (HCR6-Rz). Similar modification was observed in
cell line expressing core to the NS2 protein region (HCR6-Fse). However, this
decreasing was not observed in cell line expressing NS2 to the NS5B region
(HCR6-Age). IRF-3 dimer formation induced by NDV infection was also suppressed
after the expression of HCR6-Rz and HCR6-Fse, but not HCR6-Age. We further
analyzed using transiently expressed HCV core, E1 or E2 in HepG2 cells. The
suppression of IRF-3 dimer formation was caused by HCV core protein alone. These 
results indicated that a new crucial biological function of HCV core protein that
may be related to persistence and pathogenesis of HCV.

PMID: 15745157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Uirusu. 2004 Dec;54(2):145-51.

[TLR family and viral infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Uematsu S(1), Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, 3-1 Yamadaoka, Suita, 565-0871, Japan. uemattsu@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

The immune system has been divided into innate and adaptive component, each of
which has different roles and functions in defending the organism against foreign
agents, such as bacteria and viruses. An important advance in our understanding
of early events in microbial recognition and subsequent development of immune
responses was the identification of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) as key molecules
of the innate immune systems. The family of TLRs in vertebrates detects conserved
structures found in a broad range of pathogens and triggers innate immune
responses. At present, 11 members of the TLR family have been identified. A
subset of TLRs recognize viral components and induce antiviral responses by
producing type I interferons. Recent accumulating evidence has clarified
signaling pathways triggered by TLRs in viral infection.

PMID: 15745151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):17671-7. Epub 2005 Mar 2.

Regulatory serine residues mediate phosphorylation-dependent and
phosphorylation-independent activation of interferon regulatory factor 7.

Caillaud A(1), Hovanessian AG, Levy DE, Marié IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Cellulaire, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris,
France.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)7 is a key transcription factor required for
establishment of antiviral resistance. In response to infection, IRF7 is
activated by phosphorylation through the action of the non-canonical IkappaB
kinases, IkappaB kinase-epsilon and TANK-binding kinase 1. Activation leads to
nuclear retention, DNA binding, and derepression of transactivation ability.
Clusters of serine residues located in the carboxyl-terminal regulatory domain of
IRF7 are putative targets of virus-activated kinases. However, the exact sites of
phosphorylation have not yet been established. Here, we report a comprehensive
structure-activity examination of potential IRF7 phosphorylation sites through
analysis of mutant proteins in which specific serine residues were altered to
alanine or aspartate. Phosphorylation patterns of these mutants were analyzed by 
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and their transcriptional activity was
monitored by reporter assays. Essential phosphorylation events were mapped to
amino acids 437-438 and a redundant set of sites at either amino acids 429-431 or
441. IRF7 recovered from infected cells was heterogeneously phosphorylated at
these sites, and greater phosphorylation correlated with increased
transactivation. Interestingly, a distinct serine cluster conserved in the
related protein IRF3 was also essential for IRF7 activation and distal
phosphorylation. However, the essential role of this motif did not appear to be
fulfilled by phosphorylation. Rather, these serine residues and an adjacent
leucine were required for phosphorylation at distal sites and may determine a
conformational element required for function.

PMCID: PMC1224706
PMID: 15743772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 15;102(11):4114-9. Epub 2005 Mar 1.

Rotavirus nonstructural protein 1 subverts innate immune response by inducing
degradation of IFN regulatory factor 3.

Barro M(1), Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a constitutively expressed protein localizing
largely to the cytoplasm, is a primary effector of the innate immune response.
Infection can trigger the phosphorylation, dimerization, and nuclear
translocation of IRF3, where the factor stimulates the expression and release of 
IFN. In this study, we determined that the rotavirus gene 5 product,
nonstructural protein 1 (NSP1), interacts with IRF3 in the infected cell. To
understand the importance of the interaction, we compared IRF3 activation by
rotaviruses expressing wild-type and C-truncated forms of NSP1. The analysis
showed that IRF3 underwent dimerization and nuclear translocation and stimulated 
IFN promoter activity in infected cells expressing truncated NSP1. In contrast,
infected cells expressing wild-type NSP1 were characterized by the rapid
degradation of IRF3 during the replication cycle, severe decreases in IRF3
dimerization and nuclear translocation, and lack of IFN promoter activity. The
implication of these results, that wild-type NSP1 is an antagonist of the
IFN-signaling pathway, was confirmed in transient expression assays, which showed
that wild-type NSP1, but not the C-truncated protein, induced the degradation of 
IRF3 fusion proteins. Related experiments indicated that NSP1 mediates IRF3
degradation through a proteasome-dependent pathway. The critical role of NSP1 in 
promoting cell-to-cell spread of rotavirus was demonstrated by using gene
5-specific short interfering RNAs in plaque assays. Although several viruses have
been described that subvert the innate immune response by preventing IRF3
activation, rotavirus is identified as one that accomplishes this task by
inducing the degradation of IRF3.

PMCID: PMC554789
PMID: 15741273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 22;102(8):2992-7. Epub 2005 Feb 14.

Immune evasion by hepatitis C virus NS3/4A protease-mediated cleavage of the
Toll-like receptor 3 adaptor protein TRIF.

Li K(1), Foy E, Ferreon JC, Nakamura M, Ferreon AC, Ikeda M, Ray SC, Gale M Jr,
Lemon SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Institute for Human Infections
and Immunity, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, TX 77555-1019, USA.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) bind pathogen-specific ligands early in infection,
initiating signaling pathways that lead to expression of multiple protective
cellular genes. Many viruses have evolved strategies that block the effector
mechanisms induced through these signaling pathways, but viral interference with 
critical proximal receptor interactions has not been described. We show here that
the NS3/4A serine protease of hepatitis C virus (HCV), a virus notorious for its 
ability to establish persistent intrahepatic infection, causes specific
proteolysis of Toll-IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor inducing IFN-beta
(TRIF or TICAM-1), an adaptor protein linking TLR3 to kinases responsible for
activating IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and NF-kappaB, transcription factors
controlling a multiplicity of antiviral defenses. NS3/4A-mediated cleavage of
TRIF reduces its abundance and inhibits polyI:C-activated signaling through the
TLR3 pathway before its bifurcation to IRF-3 and NF-kappaB. This uniquely broad
mechanism of immune evasion potentially limits expression of multiple host
defense genes, thereby promoting persistent infections with this medically
important virus.

PMCID: PMC548795
PMID: 15710891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Hepatol. 2005 Mar;42(3):431-3.

RIG-I: an essential regulator of virus-induced interferon production.

Heim MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Research,
University Hospital Basel, Petersgraben 4, CH 4031 Basel, Switzerland.
markus.heim@unibas.ch

PMID: 15710232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Virol. 2005 Mar;79(5):3174-8.

Interferon regulatory factor 3-independent double-stranded RNA-induced inhibition
of hepatitis C virus replicons in human embryonic kidney 293 cells.

Ali S(1), Kukolj G.

Author information: 
(1)Boehringer Ingelheim Canada Ltd. R&D, Biological Sciences, 2100 rue Cunard,
Laval, Quebec H7S 2G5, Canada.

The treatment of human embryonic kidney 293 cells harboring a hepatitis C virus
(HCV) subgenomic replicon with the double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) mimic poly(I . C) 
inhibits HCV RNA replication through an undefined mechanism. Interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF 3) has been widely postulated to mediate various
antiviral responses, and its role in mediating the response to dsRNA in 293 cells
was examined. Treating the cells with dsRNA did not induce IRF-3 activation, as
measured by nuclear localization or the induction of reporter genes. Moreover,
the expression of a dominant negative form of IRF-3 did not affect either colony 
formation upon transfection of subgenomic replicon RNA or the inhibition of the
HCV replicon by dsRNA. Our results suggest that the inhibition of HCV RNA
replication by poly(I . C) in 293 cells is independent of IRF-3 activation.

PMCID: PMC548449
PMID: 15709037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Virol. 2005 Mar;79(5):2788-96.

Establishment of a subgenomic replicon for bovine viral diarrhea virus in Huh-7
cells and modulation of interferon-regulated factor 3-mediated antiviral
response.

Horscroft N(1), Bellows D, Ansari I, Lai VC, Dempsey S, Liang D, Donis R, Zhong
W, Hong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Valeant Pharmaceuticals International, 3300 Hyland Ave., Costa Mesa, CA 92626,
USA.

We describe the development of a selectable, bi-cistronic subgenomic replicon for
bovine viral diarrhea virus (BVDV) in Huh-7 cells, similar to that established
for hepatitis C virus (HCV). The selection marker and reporter (Luc-Ubi-Neo) in
the BVDV replicon was fused with the amino-terminal protease N(pro), and
expression of the nonstructural proteins (NS3 to NS5B) was driven by an
encephalomyocarditis virus internal ribosome entry site. This BVDV replicon
allows us to compare RNA replication of these two related viruses in a similar
cellular background and to identify antiviral molecules specific for HCV RNA
replication. The BVDV replicon showed similar sensitivity as the HCV replicon to 
interferons (alpha, beta, and gamma) and 2'-beta-C-methyl ribonucleoside
inhibitors. Known nonnucleoside inhibitor molecules specific for either HCV or
BVDV can be easily distinguished by using the parallel replicon systems. The HCV 
replicon has been shown to block, via the NS3/4A serine protease, Sendai
virus-induced activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3), a key
antiviral signaling molecule. Similar suppression of IRF-3-mediated responses was
also observed with the Huh-7-BVDV replicon but was independent of NS3/4A protease
activity. Instead, the amino-terminal cysteine protease N(pro) of BVDV appears to
be, at least partly, responsible for suppressing IRF-3 activation induced by
Sendai virus infection. This result suggests that different viruses, including
those closely related, may have developed unique mechanisms for evading host
antiviral responses. The parallel BVDV and HCV replicon systems provide robust
counterscreens to distinguish viral specificity of small-molecule inhibitors of
viral replication and to study the interactions of the viral replication
machinery with the host cell innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC548457
PMID: 15708997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Virol. 2005 Mar;79(5):2689-99.

Regulating intracellular antiviral defense and permissiveness to hepatitis C
virus RNA replication through a cellular RNA helicase, RIG-I.

Sumpter R Jr(1), Loo YM, Foy E, Li K, Yoneyama M, Fujita T, Lemon SM, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9048, USA.

Virus-responsive signaling pathways that induce alpha/beta interferon production 
and engage intracellular immune defenses influence the outcome of many viral
infections. The processes that trigger these defenses and their effect upon host 
permissiveness for specific viral pathogens are not well understood. We show that
structured hepatitis C virus (HCV) genomic RNA activates interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3), thereby inducing interferon in cultured cells. This response is 
absent in cells selected for permissiveness for HCV RNA replication. Studies
including genetic complementation revealed that permissiveness is due to
mutational inactivation of RIG-I, an interferon-inducible cellular DExD/H box RNA
helicase. Its helicase domain binds HCV RNA and transduces the activation signal 
for IRF3 by its caspase recruiting domain homolog. RIG-I is thus a pathogen
receptor that regulates cellular permissiveness to HCV replication and, as an
interferon-responsive gene, may play a key role in interferon-based therapies for
the treatment of HCV infection.

PMCID: PMC548482
PMID: 15708988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):17005-12. Epub 2005 Jan 28.

The interferon regulatory factor, IRF5, is a central mediator of toll-like
receptor 7 signaling.

Schoenemeyer A(1), Barnes BJ, Mancl ME, Latz E, Goutagny N, Pitha PM, Fitzgerald 
KA, Golenbock DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are critical components of virus-induced
immune activation and type I interferon regulation. IRF3 and IRF7 are activated
in response to a variety of viruses or after engagement of Toll-like receptor
(TLR) 3 and TLR4 by double-stranded RNA and lipopolysaccharide, respectively. The
activation of IRF5, is much more restricted. Here we show that in contrast to
IRF3 and IRF7, IRF5 is not a target of the TLR3 signaling pathway but is
activated by TLR7 or TLR8 signaling. We also demonstrate that MyD88, interleukin 
1 receptor-associated kinase 1, and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor 6 are required for the activation of IRF5 and IRF7 in the TLR7 signaling
pathway. Moreover, ectopic expression of IRF5 enabled type I interferon
production in response to TLR7 signaling, whereas knockdown of IRF5 by small
interfering RNA reduced type I interferon induction in response to the TLR7
ligand, R-848. IRF5 and IRF7, therefore, emerge from these studies as critical
mediators of TLR7 signaling.

PMID: 15695821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12262-70. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

Regulation of the transcriptional activity of the IRF7 promoter by a pathway
independent of interferon signaling.

Ning S(1), Huye LE, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Genes containing an interferon (IFN)-stimulated response element (ISRE) can be
divided into two groups according to their inducibility by IFN and virus
infection: one induced only by IFN and the other induced by both IFN and virus
infection. Although it is now clear that IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a
multifunctional gene essential for induction of type I IFNs, regulation of the
IRF7 promoter (IRF7p) is poorly understood. The IRF7 gene includes two IFN
responsive elements, an IRF-binding element (IRFE) in the promoter region and an 
ISRE in the first intron, and is induced by the IFN-triggered Jak-STAT pathway by
binding of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) complex to the ISRE. In this 
study, we demonstrate that IRF3 and IRF7, which with the coactivators
CREB-binding protein and P300 form the virus-activated factor (VAF) complex upon 
Sendai virus infection, bind to the IRF7 ISRE and IRFE and can directly activate 
IRF7 transcription. Promoter reporter assays show that both the ISRE and IRFE are
responsive to activation by IRF7 and IRF3. In cells transiently expressing IRF7
or/and IRF3, the VAF level and binding of VAF are clearly increased after Sendai 
virus infection. Studies with Jak1 kinase inactive 293 cells that were stably
transfected with a Jak1 kinase dead dominant negative construct, and the mutant
cell lines SAN (IFNalpha-/beta-), U2A (IRF9-), U4A (Jak1-), and DKO (IRF1-/IRF2-)
show that the IRF7 transcription activated directly by VAF is distinct from and
independent of the IFN signaling pathway. Thus, IRF7 transcription is
autoregulated by binding of the IRF7-containing VAF to its own ISRE and IRFE. The
results show two distinct mechanisms for the activation of the IRF7 promoter, by 
IFN and by virus infection. A regulatory network between type I IFNs and IRF7 is 
proposed. The distinct pathways may reflect special roles for an efficient
antiviral response at different stages of virus infection.

PMID: 15664995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Mol Med (Berl). 2005 Apr;83(4):258-66. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

Modulation of Toll-interleukin 1 receptor mediated signaling.

Li X(1), Qin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. lix@ccf.org

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) belong to the Toll-interleukin 1 receptor superfamily,
which is defined by a common intracellular Toll-IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain. A
group of TIR domain containing adaptors (MyD88, TIRAP, TRIF and TRAM), are
differentially recruited to the Toll-IL-1 receptors, contributing to the
specificity of signaling. The IL-1 mediated signaling pathway serves as a
"prototype" for other family members. Genetic and biochemical studies reveal that
IL-1R uses adaptor molecule MyD88 to mediate a very complex pathway, involving a 
cascade of kinases organized by multiple adapter molecules into signaling
complexes, leading to activation of the transcription factor NFkappaB. Several
Toll-like receptors utilize variations of the "prototype" pathway by employing
different adaptor molecules. Double-stranded RNA triggered, TLR3-mediated
signaling is independent of MyD88, IRAK4, and IRAK. The adapter molecule TRIF is 
utilized by TLR3 to mediate the activation of NFkappaB and IRF3. LPS-induced,
TLR4-mediated signaling employs multiple TIR-domain containing adaptors,
MyD88/TIRAP to mediate NFkappaB activation, TRIF/TRAM for IRF3 activation. Recent
studies have also begun to unravel how these pathways are negatively regulated.
SIGIRR (also known as TIR8), a member of TIR superfamily that does not activate
the transcription factors NFkappaB and IRF3, instead negatively modulates
responses. Cells from SIGIRR-null mice show enhanced activation in response to
either IL-1 or certain Toll ligands. In addition to SIGIRR, several other
negative regulators have been shown to inhibit the TIR signaling, including ST2, 
IRAKM, MyD88s, SOCS1, and Triad3A. The coordinated positive and negative
regulation of the TIR signaling ensures the appropriate modulation of the innate 
and inflammatory responses.

PMID: 15662540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Immunol. 2005 Feb 1;174(3):1507-12.

A20 is a negative regulator of IFN regulatory factor 3 signaling.

Saitoh T(1), Yamamoto M, Miyagishi M, Taira K, Nakanishi M, Fujita T, Akira S,
Yamamoto N, Yamaoka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Tokyo.

IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) is a critical transcription factor that regulates
an establishment of innate immune status following detection of viral pathogens. 
Recent studies have revealed that two IkappaB kinase (IKK)-like kinases,
NF-kappaB-activating kinase/Traf family member-associated NF-kappaB
activator-binding kinase 1 and IKK-i/IKKepsilon, are responsible for activation
of IRF-3, but the regulatory mechanism of the IRF-3 signaling pathway has not
been fully understood. In this study, we report that IRF-3 activation is
suppressed by A20, which was initially identified as an inhibitor of apoptosis
and inducibly expressed by dsRNA. A20 physically interacts with
NF-kappaB-activating kinase/Traf family member-associated NF-kappaB
activator-binding kinase 1 and IKK-i/IKKepsilon, and inhibits dimerization of
IRF-3 following engagement of TLR3 by dsRNA or Newcastle disease virus infection,
leading to suppression of the IFN stimulation response element- and IFN-beta
promoter-dependent transcription. Importantly, knocking down of A20 expression by
RNA interference results in enhanced IRF-3-dependent transcription triggered by
the stimulation of TLR3 or virus infection. Our study thus demonstrates that A20 
is a candidate negative regulator of the signaling cascade to IRF-3 activation in
the innate antiviral response.

PMID: 15661910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2005 May;288(5):L988-96. Epub 2005 Jan 14.

3-nitrotyrosine attenuates respiratory syncytial virus infection in human
bronchial epithelial cell line.

Huang YC(1), Li Z, Brighton LE, Carson JL, Becker S, Soukup JM.

Author information: 
(1)National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, Office of
Research and Development, Environmental Protection Agency, Research Triangle
Park, NC, USA. huang.tony@epa.gov

3-nitrotyrosine (NO2Tyr), an L-tyrosine derivative during nitrative stress, can
substitute the COOH-terminal tyrosine of alpha-tubulin, posttranslationally
altering microtubular functions. Because infection of the cells by respiratory
syncytial virus (RSV) may require intact microtubules, we tested the hypothesis
that NO2Tyr would inhibit RSV infection and intracellular signaling via
nitrotyrosination of alpha-tubulin. A human bronchial epithelial cell line
(BEAS-2B) was incubated with RSV with or without NO2Tyr. The release of
chemokines and viral particles and activation of interferon regulatory factor-3
(IRF-3) were measured. Incubation with NO2Tyr increased nitrotyrosinated
alpha-tubulin, and NO2Tyr colocalized with microtubules. RSV-infected cells
released viral particles, RANTES, and IL-8 in a time- and dose-dependent manner, 
and intracellular RSV proteins coprecipitated with alpha-tubulin. NO2Tyr
attenuated the RSV-induced release of RANTES, IL-8, and viral particles by 50-90%
and decreased alpha-tubulin-associated RSV proteins. 3-chlorotyrosine, another
L-tyrosine derivative, had no effects. NO2Tyr also inhibited the RSV-induced
shift of the unphosphorylated form I of IRF-3 to the phosphorylated form II.
Pre-exposure of the cells to NO(2) (0.15 ppm, 4 h), which produced diffuse
protein tyrosine nitration, did not affect RSV-induced release of RANTES, IL-8,
or viral particles. NO2Tyr did not affect the potential of viral spreading to the
neighboring cells since the RSV titers were not decreased when the uninfected
cells were cocultured with the preinfected cells in NO2Tyr-containing medium.
These results indicate that NO2Tyr, by replacing the COOH-terminal tyrosine of
alpha-tubulin, attenuated RSV infection, and the inhibition appeared to occur at 
the early stages of RSV infection.

PMID: 15653711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 4;280(9):7477-86. Epub 2004 Dec 24.

Roles of an IkappaB kinase-related pathway in human cytomegalovirus-infected
vascular smooth muscle cells: a molecular link in pathogen-induced
proatherosclerotic conditions.

Gravel SP(1), Servant MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Montreal, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3J7, Canada.

Viral and bacterial pathogens have long been suspected to affect atherogenesis
directly. However, mechanisms linking innate immunity to chronic inflammatory
diseases such as atherosclerosis are still poorly defined. Here we show that
infection of primary human aortic smooth muscle cells (HAOSMC) with human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) leads to activation of the novel IkappaB kinase
(IKK)-related kinase, Tank-binding kinase-1 (TBK1), a major effector of the
cellular innate immune response. We demonstrate that part of the HCMV
inflammatory response is most likely mediated via this novel kinase because the
canonical IKK complex was only poorly activated upon infection of HAOSMC. An
increase in TBK1 phosphotransferase activity led to a strong activation of the
interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3 transcription factor as measured by its
C-terminal phosphorylation, dimerization, and DNA binding activity. In addition
to TBK1, HAOSMC also express another IKK-related kinase isoform, IKKepsilon,
albeit at a lower level. Nevertheless, both isoforms were required for full
activation of IRF-3 by HCMV. The transcripts of proatherosclerotic genes Ccl5
(encoding for the chemokine RANTES (regulated upon activation, normal T cell
expressed and secreted)) and Cxcl10 (encoding for the chemokine IP-10
(interferon-gamma-inducible protein 10)) were induced in an IRF-3-dependent
manner after HCMV infection of smooth muscle cells. In addition, cytokine arrays 
analysis showed that RANTES and IP-10 were the predominant chemokines present in 
the supernatant of HCMV-infected HAOSMC. Activation of the TBK1/IRF-3 pathway was
independent of epidermal growth factor receptor and pertussis toxin-sensitive G
protein-coupled receptor activation. Our results thus add additional molecular
clues to a possible role of HCMV as a modulator of atherogenesis through the
induction of a proinflammatory response that is, in part, dependent of an
IKK-related kinase pathway.

PMID: 15619605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Immunol. 2005 Jan 1;174(1):27-30.

Cutting Edge: NF-kappaB-activating kinase-associated protein 1 participates in
TLR3/Toll-IL-1 homology domain-containing adapter molecule-1-mediated IFN
regulatory factor 3 activation.

Sasai M(1), Oshiumi H, Matsumoto M, Inoue N, Fujita F, Nakanishi M, Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Molecular Biology, Osaka Medical Center for
Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan.

TLRs signal the presence of microbial patterns and activate transcription
factors. In TLR3 and TLR4, the adapter Toll-IL-1R homology domain-containing
adapter molecule (TICAM-1) (also called Toll/IL-1R domain-containing adapter
inducing IFN-beta (TRIF)) mediates IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) phosphorylation
followed by IFN-beta production. The regulatory subunit TNFR-associated factor
family member-associated NF-kappaB activator (TANK) couples with the kinase
complex IkappaB kinase-related kinase epsilon/NF-kappaB-activating kinase (NAK)
(TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1)) that involveTICAM-1-dependent IFN-beta induction. 
There are several TANK-homologous proteins. We tested whether TICAM-1 binds and
coprecipitates with TANK or its family proteins. The results are: 1) the TANK
family protein NAK-associated protein 1 (NAP1), but not TANK, coprecipitates
withTICAM-1; 2) NAP1 overexpression markedly enhances TBK1-mediated IFN-beta
promoter activation; 3) a dominant-negative form, NAP (158-270), suppresses IRF3 
activation in response to poly(I:C) or LPS; 4) RNA interference targeting of the 
NAP1 message results in a failure of poly(I:C)-mediated IRF3 polymerization and
IFN-beta production. Thus, NAP1 is the kinase subunit responsible for
TLR3/4-mediated IFN-beta induction in the TICAM-1 pathway.

PMID: 15611223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Immunol. 2004 Dec 15;173(12):7416-25.

IFN regulatory factor 3-dependent induction of type I IFNs by intracellular
bacteria is mediated by a TLR- and Nod2-independent mechanism.

Stockinger S(1), Reutterer B, Schaljo B, Schellack C, Brunner S, Materna T,
Yamamoto M, Akira S, Taniguchi T, Murray PJ, Müller M, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University Department at the Vienna Biocenter,
Department of Microbiology and Genetics, University of Vienna, Austria.

Like viruses, intracellular bacteria stimulate their host cells to produce type I
IFNs (IFN-alpha and IFN-beta). In our study, we investigated the signals and
molecules relevant for the synthesis of and response to IFN by mouse macrophages 
infected with Listeria monocytogenes. We report that IFN-beta is the critical
immediate-early IFN made during infection, because the synthesis of all other
type I IFN, expression of a subset of infection-induced genes, and the biological
response to type I IFN was lost upon IFN-beta deficiency. The induction of
IFN-beta mRNA and the IFN-beta-dependent sensitization of macrophages to
bacteria-induced death, in turn, was absolutely dependent upon the presence of
the transcription factor IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). IFN-beta synthesis and
signal transduction occurred in macrophages deficient for TLR or their adaptors
MyD88, TRIF, or TRAM. Expression of Nod2, a candidate receptor for intracellular 
bacteria, increased during infection, but the protein was not required for
Listeria-induced signal transduction to the Ifn-beta gene. Based on our data, we 
propose that IRF3 is a convergence point for signals derived from structurally
unrelated intracellular pathogens, and that L. monocytogenes stimulates a novel
TLR- and Nod2-independent pathway to target IRF3 and the type I IFN genes.

PMID: 15585867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Immunol. 2004 Dec 15;173(12):7115-9.

Cutting edge: TLR4 activation mediates liver ischemia/reperfusion inflammatory
response via IFN regulatory factor 3-dependent MyD88-independent pathway.

Zhai Y(1), Shen XD, O'Connell R, Gao F, Lassman C, Busuttil RW, Cheng G,
Kupiec-Weglinski JW.

Author information: 
(1)Dumont-UCLA Transplant Center, Division of Liver and Pancreas Transplantation,
Department of Surgery, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California,
Los Angeles, USA.

The triggering molecular mechanism of ischemia-reperfusion injury (IRI), which in
clinical settings results in excessive and detrimental inflammatory responses,
remains unclear. This study analyzes the role of the TLR system in an established
murine model of liver warm ischemia followed by reperfusion. By contrasting in
parallel TLR knockout mice with their wild-type counterparts, we found that TLR4,
but not TLR2, was specifically required in initiating the IRI cascade, as
manifested by liver function (serum alanine aminotransferase levels), pathology, 
and local induction of proinflammatory cytokines/chemokines (TNF-alpha, IL-6,
IFN-inducible protein 10). We then investigated the downstream signaling pathway 
of TLR4 activation. Our results show that IFN regulatory factor 3, but not MyD88,
mediated IRI-induced TLR4 activation leading to liver inflammation and
hepatocellular damage. This study documents the selective usage of TLR in a
clinically relevant noninfectious disease model, and identifies a triggering
molecular mechanism in the pathophysiology of liver IRI.

PMID: 15585830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Virology. 2005 Jan 5;331(1):63-72.

Thogoto virus ML protein suppresses IRF3 function.

Jennings S(1), Martínez-Sobrido L, García-Sastre A, Weber F, Kochs G.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene,
Universität Freiburg, D-79008 Freiburg, Germany.

The Thogoto virus (THOV) is a member of the family Orthomyxoviridae. It prevents 
induction of alpha/beta interferons (IFN) in cell culture and in vivo via the
action of the viral ML protein. Phenotypically, the effect of THOV ML resembles
that of the NS1 protein of influenza A virus (FLUAV) in that it blocks the
expression of IFN genes. IFN expression depends on IFN regulatory factor 3
(IRF3). Upon activation, IRF3 forms homodimers and accumulates in the nucleus
where it binds the transcriptional coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP). Here, 
we show that expression of ML blocked the transcriptional activity of IRF3 after 
stimulation by virus infection. Further biochemical analysis revealed that ML
acts by blocking IRF3 dimerization and association with CBP. Surprisingly,
however, ML did not interfere with the nuclear transport of IRF3. Thus, the
action of ML differs strikingly from that of FLUAV NS1 that prevents IFN
induction by retaining IRF3 in the cytoplasm.

PMID: 15582653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. J Immunol. 2004 Dec 1;173(11):6890-8.

Viral activation of macrophages through TLR-dependent and -independent pathways.

Malmgaard L(1), Melchjorsen J, Bowie AG, Mogensen SC, Paludan SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of Aarhus,
Aarhus, Denmark. lm@microbiology.au.dk

Induction of cytokine production is important for activation of an efficient host
defense response. Macrophages constitute an important source of cytokines. In
this study we have investigated the virus-cell interactions triggering induction 
of cytokine expression in macrophages during viral infections. We found that
viral entry and viral gene products produced inside the cell are responsible for 
activation of induction pathways leading to IFN-alphabeta expression, indicating 
that virus-cell interactions on the cell surface are not enough. Moreover, by the
use of cell lines expressing dominant negative versions of TLR-associated adaptor
proteins we demonstrate that Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor
inducing IFN-beta is dispensable for all virus-induced cytokine expression
examined. However, a cell line expressing dominant negative MyD88 revealed the
existence of distinct induction pathways because virus-induced expression of
RANTES and TNF-alpha was totally blocked in this cell line whereas IFN-alphabeta 
expression was much less affected in the absence of signaling via MyD88. In
support of this, we also found that inhibitory CpG motifs, which block TLR9
signaling inhibited early HSV-2-induced TNF-alpha and RANTES expression
dramatically whereas IFN-alphabeta induction was only slightly affected. This
suggests that virus activates macrophages through distinct pathways, of which
some are dependent on TLRs signaling through MyD88, whereas others seem to be
independent of TLR signaling. Finally we demonstrate that IFN-alphabeta induction
in HSV-2-infected macrophages requires a functional dsRNA-activated protein
kinase molecule because cells expressing a dsRNA-dependent protein kinase version
unable to bind dsRNA do not express IFN-alphabeta on infection.

PMID: 15557184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Nov;11(11):1028-30.

Another detour on the Toll road to the interferon antiviral response.

Hiscott J.

Comment on
    Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2004 Nov;11(11):1060-7.

PMID: 15523474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biochem Soc Trans. 2004 Dec;32(Pt 6):952-6.

RNA interference and double-stranded-RNA-activated pathways.

Sledz CA(1), Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

RNAi (RNA interference) has become a powerful tool to determine gene function.
Different methods of expressing the short ds (double-stranded) RNA intermediates 
required for interference in mammalian systems have been developed, including the
introduction of si (short interfering) RNAs by direct transfection or driven from
transfected plasmids or lentiviral vectors encoding sh (short hairpin) RNAs.
Although RNAi relies upon a high degree of specificity, recent findings suggest
that off-target non-specific effects can be encountered. We found that
transfection of siRNAs can results in an interferon-mediated activation of the
JAK/STAT (Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription) pathway 
and global up-regulation of interferon-stimulated genes. This effect is mediated 
in part by the dsRNA-dependent protein kinase PKR, as this kinase is activated by
the 21 bp siRNA, and is required in response to the siRNAs. However, the
transcription factor IRF3 (interferon-regulatory factor 3) is also activated by
siRNA as a primary response, resulting in the stimulation of genes independent of
an interferon response. In cells deficient in IRF3, this response is blunted, but
can be restored by re-introduction of IRF3. Thus siRNAs induce complex signalling
responses in target cells, leading to effects beyond the selective silencing of
specific genes.

PMID: 15506933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Nat Immunol. 2004 Dec;5(12):1266-74. Epub 2004 Oct 24.

Disruption of Erk-dependent type I interferon induction breaks the myxoma virus
species barrier.

Wang F(1), Ma Y, Barrett JW, Gao X, Loh J, Barton E, Virgin HW, McFadden G.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario N6G 2V4, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2004 Dec;5(12):1205-6.

Myxoma virus, a member of the poxvirus family, causes lethal infection only in
rabbits, but the mechanism underlying the strict myxoma virus species barrier is 
not known. Here we show that myxoma virus infection of primary mouse embryo
fibroblasts elicited extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) signaling, which
was integrated to interferon regulatory factor 3 activation and type I interferon
induction. We further show that Erk inactivation or disruption of interferon
signaling mediated by the transcription factor STAT1 broke the cellular blockade 
to myxoma virus multiplication. Moreover, STAT1 deficiency rendered mice highly
susceptible to lethal myxoma virus infection. Thus, the Erk-interferon-STAT1
signaling cascade elicited by myxoma virus in nonpermissive primary mouse embryo 
fibroblasts mediates an innate cellular barrier to poxvirus infection.

PMID: 15502830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Virol. 2004 Nov;78(21):11591-604.

Viral evolution and interferon resistance of hepatitis C virus RNA replication in
a cell culture model.

Sumpter R Jr(1), Wang C, Foy E, Loo YM, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75235-9048, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) replicates through an error-prone process that may
support the evolution of genetic variants resistant to the host cell antiviral
response and interferon (IFN)-based therapy. We evaluated HCV-IFN interactions
within a long-term culture system of Huh7 cell lines harboring different variants
of an HCV type 1b subgenomic RNA replicon that differed at only two sites within 
the NS5A-encoding region. A replicon with a K insertion at HCV codon 2040
replicated efficiently and exhibited sequence stability in the absence of host
antiviral pressure. In contrast, a replicon with an L2198S point mutation
replicated poorly and triggered a cellular response characterized by IFN-beta
production and low-level IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) expression. When maintained in
long term-culture, the L2198S RNA evolved into a stable high-passage (HP) variant
with six additional point mutations throughout the HCV protein-encoding region
that enhanced viral replication. The HP RNA transduced Huh7 cells with more than 
1,000-fold greater efficiency than its L2198S progenitor or the K2040 sequence.
Replication of the HP RNA resisted suppression by IFN-alpha treatment and was
associated with virus-directed reduction in host cell expression of ISG56, an
antagonist of HCV RNA translation. Accordingly, the HP RNA was retained within
polyribosome complexes in vivo that were refractory to IFN-induced disassembly.
These results identify ISG56 as a translational control effector of the host
response to HCV and provide direct evidence to link this response to viral
sequence evolution, ISG regulation, and selection of the IFN-resistant viral
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC523295
PMID: 15479800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Virol. 2004 Nov;78(21):11574-82.

The N- and C-terminal domains of the NS1 protein of influenza B virus can
independently inhibit IRF-3 and beta interferon promoter activation.

Donelan NR(1), Dauber B, Wang X, Basler CF, Wolff T, García-Sastre A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Box 1124, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1
Gustave L. Levy Pl., New York, NY 10029, USA.

The NS1 proteins of influenza A and B viruses (A/NS1 and B/NS1 proteins) have
only approximately 20% amino acid sequence identity. Nevertheless, these proteins
show several functional similarities, such as their ability to bind to the same
RNA targets and to inhibit the activation of protein kinase R in vitro. A
critical function of the A/NS1 protein is the inhibition of synthesis of
alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) during viral infection. Recently, it was
also found that the B/NS1 protein inhibits IFN-alpha/beta synthesis in
virus-infected cells. We have now found that the expression of the B/NS1 protein 
complements the growth of an influenza A virus with A/NS1 deleted. Expression of 
the full-length B/NS1 protein (281 amino acids), as well as either its N-terminal
RNA-binding domain (amino acids 1 to 93) or C-terminal domain (amino acids 94 to 
281), in the absence of any other influenza B virus proteins resulted in the
inhibition of IRF-3 nuclear translocation and IFN-beta promoter activation. A
mutational analysis of the truncated B/NS1(1-93) protein showed that RNA-binding 
activity correlated with IFN-beta promoter inhibition. In addition, a recombinant
influenza B virus with NS1 deleted induces higher levels of IRF-3 activation, as 
determined by its nuclear translocation, and of IFN-alpha/beta synthesis than
wild-type influenza B virus. Our results support the hypothesis that the NS1
protein of influenza B virus plays an important role in antagonizing the IRF-3-
and IFN-induced antiviral host responses to virus infection.

PMCID: PMC523269
PMID: 15479798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Virol. 2004 Oct;78(20):10995-1006.

Major human cytomegalovirus structural protein pp65 (ppUL83) prevents interferon 
response factor 3 activation in the interferon response.

Abate DA(1), Watanabe S, Mocarski ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, D 347 Fairchild Science Bldg.,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305-5124, USA.

We have identified a cytomegalovirus virion protein capable of modulating the
rapid induction of an interferon-like response in cells that follows virus
binding and penetration. Functional genomics revealed a role for the major
cytomegalovirus structural protein, pp65 (ppUL83), in counteracting this
response. The underlying mechanism involves a differential impact of this
structural protein on the regulation of interferon response factor 3 (IRF-3). In 
contrast, NF-kappaB is activated independent of pp65, and neither STAT1 nor STAT3
becomes activated by either virus. pp65 is sufficient to prevent the activation
of IRF-3 when introduced alone into cells. pp65 acts by inhibiting nuclear
accumulation of IRF-3 and is associated with a reduced IRF-3 phosphorylation
state. Thus, this investigation shows that the major structural protein of
cytomegalovirus is committed to the modulation of the IRF-3 response, a primary
mediator of the type I interferon response. By subverting IRF-3, the virus
escapes throwing a central alarm devoted to both immediate antiviral control and 
regulation of the immune response.

PMCID: PMC521853
PMID: 15452220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Uirusu. 2004 Jun;54(1):1-8.

[Toll-like receptors that sense viral infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Seya T(1), Shingai M, Matsumoto M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular
Diseases, Higashinari-ku, Osaka, 537-8511, Japan. seya-tu@med.hokudai.ac.jp

Anti-viral host defense harbors a variety of strategies to coup with viral
infection. Recent findings suggested that Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and their
signaling pathways involve type I IFN induction in response to virus-specific
molecular patterns. TLR 3 and TLR 4 in myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) recognize
viral dsRNA and putative viral products, respectively, to induce IFN-beta via
IRF-3 activation. On the other hand, TLR 7 and TLR 9 in plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs)
induce IFN-alpha in response to their ligands, U/G-rich ssRNA and non-methylated 
CpG DNA. We identified TICAM-1 which is recruited to the cytoplasmic domain
(designated TIR) of TLR 3 and allows to select the pathway to activation of
IRF-3. We also identified TICAM-2 which binds TLR 4 and together with TICAM-1
activates IRF-3. TICAM-1 knockdown by RNAi supported the key role of TICAM-1 in
IFN-beta induction. Hence, the IFN-beta induction in mDCs appears in part due to 
the function of TICAM-1. Viruses are known to activate kinases that directly
activate IRF-3 inside the cells, and this pathway may merge with the TLR
3-TICAM-1 pathway. Here we review the relationship between the TLR 3-TICAM-1
pathway and viral infection.

PMID: 15449898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Immunology. 2004 Oct;113(2):153-62.

Signal transduction by the lipopolysaccharide receptor, Toll-like receptor-4.

Pålsson-McDermott EM(1), O'Neill LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. palssone@tcd.ie

An understanding of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) signal transduction is a key goal in
the effort to provide a molecular basis for the lethal effect of LPS during
septic shock and point the way to novel therapies. Rapid progress in this field
during the last 6 years has resulted in the discovery of not only the receptor
for LPS - Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) - but also in a better appreciation of the 
complexity of the signalling pathways activated by LPS. Soon after the discovery 
of TLR4, the formation of a receptor complex in response to LPS, consisting of
dimerized TLR4 and MD-2, was described. Intracellular events following the
formation of this receptor complex depend on different sets of adapters. An early
response, which is dependent on MyD88 and MyD88-like adapter (Mal), leads to the 
activation of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB). A later response to LPS makes
use of TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-beta (TRIF) and
TRIF-related adapter molecule (TRAM), and leads to the late activation of
NF-kappaB and IRF3, and to the induction of cytokines, chemokines, and other
transcription factors. As LPS signal transduction is an area of intense research 
and rapid progress, this review is intended to sum up our present understanding
of the events following LPS binding to TLR4, and we also attempt to create a
model of the signalling pathways activated by LPS.

PMCID: PMC1782563
PMID: 15379975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Virol. 2003 Jul;77(14):7999-8008.

Bunyamwera virus nonstructural protein NSs counteracts interferon regulatory
factor 3-mediated induction of early cell death.

Kohl A(1), Clayton RF, Weber F, Bridgen A, Randall RE, Elliott RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Virology, Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences, University of
Glasgow, Glasgow G11 5JR, Scotland, United Kingdom.

The genome of Bunyamwera virus (BUN; family Bunyaviridae, genus Orthobunyavirus) 
consists of three segments of negative-sense RNA. The smallest segment, S,
encodes two proteins, the nonstructural protein NSs, which is nonessential for
viral replication and transcription, and the nucleocapsid protein N. Although a
precise role in the replication cycle has yet to be attributed to NSs, it has
been shown that NSs inhibits the induction of alpha/beta interferon, suggesting
that it plays a part in counteracting the host antiviral defense. A defense
mechanism to limit viral spread is programmed cell death by apoptosis. Here we
show that a recombinant BUN that does not express NSs (BUNdelNSs) induces
apoptotic cell death more rapidly than wild-type virus. Screening for apoptosis
pathways revealed that the proapoptotic transcription factor interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) was activated by both wild-type BUN and BUNdelNSs
infection, but only wild-type BUN was able to suppress signaling downstream of
IRF-3. Studies with a BUN minireplicon system showed that active replication
induced an IRF-3-dependent promoter, which was suppressed by the NSs protein. In 
a cell line (P2.1) defective in double-stranded RNA signaling due to low levels
of IRF-3, induction of apoptosis was similar for wild-type BUN and BUNdelNSs.
These data suggest that the BUN NSs protein can delay cell death in the early
stages of BUN infection by inhibiting IRF-3-mediated apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC161919
PMID: 12829839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Virol. 2003 Jul;77(14):7945-56.

The Ebola virus VP35 protein inhibits activation of interferon regulatory factor 
3.

Basler CF(1), Mikulasova A, Martinez-Sobrido L, Paragas J, Mühlberger E, Bray M, 
Klenk HD, Palese P, García-Sastre A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1 Gustave L. Levy 
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA. chris.basler@mssm.edu

The Ebola virus VP35 protein was previously found to act as an interferon (IFN)
antagonist which could complement growth of influenza delNS1 virus, a mutant
influenza virus lacking the influenza virus IFN antagonist protein, NS1. The
Ebola virus VP35 could also prevent the virus- or double-stranded RNA-mediated
transcriptional activation of both the beta IFN (IFN-beta) promoter and the
IFN-stimulated ISG54 promoter (C. Basler et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
97:12289-12294, 2000). We now show that VP35 inhibits virus infection-induced
transcriptional activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3)-responsive
mammalian promoters and that VP35 does not block signaling from the
IFN-alpha/beta receptor. The ability of VP35 to inhibit this virus-induced
transcription correlates with its ability to block activation of IRF-3, a
cellular transcription factor of central importance in initiating the host cell
IFN response. We demonstrate that VP35 blocks the Sendai virus-induced activation
of two promoters which can be directly activated by IRF-3, namely, the ISG54
promoter and the ISG56 promoter. Further, expression of VP35 prevents the
IRF-3-dependent activation of the IFN-alpha4 promoter in response to viral
infection. The inhibition of IRF-3 appears to occur through an inhibition of
IRF-3 phosphorylation. VP35 blocks virus-induced IRF-3 phosphorylation and
subsequent IRF-3 dimerization and nuclear translocation. Consistent with these
observations, Ebola virus infection of Vero cells activated neither transcription
from the ISG54 promoter nor nuclear accumulation of IRF-3. These data suggest
that in Ebola virus-infected cells, VP35 inhibits the induction of antiviral
genes, including the IFN-beta gene, by blocking IRF-3 activation.

PMCID: PMC161945
PMID: 12829834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jul 11;306(4):860-6.

Essential role of IRF-3 in lipopolysaccharide-induced interferon-beta gene
expression and endotoxin shock.

Sakaguchi S(1), Negishi H, Asagiri M, Nakajima C, Mizutani T, Takaoka A, Honda K,
Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Type I interferons (IFN-alpha/beta) affect many aspects of immune responses. Many
pathogen-associated molecules, including bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
virus-associated double-stranded RNA, induce IFN gene expression through
activation of distinct Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Although much has been studied
about the activation of the transcription factor IRF-3 and induction of IFN-beta 
gene by the LPS-mediated TLR4 signaling, definitive evidence is missing about the
actual role of IRF-3 in LPS responses in vitro and in vivo. Using IRF-3 deficient
mice, we show here that IRF-3 is indeed essential for the LPS-mediated IFN-beta
gene induction. Loss of IRF-3 also affects the expression of profile of other
cytokine/chemokine genes. We also provide evidence that the LPS/TLR4 signaling
activates IRF-7 to induce IFN-beta, if IRF-7 is induced by IFNs prior to LPS
simulation. Finally, the IRF-3-deficient mice show resistance to LPS-induced
endotoxin shock. These results place IRF-3 as a molecule central to LPS/TLR4
signaling.

PMID: 12821121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26589-96. Epub 2003 May 5.

The tumor suppressor interferon regulatory factor 1 interferes with SP1
activation to repress the human CDK2 promoter.

Xie RL(1), Gupta S, Miele A, Shiffman D, Stein JL, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Cell growth control by interferons (IFNs) involves up-regulation of the tumor
suppressor interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1). To exert its anti-proliferative
effects, this factor must ultimately control transcription of several key genes
that regulate cell cycle progression. Here we show that the G1/S phase-related
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) gene is a novel proliferation-related downstream
target of IRF1. We find that IRF1, but not IRF2, IRF3, or IRF7, selectively
represses CDK2 gene transcription in a dose- and time-dependent manner. We
delineate the IRF1-responsive repressor element between nt -68 to -31 of the CDK2
promoter. For comparison, the tumor suppressor p53 represses CDK2 promoter
activity independently of IRF1 through sequences upstream of nt -68, and the
CDP/cut/Cux1 homeodomain protein represses transcription down-stream of -31.
Thus, IRF1 repression represents one of three distinct mechanisms to attenuate
CDK2 levels. The -68/-31 segment lacks a canonical IRF responsive element but
contains a single SP1 binding site. Mutation of this element abrogates
SP1-dependent enhancement of CDK2 promoter activity as expected but also
abolishes IRF1-mediated repression. Forced elevation of SP1 levels increases
endogenous CDK2 levels, whereas IRF1 reduces both endogenous SP1 and CDK2 protein
levels. Hence, IRF1 represses CDK2 gene expression by interfering with
SP1-dependent transcriptional activation. Our findings establish a causal series 
of events that functionally connect the anti-proliferative effects of interferons
with the IRF1-dependent suppression of the CDK2 gene, which encodes a key
regulator of the G1/S phase transition.

PMID: 12732645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Nat Immunol. 2003 May;4(5):432-3.

Linking Toll-like receptors to IFN-alpha/beta expression.

Barton GM, Medzhitov R.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2003 May;4(5):491-6.

PMID: 12719735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Immunol. 2003 May 1;170(9):4465-74.

Activation with CpG-A and CpG-B oligonucleotides reveals two distinct regulatory 
pathways of type I IFN synthesis in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Kerkmann M(1), Rothenfusser S, Hornung V, Towarowski A, Wagner M, Sarris A, Giese
T, Endres S, Hartmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, University
of Munich, Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    J Immunol. 2003 Sep 15;171(6):2767.

Two different CpG oligonucleotides (ODN) were used to study the regulation of
type I IFN in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC): ODN 2216, a CpG-A ODN,
known to induce high amounts of IFN-alpha in PDC, and ODN 2006, a CpG-B ODN,
which is potent at stimulating B cells. CpG-A ODN showed higher and prolonged
kinetics of type I IFN production compared with that of CpG-B ODN. In contrast,
CpG-B ODN was more active than CpG-A ODN in stimulating IL-8 production and
increasing costimulatory and Ag-presenting molecules, suggesting that CpG-A and
CpG-B trigger distinct regulatory pathways in PDC. Indeed, CpG-A ODN, but not
CpG-B ODN, activated the type I IFNR-mediated autocrine feedback loop. PDC were
found to express high constitutive levels of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)7. IRF7
and STAT1, but not IRF3, were equally up-regulated by both CpG-A and CpG-B. CD40 
ligand synergistically increased CpG-B-induced IFN-alpha independent of the IFNR 
but did not affect CpG-B-induced IFN-beta. In conclusion, our studies provide
evidence for the existence of two distinct regulatory pathways of type I IFN
synthesis in human PDC, one dependent on and one independent of the IFNR-mediated
feedback loop. The alternate use of these pathways is based on the type of
stimulus rather than the quantity of IFN-alphabeta available to trigger the IFNR.
Constitutive expression of IRF7 and the ability to produce considerable amounts
of IFN-alpha independent of the IFNR seem to represent characteristic features of
PDC.

PMID: 12707322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Science. 2003 May 16;300(5622):1145-8. Epub 2003 Apr 17.

Regulation of interferon regulatory factor-3 by the hepatitis C virus serine
protease.

Foy E(1), Li K, Wang C, Sumpter R Jr, Ikeda M, Lemon SM, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9048, USA.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2004 Jan;40(1):184-6.
    Science. 2003 May 16;300(5622):1100-1.

Persistent infections with hepatitis C virus (HCV) are likely to depend on viral 
inhibition of host defenses. We show that the HCV NS3/4A serine protease blocks
the phosphorylation and effector action of interferon regulatory factor-3
(IRF-3), a key cellular antiviral signaling molecule. Disruption of NS3/4A
protease function by mutation or a ketoamide peptidomimetic inhibitor relieved
this blockade and restored IRF-3 phosphorylation after cellular challenge with an
unrelated virus. Furthermore, dominant-negative or constitutively active IRF-3
mutants, respectively, enhanced or suppressed HCV RNA replication in hepatoma
cells. Thus, the NS3/4A protease represents a dual therapeutic target, the
inhibition of which may both block viral replication and restore IRF-3 control of
HCV infection.

PMID: 12702807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Science. 2003 May 16;300(5622):1148-51. Epub 2003 Apr 17.

Triggering the interferon antiviral response through an IKK-related pathway.

Sharma S(1), tenOever BR, Grandvaux N, Zhou GP, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research-Jewish General Hospital, Departments
of Microbiology and Immunology and Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec 
H3T 1E2, Canada.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2004 Jan;40(1):184-6.
    Science. 2003 May 16;300(5622):1100-1.

Rapid induction of type I interferon expression, a central event in establishing 
the innate antiviral response, requires cooperative activation of numerous
transcription factors. Although signaling pathways that activate the
transcription factors nuclear factor kappaB and ATF-2/c-Jun have been well
characterized, activation of the interferon regulatory factors IRF-3 and IRF-7
has remained a critical missing link in understanding interferon signaling. We
report here that the IkappaB kinase (IKK)-related kinases IKKepsilon and
TANK-binding kinase 1 are components of the virus-activated kinase that
phosphorylate IRF-3 and IRF-7. These studies illustrate an essential role for an 
IKK-related kinase pathway in triggering the host antiviral response to viral
infection.

PMID: 12702806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Nat Immunol. 2003 May;4(5):491-6.

IKKepsilon and TBK1 are essential components of the IRF3 signaling pathway.

Fitzgerald KA(1), McWhirter SM, Faia KL, Rowe DC, Latz E, Golenbock DT, Coyle AJ,
Liao SM, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease & Immunology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2003 May;4(5):432-3.

The transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and NF-kappaB are
required for the expression of many genes involved in the innate immune response.
Viral infection, or the binding of double-stranded RNA to Toll-like receptor 3,
results in the coordinate activation of IRF3 and NF-kappaB. Activation of IRF3
requires signal-dependent phosphorylation, but little is known about the
signaling pathway or kinases involved. Here we report that the noncanonical
IkappaB kinase homologs, IkappaB kinase-epsilon (IKKepsilon) and TANK-binding
kinase-1 (TBK1), which were previously implicated in NF-kappaB activation, are
also essential components of the IRF3 signaling pathway. Thus, IKKepsilon and
TBK1 have a pivotal role in coordinating the activation of IRF3 and NF-kappaB in 
the innate immune response.

PMID: 12692549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Genomics. 2003 Mar;81(3):270-8.

The telomeric region of BTA18 containing a potential QTL region for health in
cattle exhibits high similarity to the HSA19q region in humans.

Brunner RM(1), Sanftleben H, Goldammer T, Kühn C, Weikard R, Kata SR, Womack JE, 
Schwerin M.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit for Molecular Biology, Research Institute for the Biology of
Farm Animals Dummerstorf, D-18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.

We have applied a targeted physical mapping approach, based on the isolation of
bovine region-specific large-insert clones using homologous human sequences and
chromosome microdissection, to enhance the physical gene map of the telomeric
region of BTA18 and to prove its evolutionary conservation. The latter is a
prerequisite to exploit the dense human gene map for future positional cloning
approaches. Partial sequencing and homology search were used to characterize 20
BACs targeted to the BTA18q2.4-q2.6 region. We used fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) to create physical maps of 11 BACs containing 15 gene loci; 
these BACs served as anchor loci. Using these approaches, 12 new gene loci (CKM, 
STK13, PSCD2, IRF3, VASP, ACTN4, ITPKC, CYP2B6, FOSB, DMPK, MIA, SIX5) were
assigned on BTA18 in the bovine cytogenetic map. A resolved physical map of
BTA18q2.4-q2.6 was developed, which encompasses 28 marker loci and a comparative 
cytogenetic map that contains 15 genes. The mapping results demonstrate the high 
evolutionary conservation between the telomeric region of BTA18q and HSA19q.

PMID: 12659811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Virology. 2003 Feb 1;306(1):51-9.

Modulation of interferon expression by hepatitis C virus NS5A protein and human
homeodomain protein PTX1.

Ghosh AK(1), Majumder M, Steele R, Ray R, Ray RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis Unoversity, St. Louis, MO 63104, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) NS5A protein transcriptionally modulates a number of
cellular genes. Since there is no evidence of binding of NS5A protein to DNA, it 
is likely to exert its activity in concert with cellular factor(s). In this
study, we have identified a specific interaction of HCV NS5A with homeodomain
protein PTX1 of human origin by a yeast two-hybrid interacting cloning system.
The authenticity of this interaction was verified by mammalian two-hybrid assay, 
in vivo co-immunoprecipitation analysis, and from a colocalization study.
Recently, murine PTX1 (mPTX1) has been shown to repress virus-induced murine
interferonA4 promoter activity. Interferon-à alone or together with ribavirin is 
the only available therapy for HCV-infected patients. Therefore, we examined
whether coexpression of NS5A and human PTX1 (hPTX1) proteins modulate human IFN-à
promoter activity. An in vitro reporter assay by transfection of HepG2 cells with
NS5A suggested an activation of IFN-à promoter to approximately 20-fold upon
Newcastle disease virus (NDV) infection. Under similar experimental conditions,
hPTX1-activated IFN-à prompter to approximately sevenfold, unlike mPTX1. However,
cotransfection of NS5A and hPTX1 displayed a lower interferon promoter activity, 
probably for physical association between these two proteins. Subsequent study
demonstrated that activation of IFN promoter by NS5A is associated with an
increased expression of IRF-3. Further analysis revealed that ectopic expression 
of NS5A in HepG2 cells enhances endogenous IFN-à secretion and MxA expression
upon induction with NDV. However, exogenous expression of hPTX1 did not
significantly alter NS5A-mediated function in the stable transfectants. Taken
together, these results suggested that the level of endogenous hPTX1 is not
sufficient to block the function of NS5A for augmentation of virus-mediated IFN
activity in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 12620797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Vaccine. 2003 Mar 28;21(13-14):1363-70.

Super-activated interferon-regulatory factors can enhance plasmid immunization.

Bramson JL(1), Dayball K, Hall JR, Millar JB, Miller M, Wan YH, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Center for Gene Therapeutics, 
McMaster University, 1200 Main Street West, Hamilton, Ont., Canada L8N 3Z5.
bramsonj@mcmaster.ca

We have been investigating the adjuvant properties of two super-activated
interferon-regulatory factors (IRFs), IRF-3(5D) and IRF7/3A, identified in our
previous studies of structure-function relationships, for enhancing plasmid
vaccines. Intramuscular injection of plasmid cocktails encoding IRF-3(5D) and
IRF7/3A molecules elicited cytotoxic T cell responses in over 80% of mice
following a single immunization compared to a 20% response-rate using a control
cocktail. Most interestingly, greater than 60% of mice immunized with the
super-activated IRFs developed antigen-specific antibodies compared to 0% of the 
mice in the control group. Finally, vaccines which incorporated the
super-activated IRFs provided greater protection against challenge with a
recombinant vaccinia virus. These results support further investigation of the
potential of these agents as adjuvants for genetic immunization.

PMID: 12615431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):15495-504. Epub 2003 Feb 25.

Interferon regulatory factor-7 synergizes with other transcription factors
through multiple interactions with p300/CBP coactivators.

Yang H(1), Lin CH, Ma G, Baffi MO, Wathelet MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0576, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-7 is activated in response to virus infection 
and stimulates the transcription of a set of cellular genes involved in host
antiviral defense. The mechanism by which IRF-7 is activated and cooperates with 
other transcription factors is not fully elucidated. Activation of IRF-7 results 
from a conformational change triggered by the virus-dependent phosphorylation of 
its C terminus. This conformational change leads to dimerization, nuclear
accumulation, DNA-binding, and transcriptional transactivation. Here we show that
activation of IRF-7, like that of IRF-3, is dependent on modifications of two
distinct sets of Ser/Thr residues. Moreover, we show that different
virus-inducible cis-acting elements display requirements for specific IRFs. In
particular, the virus-responsive element of the ISG15 gene promoter can be
activated by either IRF-3 or IRF-7 alone, whereas the P31 element of the
interferon-beta gene is robustly activated only when IRF-3, IRF-7, and the
p300/CBP coactivators are all present. Furthermore, we find that IRF-7 interacts 
with four distinct regions of p300/CBP. These interactions not only stimulate the
intrinsic transcriptional activity of IRF-7, but they are also indispensable for 
its ability to strongly synergize with other transcription factors, including
c-Jun and IRF-3.

PMID: 12604599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 25;278(17):15272-8. Epub 2003 Feb 10.

Oncogenic potential of a dominant negative mutant of interferon regulatory factor
3.

Kim TY(1), Lee KH, Chang S, Chung C, Lee HW, Yim J, Kim TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Taejon 305-701, Korea.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is activated in response to various
environmental stresses including viral infection and DNA-damaging agents.
However, the biological function of IRF3 in cell growth is not well understood.
We demonstrated that IRF3 markedly inhibited growth and colony formation of
cells. IRF3 blocked DNA synthesis and induced apoptosis. Based on this negative
control of cell growth by IRF3, we examined whether functional loss of IRF3 may
contribute to oncogenic transformation. IRF3 activity was specifically inhibited 
by expression of its dominant negative mutant. This mutant lacks a portion of the
DNA binding domain like IRF3a, an alternative splice form of IRF3 in the cells.
This dominant negative inhibition blocked expression of specific IRF3 target
genes. Mutant IRF3 efficiently transformed NIH3T3 cells, as demonstrated by
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar and tumorigenicity in nude mice. These 
results imply that IRF3 may function as a tumor suppressor and suggest a possible
role for the relative levels of IRF3 and its dominant negative mutant in
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 12582166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Nat Immunol. 2003 Feb;4(2):161-7. Epub 2003 Jan 21.

TICAM-1, an adaptor molecule that participates in Toll-like receptor 3-mediated
interferon-beta induction.

Oshiumi H(1), Matsumoto M, Funami K, Akazawa T, Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Osaka Medical Center for Cancer and Cardiovascular
Diseases, Higashinari-ku, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Feb;4(2):105-6.

Human Toll-like receptor (TLR) 3 recognizes double-stranded (ds) RNA and induces 
production of interferon (IFN)-beta independent of the adaptor molecules MyD88
and TIRAP. Thus, another adaptor must exist that preferentially mediates
TLR3-dependent production of IFN-beta. We have identified an alternative adaptor,
designated Toll-interleukin 1 receptor domain (TIR)-containing adaptor molecule
(TICAM)-1, that can physically bind the TIR domain of TLR3 and activate the
IFN-beta promoter in response to poly(I):poly(C). Thus, dsRNA-TLR3-dependent
production of IFN-beta is mediated mainly by TICAM-1. This TICAM-1-dependent
pathway may have a role in other TLR-IFN-beta pathways, which form part of the
MyD88-independent cellular immune response.

PMID: 12539043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 2003 Mar 14;278(11):9441-7. Epub 2003 Jan 10.

Identification of the minimal phosphoacceptor site required for in vivo
activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 in response to virus and
double-stranded RNA.

Servant MJ(1), Grandvaux N, tenOever BR, Duguay D, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research 
and the Departments of Microbiology & Immunology and Medicine, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec H3T 1E2, Canada.

The ubiquitously expressed latent interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3
transcription factor is activated in response to virus infection by
phosphorylation events that target a cluster of Ser/Thr residues,
(382)GGASSLENTVDLHISNSHPLSLTSDQY(408) at the C-terminal end of the protein. To
delineate the minimal phosphoacceptor sites required for IRF-3 activation,
several point mutations were generated and tested for transactivation potential
and cAMP-response element-binding protein-binding protein/p300 coactivator
association. Expression of the IRF-3 S396D mutant alone was sufficient to induce 
type I IFN beta, IFNalpha1, RANTES, and the interferon-stimulated gene 561
promoters. Using SDS-PAGE and immunoblotting with a novel phosphospecific
antibody, we show for the first time that, in vivo, IRF-3 is phosphorylated on
Ser(396) following Sendai virus infection, expression of viral nucleocapsid, and 
double-stranded RNA treatment. These results demonstrate that Ser(396) within the
C-terminal Ser/Thr cluster is targeted in vivo for phosphorylation following
virus infection and plays an essential role in IRF-3 activation. The inability of
the phosphospecific antibody to detect Ser(396) phosphorylation in
lipopolysaccharide-treated cells suggests that other major pathways may be
involved in IRF-3 activation following Toll-like receptor 4 stimulation.

PMID: 12524442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Virology. 2002 Nov 10;303(1):33-46.

The V proteins of simian virus 5 and other paramyxoviruses inhibit induction of
interferon-beta.

Poole E(1), He B, Lamb RA, Randall RE, Goodbourn S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, St. George's Hospital Medical
School, University of London, London, SW17 0RE, United Kingdom.

In this article we show that the paramyxovirus SV5 is a poor inducer of
interferon-beta (IFN-beta). This inefficient induction is a consequence of the
expression of an intact viral V protein. In the absence of the viral V protein
cysteine-rich C-terminal domain, IFN-beta mRNA is strongly induced and the
transcription factors NF-kappaB and IRF-3 are activated significantly. The V
protein can work in isolation from SV5 to block intracellular dsRNA signaling.
The mechanism of block to dsRNA signaling is distinct from that previously
observed for blocking IFN signaling in that proteolysis of candidate factors
cannot be detected, and furthermore, the respective blocks require distinct
protein domains. Blocking of the induction of IFN-beta by dsRNA requires the
C-terminal cysteine-rich domain, a feature that is highly conserved among
paramyxoviruses. We demonstrate that the V proteins from other paramyxoviruses
have equivalent functions and speculate that limiting the yield of IFN-beta
during infection may be a general property of paramyxoviruses.

PMID: 12482656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Virology. 2002 Nov 10;303(1):15-32.

Recovery of paramyxovirus simian virus 5 with a V protein lacking the conserved
cysteine-rich domain: the multifunctional V protein blocks both interferon-beta
induction and interferon signaling.

He B(1), Paterson RG, Stock N, Durbin JE, Durbin RK, Goodbourn S, Randall RE,
Lamb RA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, University of St. Andrews, Fife, KY16 9TS, Scotland, United
Kingdom.

The V protein of the Paramyxovirus simian virus 5 (SV5) is a multifunctional
protein containing an N-terminal 164 residue domain that is shared with the P
protein and a distinct C-terminal domain that is cysteine-rich and which is
highly conserved among Paramyxoviruses. We report the recovery from Vero cells
[interferon (IFN) nonproducing cells] of a recombinant SV5 (rSV5) that lacks the 
V protein C-terminal specific domain (rSV5VDeltaC). In Vero cells rSV5VDeltaC
forms large plaques and grows at a rate and titer similar to those of rSV5. In
BHK or CV-1 cells rSV5VDeltaC forms small plaques and grows poorly. However, even
when grown in Vero cells rSV5VDeltaC reverts to pseudo-wild-type virus in four to
five passages, indicating the importance of the V protein for successful
replication of SV5. Whereas rSV5 grows in many cell types with minimal cytopathic
effect (CPE), rSV5VDeltaC causes extensive CPE in the same cell types. To
overcome the antiviral state induced by IFN, many viruses have evolved mechanisms
to counteract the effects of IFN by blocking the production of IFN and abrogating
IFN signaling. Whereas rSV5 blocks IFN signaling by mediating the degradation of 
STAT1, rSV5VDeltaC does not cause the degradation of STAT1 and IFN signaling
occurs through formation of the ISGF3 transcription complex. Furthermore, we find
that rSV5 infection of cells prevents production of IFN-beta. The transcription
factor IRF-3 which is required for transcription of the IFN-beta gene is not
translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus in rSV5-infected cells. In
contrast, in rSV5VDeltaC-infected cells IRF-3 is localized predominantly in the
nucleus and IFN-beta is produced. By using ectopic expression of IRF-3, it was
shown that after dsRNA treatment and expression of the V protein IRF-3 remained
in the cytoplasm, whereas after dsRNA treatment and expression of the P protein
(which lacks the C-terminal cysteine-rich domain) IRF-3 was localized
predominantly in the nucleus. Thus, SV5 blocks two distinct pathways of the
innate immune response, both of which require the presence of the C-terminal
specific cysteine-rich domain of the multifunctional SV5 V protein.

PMID: 12482655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Blood. 2003 Apr 15;101(8):3058-64. Epub 2002 Dec 12.

Regulation of human beta 2-microglobulin transactivation in hematopoietic cells.

Gobin SJ(1), Biesta P, Van den Elsen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

beta(2)-Microglobulin (beta(2)m) is a chaperone of major histocompatibility
complex (MHC) class I (-like) molecules that play a central role in antigen
presentation, immunoglobulin transport, and iron metabolism. It is therefore of
importance that beta(2)m is adequately expressed in cells that perform these
functions, such as hematopoietic cells. In this study, we investigated the
transcriptional regulation of beta(2)m in lymphoid and myeloid cell lines through
a promoter containing a putative E box, Ets/interferon-stimulated response
element (ISRE), and kappa B site. Here we show that upstream stimulatory factor 1
(USF1) and USF2 bind to the E box and regulate beta(2)m transactivation. The
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappa B) subunits p50 and p65 bind to the kappa B box 
and p65 transactivates beta(2)m. Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1), IRF2,
IRF4, and IRF8, but not PU.1, bind to the Ets/ISRE, and IRF1 and IRF3 are strong 
transactivators of beta(2)m. Together, all 3 boxes are important for the
constitutive and cytokine-induced levels of beta(2)m expression in lymphoid and
myeloid cell types. As such, beta(2)m transactivation is under the control of
important transcriptional pathways, which are activated during injury, infection,
and inflammation.

PMID: 12480693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Eur J Biochem. 2002 Dec;269(24):6142-51.

Transcriptional activity of interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3 depends on
multiple protein-protein interactions.

Yang H(1), Lin CH, Ma G, Orr M, Baffi MO, Wathelet MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

Virus infection results in the activation of a set of cellular genes involved in 
host antiviral defense. IRF-3 has been identified as a critical transcription
factor in this process. The activation mechanism of IRF-3 is not fully
elucidated, yet it involves a conformational change triggered by the
virus-dependent phosphorylation of its C-terminus. This conformational change
leads to nuclear accumulation, DNA binding and transcriptional transactivation.
Here we show that two distinct sets of Ser/Thr residues of IRF-3, on
phosphorylation, synergize functionally to achieve maximal activation.
Remarkably, we find that activated IRF-3 lacks transcriptional activity, but
activates transcription entirely through the recruitment of the p300/CBP
coactivators. Moreover, we show that two separate domains of IRF-3 interact with 
several distinct regions of p300/CBP. Interference with any of these interactions
leads to a complete loss of transcriptional activity, suggesting that a bivalent 
interaction is essential for coactivator recruitment by IRF-3.

PMID: 12473110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Immunol. 2002 Dec 15;169(12):6668-72.

Cutting edge: a novel Toll/IL-1 receptor domain-containing adapter that
preferentially activates the IFN-beta promoter in the Toll-like receptor
signaling.

Yamamoto M(1), Sato S, Mori K, Hoshino K, Takeuchi O, Takeda K, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, and Solution Oriented Research for Science and Technology, Japan
Science and Technology Corporation, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2003 Feb;4(2):105-6.

MyD88 is a Toll/IL-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adapter common to signaling
pathways via Toll-like receptor (TLR) family. However, accumulating evidence
demonstrates the existence of a MyD88-independent pathway, which may explain
unique biological responses of individual TLRs, particularly TLR3 and TLR4. TIR
domain-containing adapter protein (TIRAP)/MyD88 adapter-like, a second adapter
harboring the TIR domain, is essential for MyD88-dependent TLR2 and TLR4
signaling pathways, but not for MyD88-independent pathways. Here, we identified a
novel TIR domain-containing molecule, named TIR domain-containing adapter
inducing IFN-beta (TRIF). As is the case in MyD88 and TIRAP, overexpression of
TRIF activated the NF-kappaB-dependent promoter. A dominant-negative form of TRIF
inhibited TLR2-, TLR4-, and TLR7-dependent NF-kappaB activation. Furthermore,
TRIF, but neither MyD88 nor TIRAP, activated the IFN-beta promoter.
Dominant-negative TRIF inhibited TLR3-dependent activation of both the
NF-kappaB-dependent and IFN-beta promoters. TRIF associated with TLR3 and IFN
regulatory factor 3. These findings suggest that TRIF is involved in the TLR
signaling, particularly in the MyD88-independent pathway.

PMID: 12471095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochimie. 2002 Jul;84(7):643-54.

Regulation of virus-induced interferon-A genes.

Civas A(1), Island ML, Génin P, Morin P, Navarro S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228, CNRS, Laboratoire de régulation transcriptionnelle et maladies
génétiques, UFR biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université Paris V, 45, rue des
Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris cedex 6, France. civas@biomedicale.univ-paris5.fr

Different members of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family are early
activated by viral infection of eukaryotic cells. The IRFs participate in the
virus-induced transcriptional regulation of different genes, including the
multigenic interferon-A (IFN-A) family, members of which are involved in the
establishment of an antiviral state, cell growth inhibition or apoptosis. This
study presents the recent progress in the field of virus-induced transactivation 
and repression of IFN-A gene promoters. Data presented on the modular
organization of IFN-A gene promoters and their transactivation dependent on IRF-3
and IRF-7 provide a new insight on the cooperativity mechanisms among the
different IRF family members. Data on the transcriptional repression of
virus-induced interferon-A promoters by the homeodomain protein Pitx1 contribute 
to our understanding of the complex differential transcriptional activation,
repression and antirepression of the IFN-A genes.

Copyright 2002 Société françcaise de biochimie et biologie moléculaire / Editions
scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS

PMID: 12453636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. J Immunol. 2002 Dec 1;169(11):6522-9.

Production of type I IFN sensitizes macrophages to cell death induced by Listeria
monocytogenes.

Stockinger S(1), Materna T, Stoiber D, Bayr L, Steinborn R, Kolbe T, Unger H,
Chakraborty T, Levy DE, Müller M, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Vienna Biocenter and University of Vienna, Institute of Microbiology and
Genetics, Austria.

Type I IFNs (IFN-alpha/beta) modulate innate immune responses. Here we show
activation of transcription factor IFN regulatory factor 3, the synthesis of
large amounts of IFN-beta mRNA, and type I IFN signal transduction in macrophages
infected with Listeria monocytogenes. Expression of the bacterial virulence
protein listeriolysin O was necessary, but not sufficient, for efficient IFN-beta
production. Signaling through a pathway involving the type I IFN receptor and
Stat1 sensitized macrophages to L. monocytogenes-induced cell death in a manner
not requiring inducible NO synthase (nitric oxide synthase 2) or protein kinase
R, potential effectors of type I IFN action during microbial infections. The data
stress the importance of type I IFN for the course of infections with
intracellular bacteria and suggest that factors other than listeriolysin O
contribute to macrophage death during Listeria infection.

PMID: 12444163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Nov;72(5):1011-9.

CpG-DNA-induced IFN-alpha production involves p38 MAPK-dependent STAT1
phosphorylation in human plasmacytoid dendritic cell precursors.

Takauji R(1), Iho S, Takatsuka H, Yamamoto S, Takahashi T, Kitagawa H, Iwasaki H,
Iida R, Yokochi T, Matsuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Fukui Medical University, Yochida-gun, Japan.

Human plasmacytoid or CD4(+)CD11c(-) type 2 dendritic cell precursors (PDC) were 
identified as natural type I interferon (IFN)-producing cells in response to
viral and bacterial infection. They represent effector cells of innate immunity
and link it to the distinct adaptive immunity by differentiating into mature DC. 
It has been reported that oligodeoxyribonucleotides containing unmethylated CpG
motifs (CpG DNA) stimulate PDC to produce IFN-alpha, but the molecular mechanisms
involved remain unknown. We found that CpG-DNA-induced IFN-alpha production in
PDC was completely impaired by the inhibitor of the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathway. Expression of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-7 was enhanced
by CpG-DNA treatment, which was preceded by the phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)1 on Tyr-701, as well as its
enhanced phosphorylation on Ser-727. All of these events were also suppressed by 
the p38 MAPK inhibitor. STAT1, STAT2, and IRF-9, components of IFN-stimulated
gene factor 3 (ISGF3), were recognized in the nuclear fraction of CpG-DNA-treated
cells. Neither anti-IFN-alpha/beta antibodies (Ab) nor anti-IFNAR Ab suppressed
STAT1 phosphorylation, enhancement of IRF-7 expression, or IFN-alpha production
in the early phase of the culture. These results suggest that CpG DNA induces p38
MAPK-dependent phosphorylation of STAT1 in a manner independent of
IFN-alpha/beta, which may cause ISGF3 formation to increase the transcription of 
the IRF-7 gene, thereby leading to IFN-alpha production in human PDC.

PMID: 12429724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Immunity. 2002 Sep;17(3):251-63.

IRF3 mediates a TLR3/TLR4-specific antiviral gene program.

Doyle S(1), Vaidya S, O'Connell R, Dadgostar H, Dempsey P, Wu T, Rao G, Sun R,
Haberland M, Modlin R, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

We have identified a subset of genes that is specifically induced by stimulation 
of TLR3 or TLR4 but not by TLR2 or TLR9. Further gene expression analyses
established that upregulation of several primary response genes was dependent on 
NF-kappaB, commonly activated by several TLRs, and interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF3), which was found to confer TLR3/TLR4 specificity. Also identified was a
group of secondary response genes which are part of an autocrine/paracrine loop
activated by the primary response gene product, interferon beta (IFNbeta).
Selective activation of the TLR3/TLR4-IRF3 pathway potently inhibited viral
replication. These results suggest that TLR3 and TLR4 have evolutionarily
diverged from other TLRs to activate IRF3, which mediates a specific gene program
responsible for innate antiviral responses.

PMID: 12354379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Oct;22(20):7120-33.

Repression by homeoprotein pitx1 of virus-induced interferon a promoters is
mediated by physical interaction and trans repression of IRF3 and IRF7.

Island ML(1), Mesplede T, Darracq N, Bandu MT, Christeff N, Djian P, Drouin J,
Navarro S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Régulation de la Transcription et Maladies Génétiques, CNRS,
UPR 2228, UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université René Descartes, 75270
Paris Cedex 06, France.

Interferon A (IFN-A) genes are differentially expressed after virus induction.
The differential expression of individual IFN-A genes is modulated by the
specific transcription activators IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF-7 and
the homeoprotein transcription repressor Pitx1. We now show that repression by
Pitx1 does not appear to be due to the recruitment of histone deacetylases. On
the other hand, Pitx1 inhibits the IRF3 and IRF7 transcriptional activity of the 
IFN-A11 and IFN-A5 promoters and interacts physically with IRF3 and IRF7. Pitx1
trans-repression activity maps to specific C-terminal domains, and the Pitx1
homeodomain is involved in physical interaction with IRF3 or IRF7. IRF3 is able
to bind to the antisilencer region of the IFN-A4 promoter, which overrides the
repressive activity of Pitx1. These results indicate that interaction between the
Pitx1 homeodomain and IRF3 or IRF7 and the ability of the Pitx1 C-terminal
repressor domains to block IFN-A11 and IFN-A5 but not IFN-A4 promoter activities 
may contribute to our understanding of the complex differential transcriptional
activation, repression, and antirepression of the IFN-A genes.

PMCID: PMC139826
PMID: 12242290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Cancer Res. 2002 Sep 15;62(18):5148-52.

In vivo interferon regulatory factor 3 tumor suppressor activity in B16 melanoma 
tumors.

Duguay D(1), Mercier F, Stagg J, Martineau D, Bramson J, Servant M, Lin R,
Galipeau J, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General
Hospital, 3755 Cote-Ste.-Catherine Road, Montreal, Quebec H3T-1E2, Canada.

Delivery of transcription factors to cancer cells to reprogram gene expression
may represent a novel strategy to augment the production of immune stimulatory
cytokines and trigger a more potent antitumor response. In the present study, a
bicistronic retroviral vector (AP2) was used to transduce B16-F0 melanoma cells
with IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3, which has been shown to activate type I IFN
genes (IFN-beta and IFN-alpha) as well as other cytokines. Gene-modified B16
melanoma cells were inoculated s.c. into C57BL/6 syngeneic mice. In animals
receiving IRF-3 B16 melanoma cells, tumors grew at a 4- to 5-fold reduced rate,
and tumors that developed from these mice had a moderate-to-dense infiltration of
inflammatory cells, whereas only low levels of lymphocyte infiltration were
observed in mock-transduced B16 tumors. Furthermore, tumor growth was not
inhibited in severe-combined immunodeficient mice after inoculation of
IRF-3-expressing B16 cells, which suggested that IRF-3-mediated antitumor
responses were dependent on a functional adaptive lymphocyte response.
Interestingly, these in vivo effects on tumor growth correlated with higher mRNA 
expression of chemokines such as MIP-1beta, RANTES, and IP-10, as well as
dramatic increases in vitro in the inducibility of cytokine mRNA such as
IFN-beta, TNF-alpha and interleukin 6. Our results demonstrate that with weakly
antigenic tumors such as B16 melanoma, IRF-3 gene transfer can mediate important 
antitumor responses. These findings suggest a novel role for IRF-3 as a potential
molecular target for gene therapy of cancer.

PMID: 12234977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochem Pharmacol. 2002 Sep;64(5-6):985-92.

Multiple signaling pathways leading to the activation of interferon regulatory
factor 3.

Servant MJ(1), Grandvaux N, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute-Jewish General
Hospital, McGill University, 3755 Cote Ste., Catherine Montreal, Que., Canada.

Virus infection of susceptible cells activates multiple signaling pathways that
orchestrate the activation of genes, such as cytokines, involved in the antiviral
and innate immune response. Among the kinases induced are the mitogen-activated
protein (MAP) kinases, Jun-amino terminal kinases (JNK) and p38, the IkappaB
kinase (IKK) and DNA-PK. In addition, virus infection also activates an
uncharacterized VAK responsible for the C-terminal phosphorylation and subsequent
activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). Virus-mediated activation
of IRF-3 through VAK is dependent on viral entry and transcription, since
replication deficient virus failed to induce IRF-3 activity. The pathways leading
to VAK activation are not well characterized, but IRF-3 appears to represent a
novel cellular detection pathway that recognizes viral nucleocapsid (N)
structure. Recently, the range of inducers responsible for IRF-3 activation has
increased. In addition to virus infection, recognition of bacterial infection
mediated through lipopolysaccharide by Toll-like receptor 4 has also been
reported. Furthermore, MAP kinase kinase kinase (MAP KKK)-related pathways and
DNA-PK induce N-terminal phosphorylation of IRF-3. This review summarizes recent 
observations in the identification of novel signaling pathways leading to IRF-3
activation.

PMID: 12213596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Sep 1;30(17):3754-66.

Genome-wide detection of tissue-specific alternative splicing in the human
transcriptome.

Xu Q(1), Modrek B, Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Institute and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1570, USA.

We have developed an automated method for discovering tissue-specific regulation 
of alternative splicing through a genome-wide analysis of expressed sequence tags
(ESTs). Using this approach, we have identified 667 tissue-specific alternative
splice forms of human genes. We validated our muscle-specific and brain-specific 
splice forms for known genes. A high fraction (8/10) were reported to have a
matching tissue specificity by independent studies in the published literature.
The number of tissue-specific alternative splice forms is highest in brain, while
eye-retina, muscle, skin, testis and lymph have the greatest enrichment of
tissue-specific splicing. Overall, 10-30% of human alternatively spliced genes in
our data show evidence of tissue-specific splice forms. Seventy-eight percent of 
our tissue-specific alternative splices appear to be novel discoveries. We
present bioinformatics analysis of several tissue-specific splice forms,
including automated protein isoform sequence and domain prediction, showing how
our data can provide valuable insights into gene function in different tissues.
For example, we have discovered a novel kidney-specific alternative splice form
of the WNK1 gene, which appears to specifically disrupt its N-terminal kinase
domain and may play a role in PHAII hypertension. Our database greatly expands
knowledge of tissue-specific alternative splicing and provides a comprehensive
dataset for investigating its functional roles and regulation in different human 
tissues.

PMCID: PMC137414
PMID: 12202761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Virol. 2002 Sep;76(18):9545-50.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 is a cellular partner of rotavirus NSP1.

Graff JW(1), Mitzel DN, Weisend CM, Flenniken ML, Hardy ME.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Molecular Biology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana
59717, USA.

The rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP1 is the least conserved protein in the
rotavirus genome, and its function in the replication cycle is not known. We
employed NSP1 as bait in the yeast two-hybrid interaction trap to identify
candidate cellular partners of NSP1 that may provide clues to its function.
Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) was identified as an NSP1 interactor. NSP1
synthesized in rotavirus-infected cells bound IRF-3 in a glutathione
S-transferase pull-down assay, indicating that the interaction was not unique to 
the two-hybrid system. NSP1 of murine rotavirus strain EW also interacted with
IRF-3. NSP1 deletion and point mutants were constructed to map domains important 
in the interaction between NSP1 and IRF-3. The data suggest that a binding domain
resides in the C terminus of NSP1 and that the N-terminal conserved zinc finger
is important but not sufficient to mediate binding to IRF-3. We predict that a
role for NSP1 in rotavirus-infected cells is to inhibit activation of IRF-3 and
diminish the cellular interferon response.

PMCID: PMC136439
PMID: 12186937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(16):5721-40.

Multiple regulatory domains of IRF-5 control activation, cellular localization,
and induction of chemokines that mediate recruitment of T lymphocytes.

Barnes BJ(1), Kellum MJ, Field AE, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family have been 
identified as critical mediators of early inflammatory gene transcription in
infected cells. We recently determined that, besides IRF-3 and IRF-7, IRF-5
serves as a direct transducer of virus-mediated signaling. In contrast to that
mediated by the other two IRFs, IRF-5-mediated activation is virus specific. We
show that, in addition to Newcastle disease virus (NDV) infection, vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) and herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection
activates IRF-5, leading to the induction of IFNA gene subtypes that are distinct
from subtypes induced by NDV. The IRF-5-mediated stimulation of inflammatory
genes is not limited to IFNA since in BJAB/IRF-5-expressing cells IRF-5
stimulates transcription of RANTES, macrophage inflammatory protein 1 beta,
monocyte chemotactic protein 1, interleukin-8, and I-309 genes in a
virus-specific manner. By transient- transfection assay, we identified
constitutive-activation (amino acids [aa] 410 to 489) and autoinhibitory (aa 490 
to 539) domains in the IRF-5 polypeptide. We identified functional nuclear
localization signals (NLS) in the amino and carboxyl termini of IRF-5 and showed 
that both of these NLS are sufficient for nuclear translocation and retention in 
infected cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that serine residues 477 and 480
play critical roles in the response to NDV infection. Mutation of these residues 
from serine to alanine dramatically decreased phosphorylation and resulted in a
substantial loss of IRF-5 transactivation in infected cells. Thus, this study
defines the regulatory phosphorylation sites that control the activity of IRF-5
in NDV-infected cells and provides further insight into the structure and
function of IRF-5. It also shows that the range of IRF-5 immunoregulatory target 
genes includes members of the cytokine and chemokine superfamilies.

PMCID: PMC133975
PMID: 12138184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. J Virol. 2002 Aug;76(16):7949-55.

Bunyamwera bunyavirus nonstructural protein NSs counteracts the induction of
alpha/beta interferon.

Weber F(1), Bridgen A, Fazakerley JK, Streitenfeld H, Kessler N, Randall RE,
Elliott RM.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene,
Universität Freiburg, Germany.

Production of alpha/beta interferons (IFN-alpha/beta) in response to viral
infection is one of the main defense mechanisms of the innate immune system. Many
viruses therefore encode factors that subvert the IFN system to enhance their
virulence. Bunyamwera virus (BUN) is the prototype of the Bunyaviridae family. By
using reverse genetics, we previously produced a recombinant virus lacking the
nonstructural protein NSs (BUNdelNSs) and showed that NSs is a nonessential gene 
product that contributes to viral pathogenesis. Here we demonstrate that
BUNdelNSs is a strong inducer of IFN-alpha/beta, whereas in cells infected with
the wild-type counterpart expressing NSs (wild-type BUN), neither IFN nor IFN
mRNA could be detected. IFN induction by BUNdelNSs correlated with activation of 
NF-kappaB and was dependent on virally produced double-stranded RNA and on the
IFN transcription factor IRF-3. Furthermore, both in cultured cells and in mice
lacking a functional IFN-alpha/beta system, BUNdelNSs replicated to wild-type BUN
levels, whereas in IFN-competent systems, wild-type BUN grew more efficiently.
These results suggest that BUN NSs is an IFN induction antagonist that blocks the
transcriptional activation of IFN-alpha/beta in order to increase the virulence
of Bunyamwera virus.

PMCID: PMC155133
PMID: 12133999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Trends Immunol. 2002 Jun;23(6):296-300.

Toll-like receptor signal transduction and the tailoring of innate immunity: a
role for Mal?

O'Neill LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Biochemistry, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland. laoneill@tcd.ie

Recent evidence suggests that there may be specificities in the signal
transduction pathways activated by different Toll-like receptors (TLRs), with
different sets of genes being induced by TLR-4 when compared with TLR-2. These
differences may be because of different signalling adapters, with MyD88 being
used by several TLRs, and the adapter MyD88-adapter-like (Mal) being recruited
specifically by TLR-4. The set of genes being induced may be tailored for the
subsequent elimination of the pathogen being recognized, as a result of
differences in signal transduction pathways activated by TLRs. These findings may
ultimately explain how dendritic cells control specific T-cell responses.

PMID: 12072368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. FEBS Lett. 2002 Apr 24;517(1-3):251-6.

Involvement of TIRAP/MAL in signaling for the activation of interferon regulatory
factor 3 by lipopolysaccharide.

Shinobu N(1), Iwamura T, Yoneyama M, Yamaguchi K, Suhara W, Fukuhara Y, Amano F, 
Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Infections of bacteria and viruses induce host defense reactions known as innate 
responses that include the production of cytokines and chemokines. The production
of type I interferon (IFN) is known to be induced by viral double-stranded (ds)
RNA or bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Although important functions for the
transcription factors NF-kappaB and interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) are
indicated, the molecular signals leading to the activation of IFN genes have yet 
to be elucidated. We provide several lines of evidence that LPS and dsRNA trigger
distinct intracellular signals upstream. Notably, our investigation revealed a
critical function for TIRAP/MAL, a signaling adapter for Toll-like receptor (TLR)
4, in LPS-induced but not dsRNA-induced activation of IRF-3. These results
highlight cross-talk between TLR-mediated and virus/dsRNA-induced signals
resulting in activation of the IFN system.

PMID: 12062447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Virol. 2002 Jul;76(13):6652-9.

Regulation of DNA-raised immune responses by cotransfected interferon regulatory 
factors.

Sasaki S(1), Amara RR, Yeow WS, Pitha PM, Robinson HL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Yerkes National Primate Research
Center and Vaccine Research Center, Emory University School of Medicine, 954
Gatewood Road, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1), IRF-3, and IRF-7 have been tested as
genetic adjuvants for influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) and nucleoprotein
vaccine DNAs. Cotransfection of HA with IRF-3 and IRF-7 increased CD4 T-cell
responses by 2- to 4-fold and CD8 T-cell responses by more than 10-fold.
Following intramuscular deliveries of DNA, both CD4 and CD8 T cells were biased
towards type 1 immune responses and the production of gamma interferon. Following
gene gun bombardments of DNA, both were biased towards type 2 immune responses
and the production of interleukin-4. The biases of the T-cell responses towards
type 1 or type 2 were stronger for immunizations with IRF-3 as an adjuvant than
for immunizations with IRF-7 as an adjuvant. Moderate adjuvant effects for
antibody were observed. The isotypes of the antibody responses reflected the
method of DNA delivery; intramuscular deliveries of DNA predominantly raised
immunoglobulin G2a (IgG2a), whereas gene gun deliveries of DNA predominantly
raised IgG1. These biases were enhanced by the codelivered IRFs. Overall, under
the conditions of our experiments, IRF-3 had good activity for T cells, IRF-7 had
good activity for both antibody and T cells, and IRF-1 had good activity for
antibody.

PMCID: PMC136278
PMID: 12050378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Virol. 2002 Jun;76(11):5532-9.

Transcriptional profiling of interferon regulatory factor 3 target genes: direct 
involvement in the regulation of interferon-stimulated genes.

Grandvaux N(1), Servant MJ, tenOever B, Sen GC, Balachandran S, Barber GN, Lin R,
Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1E2, Canada.

Ubiquitously expressed interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) is directly
activated after virus infection and functions as a key activator of the
immediate-early alpha/beta interferon (IFN) genes, as well as the RANTES
chemokine gene. In the present study, a tetracycline-inducible expression system 
expressing a constitutively active form of IRF-3 (IRF-3 5D) was combined with DNA
microarray analysis to identify target genes regulated by IRF-3. Changes in mRNA 
expression profiles of 8,556 genes were monitored after Tet-inducible expression 
of IRF-3 5D. Among the genes upregulated by IRF-3 were transcripts for several
known IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Subsequent analysis revealed that IRF-3
directly induced the expression of ISG56 in an IFN-independent manner through the
IFN-stimulated responsive elements (ISREs) of the ISG56 promoter. These results
demonstrate that, in addition to its role in the formation of a functional
immediate-early IFN-beta enhanceosome, IRF-3 is able to discriminate among
ISRE-containing genes involved in the establishment of the antiviral state as a
direct response to virus infection.

PMCID: PMC137057
PMID: 11991981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 30;99(9):6322-7. Epub 2002 Apr 23.

IRF-3-dependent, NFkappa B- and JNK-independent activation of the 561 and
IFN-beta genes in response to double-stranded RNA.

Peters KL(1), Smith HL, Stark GR, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland 
Clinic Foundation, 9500 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Double-stranded (ds) RNA induces transcription of the 561 gene by activating IFN 
regulatory factor (IRF) transcription factors, whereas similar induction of the
IFN-beta gene is thought to require additional activation of NFkappaB and AP-1.
In mutant P2.1 cells, dsRNA failed to activate NFkappaB, IRF-3, p38, or c-Jun
N-terminal kinase, and transcription of neither 561 mRNA nor IFN-beta mRNA was
induced. The defect in the IRF-3 pathway was traced to a low cellular level of
this protein because of its higher rate of degradation in P2.1 cells. As
anticipated, in several clonal derivatives of P2.1 cells expressing different
levels of transfected IRF-3, activation of IRF-3 and induction of 561 mRNA by
dsRNA was restored fully, although the defects in other responses to dsRNA
persisted. Surprisingly, IFN-beta mRNA also was induced strongly in these cells
in response to dsRNA, demonstrating that the activation of NFkappaB and AP-1 is
not required. This conclusion was confirmed in wild-type cells overexpressing
IRF-3 by blocking NFkappaB activation with the IkappaB superrepressor and AP-1
activation with a p38 inhibitor. Therefore, IRF-3 activation by dsRNA is
sufficient to induce the transcription of genes with simple promoters such as 561
as well as complex promoters such as IFN-beta.

PMCID: PMC122947
PMID: 11972054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Virol. 2002 May;76(10):5251-9.

Blockade of interferon induction and action by the E3L double-stranded RNA
binding proteins of vaccinia virus.

Xiang Y(1), Condit RC, Vijaysri S, Jacobs B, Williams BR, Silverman RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

The vaccinia virus E3L gene encodes two double-stranded RNA binding proteins that
promote viral growth and pathogenesis through suppression of innate immunity. To 
explore how E3L enables vaccinia virus to evade the interferon system, cells and 
mice deficient in the principal interferon-regulated antiviral enzymes, PKR and
RNase L, were infected with wild-type vaccinia virus and strains of vaccinia
virus from which E3L had been deleted (E3L-deleted strains). While wild-type
virus was unaffected by RNase L and PKR, virus lacking E3L replicated only in the
deficient cells. Nevertheless, E3L-deleted virus failed to replicate to high
titers or to cause significant morbidity or mortality in triply deficient mice
lacking RNase L, PKR, and Mx1. To investigate the underlying cause, we determined
the effect of E3L on interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a transcription
factor required for viral induction of subtypes of type I interferons. Results
showed that IRF3 activation and interferon-beta induction occurred after
infections with E3L-deleted virus but not with wild-type virus. These findings
demonstrate that E3L plays an essential role in the pathogenesis of vaccinia
virus by blocking the interferon system at multiple levels. Furthermore, our
results indicate the existence of an interferon-mediated antipoxvirus pathway
that operates independently of PKR, Mx1, or the 2-5A/RNase L system.

PMCID: PMC136119
PMID: 11967338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Viral Immunol. 2002;15(1):29-40.

Activation of the interferon-beta promoter during hepatitis C virus RNA
replication.

Fredericksen B(1), Akkaraju GR, Foy E, Wang C, Pflugheber J, Chen ZJ, Gale M Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas 75390-9048, USA.

In this study we examined the impact of hepatitis C virus (HCV) RNA replication
on the innate antiviral response of the host cell. Replication of an HCV
subgenomic replicon stimulated the activation of the interferon (IFN)-beta
promoter and the production of IFN in human hepatoma cells. Using a variety of
functional assays, we found that HCV RNA replication induced the activation and
DNA-binding activity of NFkappaB and interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1. In
addition, microscopy experiments revealed a higher frequency of cells containing 
the nuclear-localized, active form of IRF-3 in HCV replicon cultures versus
control cultures. Consistent with these observations, cells harboring the HCV
replicon exhibited high basal level expression of a subset of IFN-stimulated
antiviral genes. Our results indicate that HCV RNA replication can stimulate
cellular antiviral programs that contribute to the assembly and activation of the
IFN-beta enhanceosome complex and initiation of the antiviral state. Stable HCV
RNA replication in the face of the host antiviral response suggests that HCV may 
encode one or more proteins capable of overcoming specific antiviral processes,
thereby supporting persistent infection.

PMID: 11952144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Viral Immunol. 2002;15(1):17-28.

The role of interferon regulatory factors in the cardiac response to viral
infection.

Sherry B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Pathology and Parasitology, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh 27606, USA.
Barbarasherry@ncsu.edu

Reovirus-induced murine myocarditis provides an excellent model for the human
disease. Cardiac tissue damage varies between reovirus strains, and is caused by 
a direct viral cytopathogenic effect. One determinant of virus-induced cardiac
tissue damage is the cardiac interferon-beta (IFN-beta) response to viral
infection. Nonmyocarditic reoviruses induce more IFN-beta and/or are more
sensitive to the antiviral effects of IFN-beta in cardiac cells than myocarditis 
reoviruses. The roles of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) in the cardiac
response to viral infection are reviewed, and results suggest possible
cardiac-specific variations in IRF-3 and IRF-1 function. In addition, data are
presented indicating that the role of IRF-2 in regulation of IFN-beta expression 
is cell type-specific and differs between skeletal and cardiac muscle cells.
Together, results suggest that the heart may provide a unique environment for IRF
function, critical for protection against virus-induced cardiac damage.

PMID: 11952139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 21;277(25):22304-13. Epub 2002 Apr 8.

Direct involvement of CREB-binding protein/p300 in sequence-specific DNA binding 
of virus-activated interferon regulatory factor-3 holocomplex.

Suhara W(1), Yoneyama M, Kitabayashi I, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical
Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

Infections of bacteria and viruses induce host defense reactions known as innate 
responses including the activation of interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3),
critical for the activation of type I interferon system. Upon immediate early
signals triggered by the infection, IRF-3 is phosphorylated and a homodimer
results. The homodimer complexes with the coactivator CREB-binding protein
(CBP)/p300 in the nucleus; thus, holocomplex of IRF-3 competent in DNA binding is
generated. We showed CBP/p300 to be indispensable for the DNA binding activity of
the holocomplex and to aid the binding through direct interaction with the DNA.
We demonstrated that p300 binds with the IRF-3 homodimer via a Q-rich domain and 
that an intact histone acetyltransferase (HAT) domain is indispensable for the
DNA binding of the holocomplex along with a CH3 domain, which connects the HAT
and Q-rich domains. These results highlight a novel function of CBP/p300: direct 
involvement in sequence-specific DNA binding. Furthermore, the critical function 
of these domains in virus-induced gene activation was demonstrated in vivo by
using p300 mutants.

PMID: 11940575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Virol. 2002 Apr;76(8):3659-69.

Recognition of the measles virus nucleocapsid as a mechanism of IRF-3 activation.

tenOever BR(1), Servant MJ, Grandvaux N, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2.

Erratum in
    J Virol 2002 Jun;76(12):6413.

The mechanisms of cellular recognition for virus infection remain poorly
understood despite the wealth of information regarding the signaling events and
transcriptional responses that ensue. Host cells respond to viral infection
through the activation of multiple signaling cascades, including the activation
of NF-kappaB, c-Jun/ATF-2 (AP-1), and the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs).
Although viral products such as double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) and the processes of 
viral binding and fusion have been implicated in the activation of NF-kappaB and 
AP-1, the mechanism(s) of IRF-1, IRF-3, and IRF-7 activation has yet to be fully 
elucidated. Using recombinant measles virus (MeV) constructs, we now demonstrate 
that phosphorylation-dependent IRF-3 activation represents a novel cellular
detection system that recognizes the MeV nucleocapsid structure. At low
multiplicities of infection, IRF-3 activation is dependent on viral
transcription, since UV cross-linking and a deficient MeV containing a truncated 
polymerase L gene failed to induce IRF-3 phosphorylation. Expression of the MeV
nucleocapsid (N) protein, without the requirement for any additional viral
proteins or the generation of dsRNA, was sufficient for IRF-3 activation. In
addition, the nucleocapsid protein was found to associate with both IRF-3 and the
IRF-3 virus-activated kinase, suggesting that it may aid in the colocalization of
the kinase and the substrate. Altogether, this study suggests that IRF-3
recognizes nucleocapsid structures during the course of an MeV infection and
triggers the induction of interferon production.

PMCID: PMC136070
PMID: 11907205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Mol Biol. 2002 Mar 8;316(5):1009-22.

Preferential binding sites for interferon regulatory factors 3 and 7 involved in 
interferon-A gene transcription.

Morin P(1), Bragança J, Bandu MT, Lin R, Hiscott J, Doly J, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228-CNRS, Laboratoire de Régulation Transcriptionnelle et Maladies
Génétiques, UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université Paris V, 45 rue des
Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Transcription of the murine interferon-A4 (IFN-A4) gene is mediated by a virus
responsive element (VRE-A4) located in the promoter proximal [-120 to -43]
region. VRE-A4 contains four DNA modules (A to D) which cooperate for maximal
IFN-A4 activation following virus infection. The differential expression between 
the highly expressed IFN-A4 and the weakly inducible IFN-A11 gene promoters is
essentially due to point mutations within the C and D modules of the
virus-responsive element VRE-A11. We now demonstrate that in murine L929 and
human 293 cells, transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7, which are potent
activators of virus-induced type I IFN transcription, differentially affect
IFN-A4 and IFN-A11 promoter activities. Using electrophoretic mobility shift
assays and DNase I footprinting data, our studies demonstrate that the AB modules
correspond to a preferential site for IRF-7, whereas the C module is
preferentially recognized by IRF-3. Furthermore, transfection of reporter
constructs driven by four copies of different GAAANN hexameric motifs found
within VRE-A4 indicates that the NN residues of these hexameric sequences define 
the preferential binding sites for IRF-3 or IRF-7. Together, these experiments
clarify the molecular basis for differential expression of IFN-A genes following 
virus infection by delineating the sequence requirements for IRF association with
the virus responsive elements of the IFN-A genes.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 11884139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 5;99(5):2818-23. Epub 2002 Feb 26.

Interferon regulatory factor-3 is an in vivo target of DNA-PK.

Karpova AY(1), Trost M, Murray JM, Cantley LC, Howley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Eukaryotic cells have evolved complex signaling networks to sense environmental
stress and to repair stress-induced damage. IFN regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) is a 
transcription factor that plays a central role in the host response to viral
infection. Although the main activity of IRF-3 characterized to date has been its
role in the induction of IFN-alpha and -beta after virus infection, recent
evidence indicates additional roles for IRF-3 in the response to DNA damage and
in virus-induced apoptosis. Here we identify IRF-3 as the first in vivo target
for DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK). Phosphorylation of IRF-3 by DNA-PK
after virus infection results in its nuclear retention and delayed proteolysis.
These results expand the known roles of DNA-PK and provide a functional link
between the cellular machineries that regulate the innate immune response and
that sense and respond to DNA damage. As such this study contributes to a more
integrated view of the cellular responses to various cellular stress signals.

PMCID: PMC122431
PMID: 11867762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 26;277(17):14703-11. Epub 2002 Feb 19.

Lipopolysaccharide activates the expression of ISG15-specific protease UBP43 via 
interferon regulatory factor 3.

Malakhova O(1), Malakhov M, Hetherington C, Zhang DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

UBP43 is a protease that specifically removes a ubiquitin-like protein, ISG15,
from its targets. Highest levels of UBP43 expression are detected in macrophages 
and in cell lines of monocytic lineage. Macrophages are important in host defense
against bacterial and viral infections. The lipopolysaccharide (LPS) of the
bacterial cell wall can mimic bacteria and activate monocytes/macrophages to
provoke inflammatory responses. Here, we report that LPS strongly activates UBP43
expression in macrophages, which is paralleled by changes in UBP43 protein
levels. Two interferon regulatory factor (IRF) binding sites in the UBP43
promoter are responsible for the induction of UBP43 expression by LPS, as well as
for basal UBP43 promoter activity. We have identified two members of the IRF
family (IRF-2 and IRF-3) that specifically bind to these sites. IRF-3 plays a
primary role in the LPS-inducible activation of the UBP43 gene and IRF-2 confers 
a basal transcriptional activity to the UBP43 promoter. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that LPS treatment increases the amount of ISG15-conjugates in
macrophages. Coordinated induction of ISG15 and UBP43 suggests that ISG15
conjugation is a dynamic process and that a critical balance of
ISG15-modification should be maintained during innate immune response.

PMID: 11854279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):103-9.

Nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of IRFs in response to viral infection or
interferon stimulation.

Reich NC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony
Brook, NY 11794, USA. nreich@notes.cc.sunysb.edu

Members of the interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRFs) family of transcription 
factors play diverse roles in immunity and cellular response to viral infections.
Their biologic effects result from their ability to regulate either constitutive,
inducible, or tissue-specific gene expression. All characterized IRFs contain
nuclear localization signals that allow their translocation to the nucleus.
However, certain IRFs reside in a latent state in the cytoplasm of the cell and
only redistribute to the nucleus following an activating trigger. IRF-3 and IRF-9
are examples of IRFs that are regulated by cellular redistribution. These IRFs
use distinct mechanisms that regulate nuclear/cytoplasmic localization, and both 
depend on strong interaction with non-IRF subunits of multimeric transcription
complexes. This review compares the activation of IRF-3 and IRF-9 and their
respective physiologic impacts.

PMID: 11846981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):87-93.

Enhancement and diversification of IFN induction by IRF-7-mediated positive
feedback.

Levy DE(1), Marié I, Smith E, Prakash A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology and Immunology Program, Department of Pathology and Kaplan 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016. levyd01@med.nyu.edu

Interferons (IFN) are potent components of the innate immune response to
microbial infection. The genes for type I IFN (IFN-alpha and IFN-beta) are
rapidly induced in response to viral infection through a mechanism that involves 
latent cellular transcription factors that are activated in response to innate
recognition of viral components. IFN regulatory factor (IRF) proteins are key to 
this regulation, and their conversion from latent to active involves
virus-induced serine phosphorylation. Differential utilization of distinct IRF
proteins by different members of the type I IFN gene family produces a graded
induction of gene expression, resulting in tight control of these cytokines
through a positive feedback mechanism. Early response to virus causes secretion
of a subset of IFN genes through the action of IRF-3 in conjunction with
additional transcription factors, such as NF-kappaB and activator protein-1
(AP-1) (c-jun/ATF). This early IFN acts in an autocrine manner to stimulate
production of IRF-7, a transcription factor capable of activating the many
additional members of the IFN-alpha gene family. The dependence of IRF-7 on
virus-induced phosphorylation for its activity insures that IFN production is
limited to virus-infected cells. Characterization of the cellular components
involved in viral detection and IRF activation will further delineate this vital 
mechanism of innate immune response.

PMID: 11846979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):77-86.

The virus-induced factor VIF differentially recognizes the virus-responsive
modules of the mouse IFNA4 gene promoter.

Morin P(1), Génin P, Doly J, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228-CNRS, Régulation Transcriptionnelle et Maladies Génétiques, UFR
Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université Paris V, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Maximal activation of murine infection-A4 (IFNA4) gene transcription following
viral infection requires the presence of four cooperating DNA sequences (denoted 
A to D), which make up the virus responsive element VRE-A4. The B, C, and D
modules, when tandemized, form binding sites for the virus-induced factor (VIF), 
a multiprotein complex that is detected early after viral infection in the nuclei
of mouse L929 cells. We now demonstrate that IFN regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) is a
component of VIF and that VIF is different from the previously identified
virus-activated complexes containing IRF-3 and coactivators of transcription,
such as CREB binding protein (CBP) or p300. We also show that the C module is
critical for both IRF-3-mediated and virus-induced transcription of the murine
IFNA4 gene. Consistently, DNase I footprinting experiments and EMSA performed
with increasing amounts of recombinant GST-IRF-3(DBD) fusion proteins demonstrate
that cooperativity between the modules facilitate the binding of IRF-3 and
recruitment of transcription coactivators on the IFNA4 promoter. These results
indicate that VIF differentially recognizes the virus-responsive modules of
VRE-A4 and further actualize our previous model concerning the differential
expression of murine IFNA genes.

PMID: 11846978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):73-6.

Control of IRF-3 activation by phosphorylation.

Yoneyama M(1), Suhara W, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) is a unique member of the IRF
family. Its transcriptional activity is regulated solely by posttranslational
modifications. We review current knowledge of the mechanism of IRF-3 activation: 
signalling triggered by infections including viruses and bacteria,
phosphorylation of IRF-3 on certain serine residues, homodimer formation, and
active holocomplex formation with coactivator CBP/p300.

PMID: 11846977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):59-71.

On the role of IRF in host defense.

Barnes B(1), Lubyova B, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Oncology Research Center, Baltimore, MD 21231-1001, USA.

Transcription factors of the interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF) family have
been shown to play an essential role in the regulated expression of type I IFN
genes, IFN-stimulated genes (ISG), and other cytokines and chemokines. Three
members of the IRF family, IRF-3, IRF-5, and IRF-7, have been identified as
acting as direct transducers of virus-mediated signaling. In infected cells,
these factors are activated by phosphorylation on the serine residues,
transported to the nucleus, where they bind to the promoters of IFNA and IFNB
genes and tether histone transacetylases to the transcription complex
enhanceosome. IFNB and IFNA subtypes are expressed at different levels in
infected cells. The ratio between the relative levels of IRF-3 and IRF-7 was
shown to play an essential role in the inducible expression of type I IFN genes, 
whereas IRF-3 alone is sufficient for expression of the IFNB gene. IRF-5 was
identified recently as another inducer of IFNA genes, which has two unique
properties: (1) its activation is virus specific, and (2) the profile of IFNA
genes induced by IRF-5 is distinct from that induced by IRF-7. Several viruses
target functions of IRF to eliminate the early inflammatory response. Kaposi's
sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) encodes a cluster of four genes with homology to
cellular IRF. Three of these vIRF were shown to inhibit induction of IFN genes
and ISG in infected cells and function as dominant negative mutants of cellular
IRF. The unique properties of previously uncharacterized vIRF-2 and vIRF-3 are
discussed.

PMID: 11846976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):49-58.

Overlapping and distinct mechanisms regulating IRF-3 and IRF-7 function.

Servant MJ(1), Tenoever B, Lin R.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
and Departments of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Recent molecular, biochemical, and gene disruption studies have demonstrated the 
essential role of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor-3, (IRF-3) and IRF-7 in the 
activation of type I IFN gene expression and the induction of the antiviral
state. Both transcription factors share structural and functional properties, as 
well as a common mechanism of activation through C-terminal phosphorylation. The 
purpose of this review is to summarize recent investigations indicating that
similar signalling pathways are likely involved in the activation of IRF-3 and
IRF-7. Moreover, unique biochemical events, such as coactivator association and
differential recognition of cis-acting elements, also illustrate the capacity of 
IRF-3 and IRF-7 to selectively regulate type I IFN and IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) 
expression.

PMID: 11846975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 15;277(7):4853-8. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

The Small RNA gene activator protein, SphI postoctamer homology-binding
factor/selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription activating factor, stimulates
transcription of the human interferon regulatory factor-3 gene.

Mach CM(1), Hargrove BW, Kunkel GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas 77843-2128, USA.

Many small nuclear RNA gene promoters are activated by SphI postoctamer homology 
(SPH)-binding factor/selenocysteine tRNA gene transcription activating factor
(SBF/Staf). Whereas this transcription factor was initially identified by its
ability to bind to SPH elements in such promoters, it was more recently shown to 
have the capacity to activate transcription of a synthetic mRNA gene promoter
through a distinct activation domain. Here, we show that the human interferon
regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) gene promoter contains a functional SPH element that 
is bound by SBF/Staf in vitro and in transfected cells.

PMID: 11724783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Immunol. 2001 Nov 15;167(10):5887-94.

Lipopolysaccharide stimulates the MyD88-independent pathway and results in
activation of IFN-regulatory factor 3 and the expression of a subset of
lipopolysaccharide-inducible genes.

Kawai T(1), Takeuchi O, Fujita T, Inoue J, Mühlradt PF, Sato S, Hoshino K, Akira 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Japan
Science and Technology Corporation, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) triggers innate immune responses through
Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4, a member of the TLR family that participates in
pathogen recognition. TLRs recruit a cytoplasmic protein, MyD88, upon pathogen
recognition, mediating its function for immune responses. Two major pathways for 
LPS have been suggested in recent studies, which are referred to as
MyD88-dependent and -independent pathways. We report in this study the
characterization of the MyD88-independent pathway via TLR4. MyD88-deficient cells
failed to produce inflammatory cytokines in response to LPS, whereas they
responded to LPS by activating IFN-regulatory factor 3 as well as inducing the
genes containing IFN-stimulated regulatory elements such as IP-10. In contrast, a
lipopeptide that activates TLR2 had no ability to activate IFN-regulatory factor 
3. The MyD88-independent pathway was also activated in cells lacking both MyD88
and TNFR-associated factor 6. Thus, TLR4 signaling is composed of at least two
distinct pathways, a MyD88-dependent pathway that is critical to the induction of
inflammatory cytokines and a MyD88/TNFR-associated factor 6-independent pathway
that regulates induction of IP-10.

PMID: 11698465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Br J Cancer. 2001 Jul 20;85(2):190-8.

Cloning of a gene (SR-A1), encoding for a new member of the human Ser/Arg-rich
family of pre-mRNA splicing factors: overexpression in aggressive ovarian cancer.

Scorilas A(1), Kyriakopoulou L, Katsaros D, Diamandis EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X5, Canada.

By using the positional cloning gene approach, we were able to identify a novel
gene encoding for a serine/arginine-rich protein, which appears to be the human
homologue of the rat A1 gene. We named this new gene SR-A1. Members of the SR
family of proteins have been shown to interact with the C-terminal domain (CTD)
of the large subunit of RNA polymerase II and participate in pre-mRNA splicing.
We have localized the SR-A1 gene between the known genes IRF3 and RRAS on
chromosome 19q13.3. The novel gene spans 16.7 kb of genomic sequence and it is
formed of 11 exons and 10 intervening introns. The SR-A1 protein is composed of
1312 amino acids, with a molecular mass of 139.3 kDa and a theoretical
isoelectric point of 9.31. The SR-A1 protein contains an SR-rich domain as well
as a CTD-binding domain present only in a subset of SR-proteins. Through
interactions with the pre-mRNA and the CTD domain of the Polymerase II, SR
proteins have been shown to regulate alternative splicing. The SR-A1 gene is
expressed in all tissues tested, with highest levels found in fetal brain and
fetal liver. Our data suggest that this gene is overexpressed in a subset of
ovarian cancers which are clinically more aggressive. Studies with the steroid
hormone receptor-positive breast and prostate carcinoma cell lines ZR-75-1,
BT-474 and LNCaP, respectively, suggest that SR-A1 is constitutively expressed.
Furthermore, the mRNA of the SR-A1 gene in these cell lines appears to increase
by estrogens, androgens and glucocorticoids, and to a lesser extend by
progestins.

PMCID: PMC2364031
PMID: 11461075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jul 13;285(2):518-25.

Constitutive IFN-alpha/beta signal for efficient IFN-alpha/beta gene induction by
virus.

Hata N(1), Sato M, Takaoka A, Asagiri M, Tanaka N, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Efficient IFN-alpha/beta gene induction in virus-infected cells is an event
central to innate immunity, in which the transcription factor IRF-7 plays a
critical role together with IRF-3. Unlike IRF-3, IRF-7 is short-lived and its
gene expression is dependent on IFN-alpha/beta signalling; hence, the
signal-dependent enhancement of IRF-7 gene induction during viral infection is
essential for positive-feedback regulation of IFN-alpha/beta gene induction.
Here, we provide evidence that constitutive, IRF-3/IRF-7-independent production
of IFN-alpha/beta in uninfected cells is critical for setting the IRF-7
expression levels, determining whether or not the positive-feedback mechanism
will operate effectively upon viral infection. In fact, spleen cells are more
dependent than fibroblasts on this mechanism; the IFN-alpha/beta gene induction
is impaired more severely by blocking the IRF-7 induction pathway than by
introducing an IRF-3 null mutation. Thus, the constitutive IFN-alpha/beta signal 
provides a foundation for the IRF-7-mediated enhancement of its own production in
response to virus infection.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11444873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jul 13;285(2):400-8.

Identification and characterization of a novel human testis-specific kinase
substrate gene which is downregulated in testicular tumors.

Scorilas A(1), Yousef GM, Jung K, Rajpert-De Meyts E, Carsten S, Diamandis EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.

By using the positional candidate gene approach, we identified a novel putative
serine/threonine kinase substrate gene that maps to chromosome 19q13.3. Screening
of expressed sequence tags and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction of
total RNA from human tissues allowed us to establish the expression of the gene
and delineate its genomic organization (GenBank Accession No. AF200923). This
gene (TSKS, for testis-specific kinase substrate) is composed of 11 exons and 10 
intervening introns and is likely the human homolog of the mouse testis-specific 
serine kinase substrate gene. The predicted protein-coding region of the gene is 
1779 bp, encoding for a 592-amino-acid polypeptide with a calculated molecular
mass of 65.1 kDa. Genomic analysis of the region 19q13.3 placed the TSKS gene
close to the known genes IRF3, RRAS, and alpha-Adaptin A. TSKS exhibits high
levels of expression exclusively in human testicular tissue. The expression of
TSKS is downregulated in cancerous testicular tissue, in comparison to adjacent
normal tissue. TSKS expression was very low or undetectable in seminoma,
teratocarcinoma, embryonal, and Leydig cell tumors, while high expression was
observed in testicular tissue adjacent to tumors which contain premalignant
carcinoma in situ. The expression of the TSKS gene was very low in two human
embryonal carcinoma cell lines, 2102Ep and NTERA-2. These observations suggest a 
role of TSKS in testicular physiology, most probably in the process of
spermatogenesis or spermiogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11444856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 30;282(2):515-23.

PACT, a double-stranded RNA binding protein acts as a positive regulator for type
I interferon gene induced by Newcastle disease virus.

Iwamura T(1), Yoneyama M, Koizumi N, Okabe Y, Namiki H, Samuel CE, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical
Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8613, Japan.

Virus infection triggers innate responses to host cells including production of
type I interferon (IFN). Since IFN production is also induced by treatment with
poly(I:C), viral double-stranded (ds) RNA has been postulated to play a direct
role in the process. In the present study, we investigated the effect of dsRNA
binding proteins on virus-induced activation of the IFN-beta gene. We found that 
PACT, originally identified as protein activator for dsRNA-dependent protein
kinase (PKR) and implicated in the regulation of translation, augmented IFN-beta 
gene activation induced by Newcastle disease virus. Concomitantly with the
augmented activity of IFN-beta enhancer, increased activity of NF-kappaB and
IRF-3 and IRF-7 was observed. For the observed effect, the dsRNA-binding activity
of PACT was essential. We identified residues of PACT that interact with a
presumptive target molecule to exert its function. Furthermore, PACT colocalized 
with viral replication complex in the infected cells. Thus the observed effect of
PACT is novel and PACT is involved in the regulation of viral replication and
results in a marked increase of cellular IFN-beta gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Genomics. 2001 Mar 1;72(2):217-21.

Molecular cloning, physical mapping, and expression analysis of a novel gene,
BCL2L12, encoding a proline-rich protein with a highly conserved BH2 domain of
the Bcl-2 family.

Scorilas A(1), Kyriakopoulou L, Yousef GM, Ashworth LK, Kwamie A, Diamandis EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X5, Canada.

Members of the Bcl-2 family of apoptosis-regulating proteins contain at least one
of the four evolutionarily conserved domains, termed BH1, BH2, BH3, or BH4. Here,
we report the identification, cloning, physical mapping, and expression pattern
of BCL2L12, a novel gene that encodes a BCL2-like proline-rich protein.
Proline-rich sites have been shown to interact with Src homology region 3 (SH3)
domains of several tyrosine kinases, mediating their oncogenic potential. This
new gene maps to chromosome 19q13.3 and is located between the IRF3 and the
PRMT1/HRMT1L2 genes, close to the RRAS gene. BCL2L12 is composed of seven coding 
exons and six intervening introns, spanning a genomic area of 8.8 kb. All of the 
exon-intron splice sites conform to the consensus sequence for eukaryotic splice 
sites. The BCL2L12 protein is composed of 334 amino acids, with a calculated
molecular mass of 36.8 kDa and an isoelectric point of 9.45. The BCL2L12 protein 
contains one BH2 homology domain, one proline-rich region similar to the TC21
protein and, five consensus PXXP tetrapeptide sequences. BCL2L12 is expressed
mainly in breast, thymus, prostate, fetal liver, colon, placenta, pancreas, small
intestine, spinal cord, kidney, and bone marrow and to a lesser extent in many
other tissues. We also identified one splice variant of BCL2L12 that is primarily
expressed in skeletal muscle.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jul;21(13):4169-76.

Functional characterization of interferon regulatory factor 3a (IRF-3a), an
alternative splice isoform of IRF-3.

Karpova AY(1), Ronco LV, Howley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

Virus infection of numerous cell types results in the transcriptional induction
of a subset of virus- and interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes. The beta IFN
(IFN-beta) gene is one of these rapidly induced genes; it serves as a fundamental
component of the cellular defense response in eliciting potent antiviral,
immunomodulatory, and antiproliferative effects. One of the transcription factors
involved in the stringent regulation of IFN-beta production following virus
infection is interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 (IRF-3). We have characterized 
an alternatively spliced isoform of IRF-3 that we have called IRF-3a. IRF-3a can 
selectively and potently inhibit virus-induced activation of the IFN-beta
promoter. IRF-3a lacks half of the DNA binding domain found in IRF-3 and is
unable to bind to the classical IRF binding elements, IFN-stimulated response
elements. These studies suggest that IRF-3a may act as a modulator of IRF-3.

PMCID: PMC87078
PMID: 11390646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 25;283(5):1150-6.

Gene induction pathways mediated by distinct IRFs during viral infection.

Nakaya T(1), Sato M, Hata N, Asagiri M, Suemori H, Noguchi S, Tanaka N, Taniguchi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.

During viral infection, interferon-alpha/beta (IFN-alpha/beta) and many
IFN-inducible genes are induced to elicit antiviral responses of the host. Using 
cells with a gene disruption(s) for the IRF family of transcription factors, we
provide evidence that these genes, containing similar IRF-binding cis-elements,
are classified into distinct groups, based on the gene induction pathway(s). The 
IFN-beta gene induction is dependent on either IRF-3 or IRF-7, whereas induction 
of the IFN-alpha gene family is IRF-7-dependent. On the other hand, ISG15, ISG54 
and IP-10 are induced by either IRF-3 or IFN stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). We
also show that another group of genes is totally dependent on ISGF3. Thus, during
viral infection, a given gene responds either directly to a virus or
virus-induced IFN-alpha/beta or both through distinct pathways. The differential 
utilization of these induction pathways for these genes during viral infection
may reflect their distinct functional roles in the efficient antiviral response.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11355893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genes Cells. 2001 Apr;6(4):375-88.

Induction of IRF-3/-7 kinase and NF-kappaB in response to double-stranded RNA and
virus infection: common and unique pathways.

Iwamura T(1), Yoneyama M, Yamaguchi K, Suhara W, Mori W, Shiota K, Okabe Y,
Namiki H, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Infection by virus or treatment with double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
results in the activation of transcription factors including IRF-3, IRF-7 and a
pleiotropic regulator NF-kappaB by specific phosphorylation. These factors are
important in triggering a cascade of antiviral responses. A protein kinase that
is yet to be identified is responsible for the activation of these factors and
plays a key role in the responses.
RESULTS: The signal cascade was analysed using sensitive assays for the
activation of IRF-3 and NF-kappaB, and various inhibitors. We found that the
activation of IRF-3 and NF-kappaB by dsRNA or virus involves a process that is
sensitive to Geldanamycin. Although the induction of NF-kappaB by dsRNA/virus and
TNF-alpha involves common downstream pathways including IKK activation, the
upstream, Geldanamycin-sensitive process was unique to the dsRNA/virus-induced
signal. By an in vitro assay using cell extract, we found an inducible protein
kinase activity with physiological specificity of IRF-3 phosphorylation.
Furthermore, the same extract specifically phosphorylated IRF-7 in a similar
manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Double-stranded RNA or virus triggers a specific signal cascade that
results in the activation of the IRF-3/-7 kinase we detected, which corresponds
to the long-sought signalling machinery that is responsible for triggering the
early phase of innate response. The signal branches to a common NF-kappaB
activation cascade, thus resulting in the activation of a set of critical
transcription factors for the response.

PMID: 11318879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 15;20(7):800-11.

HHV-8 encoded vIRF-1 represses the interferon antiviral response by blocking
IRF-3 recruitment of the CBP/p300 coactivators.

Lin R(1), Genin P, Mamane Y, Sgarbanti M, Battistini A, Harrington WJ Jr, Barber 
GN, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3T IE2, Canada.

Human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8) has developed unique mechanisms for altering
cellular proliferative and apoptotic control pathways by incorporating viral
homologs to several cellular regulatory genes into its genome. One of the
important pirated genes encoded by the ORF K9 reading frame is a viral homolog of
the interferon regulatory factors (IRF), a family of cellular transcription
proteins that regulates expression of genes involved in pathogen response, immune
modulation and cell proliferation. vIRF-1 has been shown to downregulate the
interferon- and IRF-mediated transcriptional activation of ISG and murine IFNA4
gene promoters. In this study we demonstrate that vIRF-1 efficiently inhibited
virus-induced expression of endogenous interferon B, CC chemokine RANTES and CXC 
chemokine IP-10 genes. Co-expression analysis revealed that vIRF-1 selectively
blocked IRF-3 but not IRF-7-mediated transactivation. vIRF-1 was able to bind to 
both IRF-3 and IRF-7 in vivo as detected by coimmunoprecipitation analysis, but
did not affect IRF-3 dimerization, nuclear translocation and DNA binding
activity. Rather, vIRF-1 interacted with the CBP/p300 coactivators and
efficiently inhibited the formation of transcriptionally competent IRF-3-CBP/p300
complexes. These results illustrate that vIRF-1 is able to block the early stages
of the IFN response to virus infection by interfering with the activation of
IRF-3 responsive, immediate early IFN genes.

PMID: 11314014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23382-90. Epub 2001 Apr 12.

Virus-specific activation of a novel interferon regulatory factor, IRF-5, results
in the induction of distinct interferon alpha genes.

Barnes BJ(1), Moore PA, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center and the Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) genes encode DNA-binding proteins that are
involved in the innate immune response to infection. Two of these proteins, IRF-3
and IRF-7, serve as direct transducers of virus-mediated signaling and play
critical roles in the induction of type I interferon genes. We have now shown
that another factor, IRF-5, participates in the induction of interferon A (IFNA) 
and IFNB genes and can replace the requirement for IRF-7 in the induction of IFNA
genes. We demonstrate that, despite the functional similarity, IRF-5 possesses
unique characteristics and does not have a redundant role. Thus, 1) activation of
IRF-5 by phosphorylation is virus-specific, and its in vivo association with the 
IFNA promoter can be detected only in cells infected with NDV, not Sendai virus, 
while both viruses activate IRF-3 and IRF-7, and 2) NDV infection of
IRF-5-overexpressing cells preferentially induced the IFNA8 subtype, while IFNA1 
was primarily induced in IRF-7 expressing cells. These data indicate that
multiple signaling pathways induced by infection may be differentially recognized
by members of the IRF family and modulate transcription of individual IFNA genes 
in a virus and cell type-specific manner.

PMID: 11303025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 25;276(21):18624-32. Epub 2001 Feb 13.

The cell cycle control element of histone H4 gene transcription is maximally
responsive to interferon regulatory factor pairs IRF-1/IRF-3 and IRF-1/IRF-7.

Xie R(1), van Wijnen AJ, van Der Meijden C, Luong MX, Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are transcriptional mediators of
interferon-responsive signaling pathways that are involved in antiviral defense, 
immune response, and cell growth regulation. To investigate the role of IRF
proteins in the regulation of histone H4 gene transcription, we compared the
transcriptional contributions of IRF-1, IRF-2, IRF-3, and IRF-7 using transient
transfection assays with H4 promoter/luciferase (Luc) reporter genes. These IRF
proteins up-regulate reporter gene expression but IRF-1, IRF-3, and IRF-7 are
more potent activators of the H4 promoter than IRF-2. Forced expression of
different IRF combinations reveals that IRF-2 reduces IRF-1 or IRF-3 dependent
activation, but does not affect IRF-7 function. Thus, IRF-2 may have a dual
function in histone H4 gene transcription by acting as a weak activator at low
dosage and a competitive inhibitor of other strongly activating IRFs at high
levels. IRF-1/IRF-3 and IRF-1/IRF-7 pairs each mediate the highest levels of site
II-dependent promoter activity and can up-regulate transcription by 120-150-fold.
We also find that interferon gamma up-regulates IRF-1 and site II-dependent
promoter activity. This up-regulation is not observed when the IRF site is
mutated or if cells are preloaded with IRF-1. Our results indicate that IRF-1,
IRF-2, IRF-3, and IRF-7 can all regulate histone H4 gene expression. The pairwise
utilization of distinct IRF factors provides a flexible transcriptional mechanism
for integration of diverse growth-related signaling pathways.

PMID: 11278666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Annu Rev Immunol. 2001;19:623-55.

IRF family of transcription factors as regulators of host defense.

Taniguchi T(1), Ogasawara K, Takaoka A, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
tada@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) constitute a family of transcription factors
that commonly possess a novel helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. Following the
initial identification of two structurally related members, IRF-1 and IRF-2,
seven additional members have now been reported. In addition, virally encoded
IRFs, which may interfere with cellular IRFs, have also been identified. Thus
far, intensive functional analyses have been done on IRF-1, revealing a
remarkable functional diversity of this transcription factor in the regulation of
cellular response in host defense. Indeed, IRF-1 selectively modulates different 
sets of genes, depending on the cell type and/or the nature of cellular stimuli, 
in order to evoke appropriate responses in each. More recently, much attention
has also been focused on other IRF family members. Their functional roles,
through interactions with their own or other members of the family of
transcription factors, are becoming clearer in the regulation of host defense,
such as innate and adaptive immune responses and oncogenesis.

PMID: 11244049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1999;64:465-72.

Transcription factor IRF-1 and its family members in the regulation of host
defense.

Taniguchi T(1), Tanaka N, Ogasawara K, Taki S, Sato M, Takaoka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

PMID: 11232323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(6):3021-7.

Downregulation of IRF-3 levels by ribozyme modulates the profile of IFNA subtypes
expressed in infected human cells.

Yeow WS(1), Au WC, Lowther WJ, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

As an early response to viral infection, cells express a number of cellular genes
that play a role in innate immunity, including alpha/beta interferons (IFN).
IFN-alpha/beta are encoded by a single IFNB gene and multiple, closely related
IFNA genes. The induction of these IFN genes in infected cells occurs at the
transcriptional level, and two transcription factors of the IRF family, IRF-3 and
IRF-7, were shown to play a role in their activation. While the expression of
IRF-3 alone was shown to be sufficient for induction of the IFNB gene, induction 
of all the IFNA subtypes in human cells required the presence of IRF-7. Since
IRF-3 is expressed constitutively in all cells examined, the role of IRF-3 in the
induction of IFNA genes has not been clarified. Using ribozyme targeted to IRF-3 
mRNA, we found that the downregulation of IRF-3 levels in the infected cells
inhibited not only the induction of IFNB gene but also the expression of IFNA
genes. Furthermore, downmodulation of IRF-3 levels altered the expression profile
of IFNA subtypes induced by viral infection. These studies suggest that the ratio
between the relative levels of IRF-3 and IRF-7 is a critical determinant for the 
induction of the individual IFNA subtypes in infected cells.

PMCID: PMC115930
PMID: 11222729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Virology. 2001 Feb 15;280(2):273-82.

Analysis of functional domains of interferon regulatory factor 7 and its
association with IRF-3.

Au WC(1), Yeow WS, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

IRF-7 plays an essential role in virus-activated transcription of IFNA genes. To 
analyze functional domains of IRF-7 we have constructed an amino-terminal
deletion mutant of IRF-7 (237-514) which exerted a dominant negative (DN) effect 
on virus-induced expression of the endogenous Type I IFN genes. Focusing on the
molecular mechanism underlying the dominant negative effect of IRF-7 DN, we found
that virus-activated transcription of endogenous IFNA genes requires full-length 
IRF-7 and that Serine 483 and 484 play an essential role. While IRF-7 DN had no
effect on virus-stimulated nuclear translocation of IRF-3 and IRF-7, the binding 
of IRF-7 DN to IRF-3 and IRF-7 was detected by GST pull-down assay as well as by 
immunoprecipitation in infected cells, indicating that IRF-7 DN targets both
IRF-7 and IRF-3. The region by which IRF-7 interacts with IRF-3 was mapped
between amino acid 418 and 473. Overexpression of IRF-7 DN in virus-infected
2FTGH cells resulted in an inhibition of IFN synthesis and in a significant
reduction of binding of both IRF-3 and IRF-7 to the IFNA1 promoter.
Interestingly, the IRF-7 DN-mediated suppression of IFNA gene expression can be
negated by overexpression of IRF-3. Altogether these results suggest that the
IRF-3/IRF-7 complexes are biologically active and are involved in virus-activated
transcription of endogenous IFNA genes.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11162841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. FASEB J. 2001 Feb;15(2):501-15.

Apoptosis is promoted by the dsRNA-activated factor (DRAF1) during viral
infection independent of the action of interferon or p53.

Weaver BK(1), Ando O, Kumar KP, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York at Stony Brook, New York
11794, USA.

An apoptotic cellular defense mechanism is triggered in response to viral dsRNA
generated during the course of infection by many DNA and RNA viruses. We
demonstrate that apoptosis induced by dsRNA or a paramyxovirus is independent of 
the action of interferon as it can proceed in a variety of cell lines and primary
cells deficient in an interferon response. Initiation of apoptosis appears to be 
triggered by activation of a cellular transcription factor, the dsRNA-activated
factor (DRAF1). DRAF1 is composed of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and
the transcriptional coactivators CREB binding protein (CBP) or p300. We find that
activation of IRF-3 in the absence of viral infection stimulates apoptosis. In
addition, a negative interfering mutant blocks both target gene induction and
apoptosis, demonstrating a requirement for gene expression by IRF-3/DRAF1 to
promote apoptosis. IRF-3/DRAF1 target gene expression is also induced in response
to a distinct apoptotic stimulus, the DNA damaging agent etoposide. The activity 
of the p53 tumor suppressor does not appear to be required for
IRF-3/DRAF1-mediated apoptosis.

PMID: 11156966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 23;276(12):8951-7. Epub 2000 Dec 21.

IRF3 and IRF7 phosphorylation in virus-infected cells does not require
double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase R or Ikappa B kinase but is blocked 
by Vaccinia virus E3L protein.

Smith EJ(1), Marié I, Prakash A, García-Sastre A, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Molecular
Oncology and Immunology Program, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10016, USA.

Induction of interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) gene expression in virus-infected cells 
requires phosphorylation-induced activation of the transcription factors IRF3 and
IRF7. However, the kinase(s) that targets these proteins has not been identified.
Using a combined pharmacological and genetic approach, we found that none of the 
kinases tested was responsible for IRF phosphorylation in cells infected with
Newcastle disease virus (NDV). Although the broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor
staurosporine potently blocked IRF3 and -7 phosphorylation, inhibitors for
protein kinase C, protein kinase A, MEK, SAPK, IKK, and protein kinase R (PKR)
were without effect. Both IkappaB kinase and PKR have been implicated in IFN
induction, but cells genetically deficient in IkappaB kinase, PKR, or the
PKR-related genes PERK, IRE1, or GCN2 retained the ability to phosphorylate IRF7 
and induce IFNalpha. Interestingly, PKR mutant cells were defective for response 
to double-stranded (ds) RNA but not to virus infection, suggesting that dsRNA is 
not the only activating viral component. Consistent with this notion, protein
synthesis was required for IRF7 phosphorylation in virus-infected cells, and the 
kinetics of phosphorylation and viral protein production were similar. Despite
evidence for a lack of involvement of dsRNA and PKR, vaccinia virus E3L protein, 
a dsRNA-binding protein capable of inhibiting PKR, was an effective IRF3 and -7
phosphorylation inhibitor. These results suggest that a novel cellular protein
that is activated by viral products in addition to dsRNA and is sensitive to E3L 
inhibition is responsible for IRF activation and reveal a novel mechanism for the
anti-IFN effect of E3L distinct from its inhibition of PKR.

PMID: 11124948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Nov 19;278(2):349-59.

Genomic organization, physical mapping, and expression analysis of the human
protein arginine methyltransferase 1 gene.

Scorilas A(1), Black MH, Talieri M, Diamandis EP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Canada.

Protein arginine methyltransferases (PRMTs) regulate mRNA processing and
maturation by modulating the activity of RNA-binding proteins through
methylation. The cDNA for human PRMT1 (HRMT1L2) was recently identified. In this 
paper, we describe the complete genomic organization of the human PRMT1 gene
(GenBank Accession No. AF222689), together with its precise chromosomal
localization in relation to other neighboring genes. We have also examined its
expression in a total RNA panel of 26 human tissues, the BT-474 breast carcinoma 
cell line, and 16 breast tumors. PRMT1, which spans 11.2 kb of genomic sequence
on chromosome 19q13.3, is located in close proximity to the IRF3 and RRAS genes
and is transcribed in the opposite direction. It is formed of 12 coding exons and
11 intervening introns, and shows structural similarity to other PRMT genes.
Three PRMT1 isoforms exist as a result of alternative mRNA splicing. Amino acid
sequence comparison of the splicing variants indicates that they are all
enzymatically active methyl transferases, but with different N-terminal
hydrophobic regions. PRMT1 expression was detected in a variety of tissues. We
have shown that the relative prevalence of alternatively spliced forms of PRMT1
is different between normal and cancerous breast tissues. Although PRMT1 was not 
found to be hormonally regulated by steroid hormones in breast cancer cells, our 
results suggest that two variants of PRMT1 are down regulated in breast cancer.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11097842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Genes Dev. 2000 Nov 15;14(22):2813-8.

Dual utilization of an acceptor/donor splice site governs the alternative
splicing of the IRF-3 gene.

Karpova AY(1), Howley PM, Ronco LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, 
USA.

Interferon regulatory factors constitute a family of transcriptional activators
and repressors involved in a large number of vital cellular processes. Interferon
regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) has been implicated in virus and double-stranded RNA 
mediated induction of IFNbeta and RANTES, in DNA damage signaling, and in
virus-induced apoptosis. With its critical role in these pathways, the activity
of IRF-3 is tightly regulated in myriad ways. Here we describe novel regulation
of IRF-3 at the level of RNA splicing. We show that an unprecedented dual
utilization of a splice acceptor/donor site within the IRF-3 mRNA governs the
production of two alternative splice isoforms.

PMCID: PMC317057
PMID: 11090129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Immunity. 2000 Oct;13(4):539-48.

Distinct and essential roles of transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 in response
to viruses for IFN-alpha/beta gene induction.

Sato M(1), Suemori H, Hata N, Asagiri M, Ogasawara K, Nakao K, Nakaya T, Katsuki 
M, Noguchi S, Tanaka N, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Induction of the interferon (IFN)-alpha/beta gene transcription in virus-infected
cells is an event central to innate immunity. Mice lacking the transcription
factor IRF-3 are more vulnerable to virus infection. In embryonic fibroblasts,
virus-induced IFN-alpha/beta gene expression levels are reduced and the spectrum 
of the IFN-alpha mRNA subspecies altered. Furthermore, cells additionally
defective in IRF-7 expression totally fail to induce these genes in response to
infections by any of the virus types tested. In these cells, a normal profile of 
IFN-alpha/beta mRNA induction can be achieved by coexpressing both IRF-3 and
IRF-7. These results demonstrate the essential and distinct roles of thetwo
factors, which together ensure the transcriptional efficiency and diversity of
IFN-alpha/beta genes for the antiviral response.

PMID: 11070172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):355-63.

Identification of distinct signaling pathways leading to the phosphorylation of
interferon regulatory factor 3.

Servant MJ(1), ten Oever B, LePage C, Conti L, Gessani S, Julkunen I, Lin R,
Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, H3T 1E2 Canada.

Infection of host cells by viruses leads to the activation of multiple signaling 
pathways, resulting in the expression of host genes involved in the establishment
of the antiviral state. Among the transcription factors mediating the immediate
response to virus is interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) which is
post-translationally modified as a result of virus infection. Phosphorylation of 
latent cytoplasmic IRF-3 on serine and threonine residues in the C-terminal
region leads to dimerization, cytoplasmic to nuclear translocation, association
with the p300/CBP coactivator, and stimulation of DNA binding and transcriptional
activities. We now demonstrate that IRF-3 is a phosphoprotein that is uniquely
activated via virus-dependent C-terminal phosphorylation. Paramyxoviridae
including measles virus and rhabdoviridae, vesicular stomatitis virus, are potent
inducers of a unique virus-activated kinase activity. In contrast, stress
inducers, growth factors, DNA-damaging agents, and cytokines do not induce
C-terminal IRF-3 phosphorylation, translocation or transactivation, but rather
activate a MAPKKK-related signaling pathway that results in N-terminal IRF-3
phosphorylation. The failure of numerous well characterized pharmacological
inhibitors to abrogate virus-induced IRF-3 phosphorylation suggests the
involvement of a novel kinase activity in IRF-3 regulation by viruses.

PMID: 11035028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6342-53.

Selective DNA binding and association with the CREB binding protein coactivator
contribute to differential activation of alpha/beta interferon genes by
interferon regulatory factors 3 and 7.

Lin R(1), Génin P, Mamane Y, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2. mdli@musica.mcgill.ca

Recent studies implicate the interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRF) IRF-3 and 
IRF-7 as key activators of the alpha/beta IFN (IFN-alpha/beta) genes as well as
the RANTES chemokine gene. Using coexpression analysis, the human IFNB, IFNA1,
and RANTES promoters were stimulated by IRF-3 coexpression, whereas the IFNA4,
IFNA7, and IFNA14 promoters were preferentially induced by IRF-7 only. Chimeric
proteins containing combinations of different IRF-7 and IRF-3 domains were also
tested, and the results provided evidence of distinct DNA binding properties of
IRF-3 and IRF-7, as well as a preferential association of IRF-3 with the CREB
binding protein (CBP) coactivator. Interestingly, some of these fusion proteins
led to supraphysiological levels of IFN promoter activation. DNA binding site
selection studies demonstrated that IRF-3 and IRF-7 bound to the
5'-GAAANNGAAANN-3' consensus motif found in many virus-inducible genes; however, 
a single nucleotide substitution in either of the GAAA half-site motifs
eliminated IRF-3 binding and transactivation activity but did not affect IRF-7
interaction or transactivation activity. These studies demonstrate that IRF-3
possesses a restricted DNA binding site specificity and interacts with CBP,
whereas IRF-7 has a broader DNA binding specificity that contributes to its
capacity to stimulate delayed-type IFN gene expression. These results provide an 
explanation for the differential regulation of IFN-alpha/beta gene expression by 
IRF-3 and IRF-7 and suggest that these factors have complementary rather than
redundant roles in the activation of the IFN-alpha/beta genes.

PMCID: PMC86109
PMID: 10938111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Virol. 2000 Sep;74(17):8194-201.

Characterization of a novel human herpesvirus 8-encoded protein, vIRF-3, that
shows homology to viral and cellular interferon regulatory factors.

Lubyova B(1), Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

The genome of the human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) contains a cluster of open reading 
frames (ORFs) encoding proteins with homology to the cellular transcription
factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family. Two of these
homologues, vIRF-1 and vIRF-2, were previously identified and functionally
analyzed. In this study, we have characterized a novel gene, designated vIRF-3,
encoded within the previously predicted ORF K10.5 and our newly identified ORF
K10. 6. Northern blotting of RNA extracted from BCBL-1 cells with a
vIRF-3-specific probe and reverse transcription-PCR analyses revealed a single
transcript of 2.2 kb with a splice present in the coding region. The vIRF-3 mRNA 
levels in BCBL-1 cells were increased upon 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
treatment, with kinetics of expression similar to those of the early immediate
genes. The vIRF-3 ORF encodes a 73-kDa protein with homology to cellular IRF-4
and HHV-8-encoded vIRF-2 and K11. In transient transfection assays with the
IFNACAT reporter, vIRF-3 functioned as a dominant-negative mutant of both IRF-3
and IRF-7 and inhibited virus-mediated transcriptional activity of the IFNA
promoter. Similarly, the overexpression of vIRF-3 in mouse L929 cells resulted in
inhibition of virus-mediated synthesis of biologically active interferons. These 
results suggest that by targeting IRF-3 and IRF-7, which play a critical role in 
the activation of alpha/beta interferon (IFN) genes, HHV-8 has evolved a
mechanism by which it directly subverts the functions of IRFs and down-regulates 
the induction of the IFN genes that are important components of the innate
immunity.

PMCID: PMC112355
PMID: 10933732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Virol. 2000 Sep;74(17):7989-96.

Activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 is inhibited by the influenza A
virus NS1 protein.

Talon J(1), Horvath CM, Polley R, Basler CF, Muster T, Palese P, García-Sastre A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

We present a novel mechanism by which viruses may inhibit the alpha/beta
interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) cascade. The double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) binding
protein NS1 of influenza virus is shown to prevent the potent antiviral
interferon response by inhibiting the activation of interferon regulatory factor 
3 (IRF-3), a key regulator of IFN-alpha/beta gene expression. IRF-3 activation
and, as a consequence, IFN-beta mRNA induction are inhibited in wild-type (PR8)
influenza virus-infected cells but not in cells infected with an isogenic virus
lacking the NS1 gene (delNS1 virus). Furthermore, NS1 is shown to be a general
inhibitor of the interferon signaling pathway. Inhibition of IRF-3 activation can
be achieved by the expression of wild-type NS1 in trans, not only in delNS1
virus-infected cells but also in cells infected with a heterologous RNA virus
(Newcastle disease virus). We propose that inhibition of IRF-3 activation by a
dsRNA binding protein significantly contributes to the virulence of influenza A
viruses and possibly to that of other viruses.

PMCID: PMC112330
PMID: 10933707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biochem. 2000 Aug;128(2):301-7.

Analyses of virus-induced homomeric and heteromeric protein associations between 
IRF-3 and coactivator CBP/p300.

Suhara W(1), Yoneyama M, Iwamura T, Yoshimura S, Tamura K, Namiki H, Aimoto S,
Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

Cellular genes including the type I interferon genes are activated in response to
viral infection. We previously reported that IRF-3 (interferon regulatory factor 
3) is specifically phosphorylated on serine residues and directly transmits a
virus-induced signal from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, and then participates in 
the primary phase of gene induction. In this study, we analyzed the molecular
mechanism of IRF-3 activation further. The formation of a stable homomeric
complex of IRF-3 between the specifically phosphorylated IRF-3 molecules
occurred. While virus-induced IRF-7 did not bind to p300, the phosphorylated
IRF-3 complex formed a stable multimeric complex with p300 (active holocomplex). 
Competition using a synthetic phosphopeptide corresponding to the activated IRF-3
demonstrated that p300 directly recognizes the structure in the vicinity of the
phosphorylated residues of IRF-3. These results indicated that the
phosphorylation of serine residues at positions 385 and 386 is critical for the
formation of the holocomplex, presumably through a conformational switch
facilitating homodimer formation and the generation of the interaction interface 
with CBP/p300.

PMID: 10920266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34320-7.

Multiple regulatory domains control IRF-7 activity in response to virus
infection.

Lin R(1), Mamane Y, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Montreal H3T 1E2, Canada. mdli@musica.mcgill.ca

Recent studies implicate the interferon regulatory factors (IRF), IRF-3 and
IRF-7, as key activators of Type 1 interferon genes, as well as the RANTES
(regulated on activation normal T cell expressed) chemokine gene. Both IRF-3 and 
IRF-7 are regulated in part by virus-induced C-terminal phosphorylation, leading 
to nuclear translocation, stimulation of DNA binding, and transcriptional
activities. Structure-function studies with IRF-7 suggested a complex
organization of the C-terminal region, with a constitutive activation domain
located between amino acids 150-246, an accessory inducibility region at the very
end of IRF-7 between amino acids 467 and 503, and an inhibitory region (amino
acids 341-467) adjacent to the C-terminal end that interferes with
transactivation. Furthermore, an element that increases basal and virus-inducible
activity is located between amino acids 278 and 305. A transcriptionally active
form of IRF-7 was also generated by substitution of Ser-477 and Ser-479 residues 
with the phosphomimetic Asp. IRF-7, particularly IRF-7(S477D/S479D), was a strong
transactivator of type I interferon and RANTES chemokine gene expression. Unlike 
wild type IRF-3, IRF-7 overexpression was able to stimulate inteferon gene
expression in the absence of virus infection. Using tagged versions of IRF-7 and 
IRF-3, the formation of homo- and heterodimers was detected by
co-immunoprecipitation. These results demonstrate that IRF-3 and IRF-7
transcription factors possess distinct structural characteristics that impart
complementary rather than redundant functional roles in cytokine gene activation.

PMID: 10893229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(13):4814-25.

Assembly of a functional beta interferon enhanceosome is dependent on ATF-2-c-jun
heterodimer orientation.

Falvo JV(1), Parekh BS, Lin CH, Fraenkel E, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Heterodimeric transcription factors, including the basic region-leucine zipper
(bZIP) protein ATF-2-c-jun, are well-characterized components of an enhanceosome 
that mediates virus induction of the human beta interferon (IFN-beta) gene. Here 
we report that within the IFN-beta enhanceosome the ATF-2-c-jun heterodimer binds
in a specific orientation, which is required for assembly of a complex between
ATF-2-c-jun and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). We demonstrate that
correct orientation of the ATF-2-c-jun binding site is required for virus
induction of the IFN-beta gene and for IRF-3-dependent activation of a composite 
ATF-2- c-jun-IRF site in the IFN-beta promoter. We also show that in vitro the
DNA-bound ATF-2-c-jun heterodimer adopts a fixed orientation upon the binding of 
IRF-3 at an adjacent site in the IFN-beta enhancer and that the DNA-binding
domain of IRF-3 is sufficient to mediate this effect. In addition, we show that
the DNA-binding domain of ATF-2 is necessary and sufficient for selective
protein-protein interactions with IRF-3. Strikingly, in vivo chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments with IFN-beta reporter constructs reveal that
recruitment of IRF-3 to the IFN-beta promoter upon virus infection is dependent
on the orientation of the ATF-2-c-jun heterodimer binding site. These
observations demonstrate functional and physical cooperativity between the bZIP
and IRF transcription factor families and illustrate the critical role of
heterodimeric transcription factors in formation of the IFN-beta enhanceosome.

PMCID: PMC85927
PMID: 10848607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jun;20(11):4159-68.

Regulated nuclear-cytoplasmic localization of interferon regulatory factor 3, a
subunit of double-stranded RNA-activated factor 1.

Kumar KP(1), McBride KM, Weaver BK, Dingwall C, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, SUNY at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794,
USA.

Viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) generated during the course of infection leads 
to the activation of a latent transcription factor, dsRNA-activated factor 1
(DRAF1). DRAF1 binds to a DNA target containing the type I interferon-stimulated 
response element and induces transcription of responsive genes. DRAF1 is a
multimeric transcription factor containing the interferon regulatory factor 3
(IRF-3) protein and one of the histone acetyl transferases, CREB binding protein 
(CBP) or p300 (CBP/p300). In uninfected cells, the IRF-3 component of DRAF1
resides in the cytoplasm. The cytoplasmic localization of IRF-3 is dependent on a
nuclear export signal, and we demonstrate IRF-3 recognition by the chromosome
region maintenance 1 (CRM1) (also known as exportin 1) shuttling receptor.
Following infection and specific phosphorylation, IRF-3 accumulates in the
nucleus where it associates with CBP and p300. We identify a nuclear localization
signal (NLS) in IRF-3 that is critical for nuclear accumulation. Mutation of the 
NLS abrogates nuclear localization even following infection. The NLS appears to
be active constitutively, but it is recognized by only a subset of importin-alpha
shuttling receptors. Evidence is presented to support a model in which IRF-3
normally shuttles between the nucleus and the cytoplasm but cytoplasmic
localization is dominant prior to infection. Following infection, phosphorylated 
IRF-3 can bind to the CBP/p300 proteins resident in the nucleus. We provide the
evidence of a role for CBP/p300 binding in the nuclear sequestration of a
transcription factor that normally resides in the cytoplasm.

PMCID: PMC85785
PMID: 10805757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Immunol. 2000 May 15;164(10):5352-61.

Regulation of RANTES chemokine gene expression requires cooperativity between
NF-kappa B and IFN-regulatory factor transcription factors.

Génin P(1), Algarté M, Roof P, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Departments of Microbiology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Virus infection of host cells activates a set of cellular genes, including
cytokines, IFNs, and chemokines, involved in antiviral defense and immune
activation. Previous studies demonstrated that virus-induced transcriptional
activation of a member of the human CC-chemokine RANTES required activation of
the latent transcription factors IFN-regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and NF-kappa B via
posttranslational phosphorylation. In the present study, we further characterized
the regulatory control of RANTES transcription during virus infection using in
vivo genomic footprinting analyses. IRF-3, the related IRF-7, and NF-kappa B are 
identified as important in vivo binding factors required for the cooperative
induction of RANTES transcription after virus infection. Using fibroblastic or
myeloid cells, we demonstrate that the kinetics and strength of RANTES
virus-induced transcription are highly dependent on the preexistence of IRFs and 
NF-kappa B. Use of dominant negative mutants of either I kappa B-alpha or IRF-3
demonstrate that disruption of either pathway dramatically abolishes the ability 
of the other to bind and activate RANTES expression. Furthermore, coexpression of
IRF-3, IRF-7, and p65/p50 leads to synergistic activation of RANTES promoter
transcription. These studies reveal a model of virus-mediated RANTES promoter
activation that involves cooperative synergism between IRF-3/IRF-7 and NF-kappa B
factors.

PMID: 10799898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 2;275(22):16910-7.

Signaling pathways to the assembly of an interferon-beta enhanceosome. Chemical
genetic studies with a small molecule.

Kim T(1), Kim TY, Lee WG, Yim J, Kim TK.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiative Center for Genetic Reprogramming,
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea. tk_kim@hms.harvard.edu

Small molecules that modulate specific protein functions are valuable tools for
dissecting complex signaling pathways. Here, we identified a small molecule that 
induces the assembly of the interferon-beta (IFN-beta) enhanceosome by
stimulating all the enhancer-binding activator proteins: ATF2/c-JUN, IRF3, and
p50/p65 of NF-kappaB. This compound stimulates mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase kinase 1 (MEKK1), which is a member of a family of proteins involved in
stress-mediated signaling pathways. Consistent with this, MEKK1 activates IRF3 in
addition to ATF2/c-JUN and NF-kappaB for the assembly of the IFN-beta
enhanceosome. MEKK1 activates IRF3 through the c-JUN amino-terminal kinase (JNK) 
pathway but not the p38 and IkappaB kinase (IKK) pathway. Taken together with
previous observations, these results implicate that, for the assembly of an
IFN-beta enhanceosome, MEKK1 can induce IRF3 and ATF2/c-JUN through the JNK
pathway, whereas it can induce NF-kappaB through the IKK pathway. Thus, specific 
MEKK family proteins may be able to integrate some of multiple signal
transduction pathways leading to the specific activation of the IFN-beta
enhanceosome.

PMID: 10747925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Virol. 2000 Apr;74(8):3781-92.

The IRF-3 transcription factor mediates Sendai virus-induced apoptosis.

Heylbroeck C(1), Balachandran S, Servant MJ, DeLuca C, Barber GN, Lin R, Hiscott 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Sir Mortimer B. Davis Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2.

Virus infection of target cells can result in different biological outcomes:
lytic infection, cellular transformation, or cell death by apoptosis. Cells
respond to virus infection by the activation of specific transcription factors
involved in cytokine gene regulation and cell growth control. The ubiquitously
expressed interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) transcription factor is directly
activated following virus infection through posttranslational modification.
Phosphorylation of specific C-terminal serine residues results in IRF-3
dimerization, nuclear translocation, and activation of DNA-binding and
transactivation potential. Once activated, IRF-3 transcriptionally up regulates
alpha/beta interferon genes, the chemokine RANTES, and potentially other genes
that inhibit viral infection. We previously generated constitutively active
[IRF-3(5D)] and dominant negative (IRF-3 DeltaN) forms of IRF-3 that control
target gene expression. In an effort to characterize the growth regulatory
properties of IRF-3, we observed that IRF-3 is a mediator of
paramyxovirus-induced apoptosis. Expression of the constitutively active form of 
IRF-3 is toxic, preventing the establishment of stably transfected cells. By
using a tetracycline-inducible system, we show that induction of IRF-3(5D) alone 
is sufficient to induce apoptosis in human embryonic kidney 293 and human Jurkat 
T cells as measured by DNA laddering, terminal
deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling assay, and
analysis of DNA content by flow cytometry. Wild-type IRF-3 expression augments
paramyxovirus-induced apoptosis, while expression of IRF-3 DeltaN blocks
virus-induced apoptosis. In addition, we demonstrate an important role of
caspases 8, 9, and 3 in IRF-3-induced apoptosis. These results suggest that
IRF-3, in addition to potently activating cytokine genes, regulates apoptotic
signalling following virus infection.

PMCID: PMC111887
PMID: 10729153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 3;275(9):6313-20.

Reconstitution of virus-mediated expression of interferon alpha genes in human
fibroblast cells by ectopic interferon regulatory factor-7.

Yeow WS(1), Au WC, Juang YT, Fields CD, Dent CL, Gewert DR, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

Type I interferons constitute an important part of the innate immune response
against viral infection. Unlike the expression of interferon (IFN) B gene, the
expression of IFNA genes is restricted to the lymphoid cells. Both IFN regulatory
factor 3 and 7 (IRF-3 and IRF-7) were suggested to play positive roles in these
genes expression. However, their role in the differential expression of
individual subtypes of human IFNA genes is unknown. Using various IFNA reporter
constructs in transient transfection assay we found that overexpression of IRF-3 
in virus infected 2FTGH cells selectively activated IFNA1 VRE, whereas IRF-7 was 
able to activate IFNA1, A2, and A4. The binding of recombinant IRF-7 and IRF-3 to
these VREs correlated with their transcriptional activation. Nuclear proteins
from infected and uninfected IRF-7 expressing 2FTGH cells formed multiple
DNA-protein complexes with IFNA1 VRE, in which two unique DNA-protein complexes
containing IRF-7 were detected. In 2FTGH cells, virus stimulated expression of
IFNB gene but none of the IFNA genes. Reconstitution of IRF-7 synthesis in these 
cells resulted, upon virus infection, in the activation of seven endogenous IFNA 
genes in which IFNA1 predominated. These studies suggest that IRF-7 is a critical
determinant for the induction of IFNA genes in infected cells.

PMID: 10692430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35535-8.

p38-dependent activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 by lipopolysaccharide.

Navarro L(1), David M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California San Diego Cancer Center,
University of California, La Jolla, California 92093-0322, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is known to participate in the
transcriptional induction of interferon (IFN) alpha and IFNbeta genes, as well as
of a number of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), as a result of viral
infection. In the present study we demonstrate the activation of IRF3 followed by
ISG induction after exposure of cells to the bacterial cell wall component
lipopolysaccharide. Engagement of Toll-like receptors by lipopolysaccharide
triggered the nuclear translocation of IRF3, followed by its DNA binding and the 
subsequent induction of several interferon-regulated genes. Transcriptional
activation of ISGs occurred in a protein synthesis independent manner, but was
sensitive to inhibition of the stress-activated protein kinase, p38. The
activation of IRF3 by viral particles or bacterial membrane components suggests
that this signaling pathway might contribute to the evolutionary conserved innate
immune response.

PMID: 10585427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Virol. 1999 Dec;73(12):10208-13.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 is required for viral induction of beta interferon
in primary cardiac myocyte cultures.

Noah DL(1), Blum MA, Sherry B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, USA.

Viral myocarditis affects an estimated 5 to 20% of the human population. The
antiviral cytokine beta interferon (IFN-beta) is critical for protection against 
viral myocarditis in mice. That is, nonmyocarditic reoviruses induce myocarditis 
in mice that lack IFN-alpha/beta, and nonmyocarditic reoviruses both induce more 
IFN-beta and are more sensitive to the antiviral effects of IFN-beta than
myocarditic reoviruses in primary cardiac myocyte cultures. Induction of IFN-beta
in certain cell types involves viral activation of the transcription factor
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3). To address whether IRF-3 can induce
IFN-beta in cardiac myocytes, primary cardiac myocyte cultures and control L929
cells were transfected with a plasmid constitutively expressing IRF-3.
Overexpression of IRF-3 resulted in induction of IFN-beta in the absence of viral
infection in both cell types. To address whether IRF-3 is required for viral
induction of IFN-beta, cell cultures were transfected with a plasmid
constitutively expressing a dominant negative IRF-3 protein. The dominant
negative IRF-3 reduced reovirus induction of IFN-beta in control L929 cells and
completely eliminated induction in primary cardiac myocyte cultures. This
provides the first identification of a cardiac cellular factor required for viral
induction of IFN-beta and the first report of any cell type requiring IRF-3 for
this response.

PMCID: PMC113074
PMID: 10559337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Gene. 1999 Sep 3;237(1):1-14.

Interferon regulatory factors: the next generation.

Mamane Y(1), Heylbroeck C, Génin P, Algarté M, Servant MJ, LePage C, DeLuca C,
Kwon H, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Canada.

Interferons are a large family of multifunctional secreted proteins involved in
antiviral defense, cell growth regulation and immune activation. Viral infection 
induces transcription of multiple IFN genes, a response that is in part mediated 
by the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs). The initially characterized members 
IRF-1 and IRF-2 are now part of a growing family of transcriptional regulators
that has expanded to nine members. The functions of the IRFs have also expanded
to include distinct roles in biological processes such as pathogen response,
cytokine signaling, cell growth regulation and hematopoietic development. The aim
of this review is to provide an update on the novel discoveries in the area of
IRF transcription factors and the important roles of the new generation of
IRFs--particularly IRF-3, IRF-4 and IRF-7.

PMID: 10524230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 22;274(43):30686-9.

Activation of interferon regulatory factor 3 in response to DNA-damaging agents.

Kim T(1), Kim TY, Song YH, Min IM, Yim J, Kim TK.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiative Center for Genetic Reprogramming,
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul
151-742, Korea. TK_Kim@hms.harvard.edu

Genotoxic stress triggers signal transduction pathways that mediate either the
protection or apoptosis of affected cells. The interferon regulatory factors
(IRFs) are involved in a wide range of host defense mechanisms against
environmental stresses. Treatment with DNA-damaging agents, including doxorubicin
and UV radiation, caused phosphorylation of the IRF3 transcription factor.
Phosphorylation of IRF3 induced its interaction with the transcriptional
co-activator cAMP-response element binding protein-binding protein. Furthermore, 
genotoxic stress-induced phosphorylation of IRF3 resulted in its movement from
the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where it activated transcription from its binding
site. These observations suggest that IRF3 plays a role in the defensive
responses induced by genotoxic stress.

PMID: 10521456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;18(9):685-92.

Cloning and functional analysis of the human IRF-3 promoter.

Lowther WJ(1), Moore PA, Carter KC, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, School of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
Maryland 21231, USA.

We have isolated a genomic clone of the human IRF-3 gene containing 779
nucleotides of the 5' flanking region and the complete intron exon sequence. The 
gene has eight exons which span about 6 kb on chromosome 19q13.3. The IRF-3
promoter has neither a conserved TATA box nor a CCAAT box motif but is GC rich.
Several putative DNA-binding elements were identified, including three SP-1
sites, a USF element, a HOX box, a CarG box, and an NF-1 site. Deletion analysis 
of the promoter region showed that the core basal promoter, consisting of 113 bp 
5' of the first transcription start site, was sufficient for constitutive
expression. This region contains only one of the SP-1 sites as well as the HOX
element and NF-1 site, and although it is GC rich, it does not contain any of the
other putative DNA-binding sites. In contrast, the mouse IRF-3 promoter, while
displaying a high degree of homology with the human promoter, contains both TATA 
and CCAAT box motifs, suggesting that, at least at the level of transcription
initiation, these genes may be differentially regulated.

PMID: 10492399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Virol. 1999 Sep;73(9):7334-42.

Functional analysis of human herpesvirus 8-encoded viral interferon regulatory
factor 1 and its association with cellular interferon regulatory factors and
p300.

Burýsek L(1), Yeow WS, Lubyová B, Kellum M, Schafer SL, Huang YQ, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

Human herpesvirus 8/Kaposi sarcoma-associated virus (HHV-8/KSHV) contains, in
addition to genes required for viral replication, a unique set of nonstructural
genes which may be part of viral mimicry and contribute to viral replication and 
pathogenesis in vivo. Among these, HHV-8 encodes four open reading frames (ORFs) 
that showed homology to the transcription factors of the interferon regulatory
factor (IRF) family. The ORF K9, viral IRF 1 (vIRF-1), has been cloned, and it
was shown that, when overexpressed, it down modulates the interferon-mediated
transcriptional activation of the interferon-stimulated gene 15 (ISG 15)
promoter, and the role of vIRF-1 in viral mimicry was implied. However, the
molecular mechanism of this effect has not been clarified. Here, we extend this
observation and show that vIRF-1 also downregulates the transcriptional activity 
of IFNA gene promoter in infected cells by interfering with the transactivating
activity of cellular IRFs, including IRF-1 and IRF-3. We further show that
ectopic expression of vIRF-1 in NIH 3T3 cells confers resistance to tumor
necrosis factor alpha-induced apoptosis. While vIRF-1 is unable to bind DNA with 
the same specificity as cellular IRFs, we demonstrate by in vitro binding assay
that it can associate with the family of cellular IRFs, such as IRF-1 and the
interferon consensus sequence binding protein. vIRF-1 interaction domain was
localized between amino acids (aa) 152 and 243. While no binding between the
full-size IRF-3 and vIRF-1 could be detected by the same assay, we show that
vIRF-1 also targets the carboxy-terminal region (aa 1623 to 2414) of the
transcriptional coactivator p300 which could also bind IRF-3 and IRF-1. These
results demonstrate that vIRF-1 can modulate the transcription of the IFNA genes 
by direct heterodimerization with members of the IRF family, as well as by
competitive binding with cellular transcription factors to the carboxy-terminal
region of p300.

PMCID: PMC104259
PMID: 10438822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Oncogene. 1999 Jul 8;18(27):3944-53.

Retinoic acid resistance in NB4 APL cells is associated with lack of interferon
alpha synthesis Stat1 and p48 induction.

Pelicano L(1), Brumpt C, Pitha PM, Chelbi-Alix MK.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UPR 9051, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France.

In the t(15;17) acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL), all trans-retinoic (RA)
treatment induces maturation leading to clinically complete but not durable
remission, as RA resistance develops in the treated patients as well as in vitro.
RA and interferons (IFNs) are known inhibitors of proliferation in various cells 
including those from APL. In this report, we show that they can act cooperatively
to inhibit growth and to induce differentiation of NB4 cells but not of two
RA-resistant NB4 derived cell lines, NB4-R1 and NB4-R2. However, the resistant
cell lines respond to IFN. In NB4 cells, RA increases the expression of Stat1,
p48 and IRF-1, three transcription factors playing a central role in the IFN
response and induces the synthesis and the secretion of IFN alpha. RA-induced IFN
alpha seems to play a role in inhibition of NB4 cell growth but not in their
differentiation. In the resistant cells, NB4-R1 and NB4-R2, both the induction of
IFN and the increase of Statl and p48 expression by RA are completely blocked. In
contrast, IRF-1 mRNA and protein expressions are induced in the three cell lines.
This suggests that increase of IRF-1 expression is not sufficient for IFN
induction. Our results identify some defects linked to RA-resistance in APL and
support the hypothesis that RA-induced Stat1 expression and IFN secretion may be 
one of the mechanisms mediating growth inhibition by RA.

PMID: 10435617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 18;274(25):18060-6.

Lipopolysaccharide inhibits virus-mediated induction of interferon genes by
disruption of nuclear transport of interferon regulatory factors 3 and 7.

Juang YT(1), Au WC, Lowther W, Hiscott J, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

We have studied the effects of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on the Newcastle disease 
virus (NDV)-mediated induction of cytokine genes expression. Raw cells treated
with LPS before or after virus infection showed down-regulation in the expression
of interferon A and, to a lesser extent, interferon B genes. In contrast,
induction of the interleukin (IL)-6 gene was enhanced. The effects of LPS were
not a result of the suppression of virus replication, because the transcription
of viral nucleocapsid gene was not affected. Consistent with these findings, LPS 
also suppressed the NDV-mediated induction of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene driven by murine interferon A4 promoter in a transient transfection
assay. Furthermore, LPS inhibited virus-mediated phosphorylation of interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and the consequent translocation of IRF-3 from
cytoplasm to nucleus. The LPS-mediated inhibition of IFNA gene expression was
much weaker in infected Raw cells that constitutively overexpressed IRF-3. The
nuclear translocation of IRF-7 in infected cells was also inhibited by LPS. These
data suggest that LPS down-regulates the virus-mediated induction of IFNA genes
by post-translationally targeting the IRF-3 and IRF-7 proteins.

PMID: 10364258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Mol Cell. 1999 Jan;3(1):125-9.

Virus infection leads to localized hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4 at the 
IFN-beta promoter.

Parekh BS(1), Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Transcriptional activation of the human interferon-beta (IFN-beta) gene by virus 
infection requires the assembly of a higher order nucleoprotein complex, the
enhanceosome, which consists of the transcriptional activators NF-kappa B
(p50/p65), ATF-2/c-jun, IRF-3 and IRF-7, architectural protein HMGI(Y), and the
coactivators p300 and CBP. In this report, we show that virus infection of cells 
results in a dramatic hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4 that is localized to
the IFN-beta promoter. Furthermore, expressing a truncated version of IRF-3,
which lacks a p300/CBP interaction domain, suppresses both histone
hyperacetylation and activation of the IFN-beta gene. Thus, coactivator-mediated 
localized hyperacetylation of histones may play a crucial role in inducible gene 
expression.

PMID: 10024886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;19(2):959-66.

Essential role of interferon regulatory factor 3 in direct activation of RANTES
chemokine transcription.

Lin R(1), Heylbroeck C, Genin P, Pitha PM, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Canada H3T 1E2.

Localized and systemic cytokine production in virus-infected cells play an
important role in the outcome of viral infection and pathogenicity. Activation of
the interferon regulatory factors (IRF) in turn is a critical mediator of
cytokine gene transcription. Recent studies have focused on the 55-kDa IRF-3 gene
product as a direct transcriptional regulator of type 1 interferon (IFN-alpha and
IFN-beta) activation in response to virus infection. Virus infection induces
phosphorylation of IRF-3 on specific C-terminal serine residues and permits
cytoplasmic-to-nuclear translocation of IRF-3, activation of DNA binding and
transactivation potential, and association with the CBP/p300 coactivator. We
previously generated constitutively active [IRF-3(5D)] and dominant-negative
forms of IRF-3 that control IFN-beta and IFN-alpha gene expression. In an effort 
to characterize the range of immunoregulatory genes controlled by IRF-3, we now
demonstrate that endogenous human RANTES gene transcription is directly induced
in tetracycline-inducible IRF-3(5D)-expressing cells or paramyxovirus-infected
cells. We also show that a dominant-negative IRF-3 mutant inhibits virus-induced 
expression of the RANTES promoter. Specific mutagenesis of overlapping ISRE-like 
sites located between nucleotides -123 and -96 in the RANTES promoter reduces
virus-induced and IRF-3-dependent activation. These studies broaden the range of 
IRF-3 immunoregulatory target genes to include at least one member of the
chemokine superfamily.

PMCID: PMC116027
PMID: 9891032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochimie. 1998 Aug-Sep;80(8-9):641-50.

The role of interferon regulatory factors in the interferon system and cell
growth control.

Harada H(1), Taniguchi T, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

Complex cellular responses are often coordinated by a genetic regulatory network 
in which a given transcription factor controls the expression of a diverse set of
target genes. Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and IRF-2 have originally been
identified as a transcriptional activator and repressor, respectively, of the
interferon-beta (IFN-beta) as well as of IFN-inducible genes. However, these
factors have since been shown to modulate not only the cellular response to IFNs,
but also cell growth, susceptibility to transformation by oncogenes, induction of
apoptosis, and development of the T cell immune response. Furthermore, the
evidence suggests that deletion and/or inactivation of the IRF-1 gene may be a
critical step in the development of some human hematopoietic neoplasms.
Subsequently, these factors have been shown to constitute a family of
transcription factors, termed the IRF-family. Recent studies indicate that other 
IRF family members also involve the regulation of the IFN system and cell
transformation. The IRF-family may be examples of transcription factors which can
selectively modulate several sets of genes depending on the cell type and/or
nature of the cellular stimuli, so as to evoke host defense mechanisms against
infection and oncogenesis.

PMID: 9865486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Ann Hum Genet. 1998 May;62(Pt 3):231-4.

Mapping of human interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) to chromosome 19q13.3-13.4
by an intragenic polymorphic marker.

Bellingham J(1), Gregory-Evans K, Gregory-Evans CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Imperial College School of Medicine, London,
UK. jbelling@hgmp.mrc.ac.uk

We have identified a highly polymorphic intragenic marker composed of two
dinucleotide repeats in an intron of the human interferon regulatory factor
(IRF3) gene. This polymorphic marker has allowed us to map IRF3 to the boundary
of 19q13.3-13.4 between the polymorphic markers D19S604 and D19S206 close to
KLK1. An intron is present in a homologous position in the mouse Irf3 gene, but
lacks the dinucleotide repeats present in the human intron. Syntenic conservation
between this region of 19q13.3-13.4 maps Irf3 to either mouse chromosome 7 or 17.

PMID: 9803267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Aug 18;95(17):9837-42.

Primary activation of interferon A and interferon B gene transcription by
interferon regulatory factor 3.

Juang YT(1), Lowther W, Kellum M, Au WC, Lin R, Hiscott J, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD 21231, USA.

The family of interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRFs) encodes DNA-binding
transcription factors, some of which function as modulators of virus-induced
signaling. The IRF-3 gene is constitutively expressed in many tissues and cell
types, and neither virus infection nor IFN treatment enhances its transcription. 
In infected cells, however, IRF-3 protein is phosphorylated at the carboxyl
terminus, which facilitates its binding to the CBP/p300 coactivator. In the
present study, we demonstrate that overexpression of IRF-3 significantly enhances
virus-mediated transcription of the IFNA and IFNB genes in infected cells as well
as IFN synthesis. IRF-3-mediated activation of IFN genes depends in part on
carboxyl-terminal phosphorylation of a cluster of Ser/Thr residues, because a
mutant with Ser/Thr to Ala substitutions activates the IFN promoter less
efficiently. However, overexpression of IRF-3 in human 2FTGH cells alone results 
in the induction of an antiviral state, which depends on functional IFN
signaling, because IRF-3 does not induce an antiviral state in mutant 2FTGH cells
defective in either JAK-1 or p48 functions; also no antiviral effect of IRF-3
could be demonstrated in Vero cells that lack the IFNA and IFNB genes. This
finding indicates that the observed antiviral activity of IRF-3 in 2FTGH cells
results mainly from the induction of IFNs. Furthermore, E1A protein inhibited
IRF-3-mediated stimulation of the IFNA4 promoter in transient expression assays; 
this inhibition could be reversed partially by overexpression of CBP/p300 and was
not demonstrated with the mutant of E1A that does not bind p300. These results
identify IRF-3 and CBP/p300 as integral components of the virus-induced complex
that stimulates type 1 IFN gene transcription. The observation that adenovirus
E1A antagonizes IRF-3 mediated activation suggests that E1A and IRF-3 may compete
for binding to CBP/p300 and implicates a novel mechanism by which adenovirus may 
overcome the antiviral effects of the IFN pathway.

PMCID: PMC21423
PMID: 9707562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell. 1998 Mar;1(4):507-18.

Virus infection induces the assembly of coordinately activated transcription
factors on the IFN-beta enhancer in vivo.

Wathelet MG(1), Lin CH, Parekh BS, Ronco LV, Howley PM, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell 1999 Jun;3(6):813.

We have identified a virus-activated factor (VAF) that binds to a regulatory
element shared by different virus-inducible genes. We provide evidence that VAF
contains two members of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of
transcriptional activator proteins (IRF-3 and IRF-7), as well as the
transcriptional coactivator proteins p300 and CBP. Remarkably, VAF, as well as
recombinant IRF-3 and IRF-7 proteins, binds very weakly to the interferon-beta
(IFN-beta) gene promoter in vitro. However, in virus-infected cells, both
proteins are recruited to the endogenous IFN-beta promoter as part of a protein
complex that includes ATF-2/c-Jun and NF-kappa B. These observations provide a
unique example of the coordinate activation of multiple transcriptional activator
proteins and their highly cooperative assembly into a transcriptional enhancer
complex in vivo.

PMID: 9660935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Genes Dev. 1998 Jul 1;12(13):2061-72.

Human papillomavirus 16 E6 oncoprotein binds to interferon regulatory factor-3
and inhibits its transcriptional activity.

Ronco LV(1), Karpova AY, Vidal M, Howley PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115
USA.

Interferon regulatory factor-3 (IRF-3) was found to specifically interact with
HPV16 E6 in a yeast two-hybrid screen. IRF-3 is activated by the presence of
double-stranded RNA or by virus infection to form a stable complex with other
transcriptional regulators that bind to the regulatory elements of the IFNbeta
promoter. We show that IRF-3 is a potent transcriptional activator and
demonstrate that HPV16 E6 can inhibit its transactivation function. The
expression of HPV16 E6 in primary human keratinocytes inhibits the induction of
IFNbeta mRNA following Sendai virus infection. The binding of HPV16 E6 to IRF-3
does not result in its ubiquitination or degradation. We propose that the
interaction of E6 with IRF-3 and the inhibition of IRF-3's transcriptional
activity may provide the virus a means to circumvent the normal antiviral
response of an HPV16-infected cell.

PMCID: PMC316980
PMID: 9649509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):3796-802.

Cytomegalovirus activates interferon immediate-early response gene expression and
an interferon regulatory factor 3-containing interferon-stimulated response
element-binding complex.

Navarro L(1), Mowen K, Rodems S, Weaver B, Reich N, Spector D, David M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093, USA.

Interferon establishes an antiviral state in numerous cell types through the
induction of a set of immediate-early response genes. Activation of these genes
is mediated by phosphorylation of latent transcription factors of the STAT
family. We found that infection of primary foreskin fibroblasts with human
cytomegalovirus (HCMV) causes selective transcriptional activation of the
alpha/beta-interferon-responsive ISG54 gene. However, no activation or nuclear
translocation of STAT proteins was detected. Activation of ISG54 occurs
independent of protein synthesis but is prevented by protein tyrosine kinase
inhibitors. Further analysis revealed that HCMV infection induced the DNA binding
of a novel complex, tentatively called cytomegalovirus-induced
interferon-stimulated response element binding factor (CIF). CIF is composed, at 
least in part, of the recently identified interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), 
but it does not contain the STAT1 and STAT2 proteins that participate in the
formation of interferon-stimulated gene factor 3. IRF3, which has previously been
shown to possess no intrinsic transcriptional activation potential, interacts
with the transcriptional coactivator CREB binding protein, but not with p300, to 
form CIF. Activating interferon-stimulated genes without the need for prior
synthesis of interferons might provide the host cell with a potential shortcut in
the activation of its antiviral defense.

PMCID: PMC108963
PMID: 9632763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 1997 Dec;8(4):293-312.

The growing family of interferon regulatory factors.

Nguyen H(1), Hiscott J, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Interferons (IFN) exert their multiple biological effects through the induction
of expression of over 30 genes encoding proteins with antiviral,
antiproliferative and immunomodulatory functions. Among the many IFN-inducible
proteins are the Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs), a family of transcription 
regulators, originally consisting of the well-characterized IRF-1 and IRF-2
proteins; the family has now expanded to over 10 members and is still growing.
The present review provides a detailed description of recently characterized IRF 
family members. Studies analyzing IRF-expressing cell lines and IRF knockout mice
reveal that each member of the IRF family exerts distinct roles in biological
processes such as pathogen response, cytokine signalling, cell growth regulation 
and hematopoietic development. Understanding the molecular mechanisms by which
the IRFs affect these important cellular events and IFN expression will
contribute to a greater understanding of events leading to various viral, immune 
and malignant disease states and will suggest novel strategies for antiviral and 
immune modulatory therapy.

PMID: 9620643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):2986-96.

Virus-dependent phosphorylation of the IRF-3 transcription factor regulates
nuclear translocation, transactivation potential, and proteasome-mediated
degradation.

Lin R(1), Heylbroeck C, Pitha PM, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. mdli@musica.mcgill.ca

The interferon regulatory factors (IRF) consist of a growing family of related
transcription proteins first identified as regulators of the alpha beta
interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) gene promoters, as well as the interferon-stimulated 
response element (ISRE) of some IFN-stimulated genes. IRF-3 was originally
identified as a member of the IRF family based on homology with other IRF family 
members and on binding to the ISRE of the ISG15 promoter. IRF-3 is expressed
constitutively in a variety of tissues, and the relative levels of IRF-3 mRNA do 
not change in virus-infected or IFN-treated cells. In the present study, we
demonstrate that following Sendai virus infection, IRF-3 is posttranslationally
modified by protein phosphorylation at multiple serine and threonine residues,
which are located in the carboxy terminus of IRF-3. A combination of IRF-3
deletion and point mutations localized the inducible phosphorylation sites to the
region -ISNSHPLSLTSDQ- between amino acids 395 and 407; point mutation of
residues Ser-396 and Ser-398 eliminated virus-induced phosphorylation of IRF-3
protein, although residues Ser-402, Thr-404, and Ser-405 were also targets.
Phosphorylation results in the cytoplasm-to-nucleus translocation of IRF-3, DNA
binding, and increased transcriptional activation. Substitution of the Ser-Thr
sites with the phosphomimetic Asp generated a constitutively active form of IRF-3
that functioned as a very strong activator of promoters containing PRDI-PRDIII or
ISRE regulatory elements. Phosphorylation also appears to represent a signal for 
virus-mediated degradation, since the virus-induced turnover of IRF-3 was
prevented by mutation of the IRF-3 Ser-Thr cluster or by proteasome inhibitors.
Interestingly, virus infection resulted in the association of IRF-3 with the CREB
binding protein (CBP) coactivator, as detected by coimmunoprecipitation with
anti-CBP antibody, an interaction mediated by the C-terminal domains of both
proteins. Mutation of residues Ser-396 and Ser-398 in IRF-3 abrogated its binding
to CBP. These results are discussed in terms of a model in which virus-inducible,
C-terminal phosphorylation of IRF-3 alters protein conformation to permit nuclear
translocation, association with transcriptional partners, and primary activation 
of IFN- and IFN-responsive genes.

PMCID: PMC110678
PMID: 9566918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FEBS Lett. 1998 Mar 20;425(1):112-6.

Involvement of the IRF family transcription factor IRF-3 in virus-induced
activation of the IFN-beta gene.

Sato M(1), Tanaka N, Hata N, Oda E, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

The virus-induced activation of interferon alpha/beta (IFN-alpha/beta) gene
transcription is essential for host defense. The IFN-beta promoter is controlled 
primarily by the virus-inducible enhancer elements, the IRF-Es. Here we show that
IRF-3, an IRF family transcription factor, translocates to the nucleus from the
cytoplasm upon virus infection in NIH/3T3 cells. The nuclear IRF-3 is
phosphorylated, interacts with the co-activators CBP/p300, and binds specifically
to the IFN-beta IRF-E. Furthermore, overexpression of IRF-3 causes a marked
increase in virus-induced IFN-beta mRNA expression. Thus, IRF-3 is a candidate
transcription factor mediating the activation of the IFN-beta gene.

PMID: 9541017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. EMBO J. 1998 Feb 16;17(4):1087-95.

Direct triggering of the type I interferon system by virus infection: activation 
of a transcription factor complex containing IRF-3 and CBP/p300.

Yoneyama M(1), Suhara W, Fukuhara Y, Fukuda M, Nishida E, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Japan.

It has been hypothesized that certain viral infections directly activate a
transcription factor(s) which is responsible for the activation of genes encoding
type I interferons (IFNs) and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) via interferon
regulatory factor (IRF) motifs present in their respective promoters. These
events trigger the activation of defense machinery against viruses. Here we
demonstrate that IRF-3 transmits a virus-induced signal from the cytoplasm to the
nucleus. In unstimulated cells, IRF-3 is present in its inactive form, restricted
to the cytoplasm due to a continuous nuclear export mediated by nuclear export
signal, and it exhibits few DNA-binding properties. Virus infection but not IFN
treatment induces phosphorylation of IRF-3 on specific serine residues, thereby
allowing it to complex with the co-activator CBP/p300 with simultaneous nuclear
translocation and its specific DNA binding. We also show that a dominant-negative
mutant of IRF-3 could inhibit virus-induced activation of chromosomal type I IFN 
genes and ISGs. These findings suggest that IRF-3 plays an important role in the 
virus-inducible primary activation of type I IFN and IFN-responsive genes.

PMCID: PMC1170457
PMID: 9463386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Feb 3;95(3):1085-90.

The polyoma virus T antigen interferes with interferon-inducible gene expression.

Weihua X(1), Ramanujam S, Lindner DJ, Kudaravalli RD, Freund R, Kalvakolanu DV.

Author information: 
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Murine polyoma virus (MPyV) is a small DNA virus that induces tumors in multiple 
tissues of infected host. In this investigation, we show that cell lines derived 
from wild type virus-induced breast tumors are resistant to the growth inhibitory
action of interferon beta (IFN-beta). Furthermore, replication of heterologous
viruses such as vesicular stomatitis virus and encephalomyocarditis virus was not
inhibited by IFN-beta in these cells. This effect was due to inhibition of
IFN-stimulated gene expression by viral T antigen. Activation of IFN-stimulated
gene factor 3 was inhibited in cells derived from a tumor induced by wild-type
MPyV but not those from a mutant that lacks the pRB binding site of the large T
antigen. Similarly IFN-gamma-inducible gene expression was also inhibited in
cells transformed by wild-type virus. The levels of components of IFN-stimulated 
gene factor 3 and signal transducing Janus tyrosine kinases were comparable
between the cells transformed by the wild-type and mutant viruses. The viral
large T antigen bound to Janus tyrosine kinase 1 and inactivated signaling
through IFN receptors. Thus, these studies identify a mechanism of viral
resistance to IFN action.

PMCID: PMC18681
PMID: 9448289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;18(3):1359-68.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 and CREB-binding protein/p300 are subunits of
double-stranded RNA-activated transcription factor DRAF1.

Weaver BK(1), Kumar KP, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York at Stony Brook, 11794,
USA.

Cells respond to viral infection or double-stranded RNA with the transcriptional 
induction of a subset of alpha/beta interferon-stimulated genes by a pathway
distinct from the interferon signal pathway. The transcriptional induction is
mediated through a DNA sequence containing the alpha/beta interferon-stimulated
response element (ISRE). We previously identified a novel transcription factor,
designated double-stranded RNA-activated factor 1 (DRAF1), that recognizes this
response element. The DNA-binding specificity of DRAF1 correlates with
transcriptional induction, thereby distinguishing it as a positive regulator of
alpha/beta interferon-stimulated genes. Two of the components of DRAF1 have now
been identified as interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and the transcriptional
coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP)/p300. We demonstrate that IRF-3 preexists 
in the cytoplasm of uninfected cells and translocates to the nucleus following
viral infection. Translocation of IRF-3 is accompanied by an increase in serine
and threonine phosphorylation. Coimmunoprecipitation analyses of endogenous
proteins demonstrate an association of IRF-3 with the transcriptional
coactivators CBP and p300 only subsequent to infection. In addition, antibodies
to the IRF-3, CBP, and p300 molecules react with DRAF1 bound to the ISRE target
site of induced genes. The cellular response that leads to DRAF1 activation and
specific gene expression may serve to increase host survival during viral
infection.

PMCID: PMC108849
PMID: 9488451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jan 30;273(5):2714-20.

Regulation of type I interferon gene expression by interferon regulatory
factor-3.

Schafer SL(1), Lin R, Moore PA, Hiscott J, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

The genes of the family of interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRF) encode DNA
binding transcriptional factors that are involved in modulation of transcription 
of IFN and interferon-induced genes (ISG). The presence of IRF binding sites in
the promoter region of IFNA and IFNB genes indicates that IRF factors recognizing
these sites play an important role in the virus-mediated induction of these
genes. We have described a novel human gene of this family, IRF-3, that is
constitutively expressed in a variety of cell types. IRF-3 binds to the
interferon-sensitive response element (ISRE) present in the ISG15 gene promoter
and activates its transcriptional activity. In the present study, we examined
whether IRF-3 can modulate transcriptional activity of IFNA and IFNB promoter
regions. Our results demonstrate that IRF-3 can bind to the IRF-like binding
sites present in the virus-inducible region of the IFNA4 promoter and to the
PRDIII region of the IFNB promoter but cannot alone stimulate their
transcriptional activity in the human cell line, 293. However, the fusion protein
generated from the IRF-3 binding domain and the RelA(p65) activation domain
effectively activates both IFNA4 and IFNB promoters. Cotransfection of IRF-3 and 
RelA(p65) expression plasmids activates the IFNB gene promoter but not the
promoter of IFNA4 gene that does not contain the NF-kB binding site.
Surprisingly, activation of the IFNA4 gene promoter by virus and IRF-1 in these
cells was inhibited by IRF-3. These data indicate that in 293 cells IRF-3 does
not stimulate expression of IFN genes but can cooperate with RelA(p65) to
stimulate the IFNB promoter.

PMID: 9446577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Dec 5;92(25):11657-61.

Identification of a member of the interferon regulatory factor family that binds 
to the interferon-stimulated response element and activates expression of
interferon-induced genes.

Au WC(1), Moore PA, Lowther W, Juang YT, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

A family of interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRFs) have been shown to play a 
role in transcription of IFN genes as well as IFN-stimulated genes. We report the
identification of a member of the IRF family which we have named IRF-3. The IRF-3
gene is present in a single copy in human genomic DNA. It is expressed
constitutively in a variety of tissues and no increase in the relative
steady-state levels of IRF-3 mRNA was observed in virus-infected or IFN-treated
cells. The IRF-3 gene encodes a 50-kDa protein that binds specifically to the
IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) but not to the IRF-1 binding site PRD-I.
Overexpression of IRF-3 stimulates expression of the IFN-stimulated gene 15
(ISG15) promoter, an ISRE-containing promoter. The murine IFNA4 promoter, which
can be induced by IRF-1 or viral infection, is not induced by IRF-3. Expression
of IRF-3 as a Gal4 fusion protein does not activate expression of a
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene containing repeats of the Gal4
binding sites, indicating that this protein does not contain the transcription
transactivation domain. The high amino acid homology between IRF-3 and ISG factor
3 gamma polypeptide (ISGF3 gamma) and their similar binding properties indicate
that, like ISGF3 gamma, IRF-3 may activate transcription by complex formation
with other transcriptional factors, possibly members of the Stat family.
Identification of this ISRE-binding protein may help us to understand the
specificity in the various Stat pathways.

PMCID: PMC40461
PMID: 8524823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


