
1. Clin Rheumatol. 2016 Mar 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic association study of systemic lupus erythematosus and disease
subphenotypes in European populations.

Ruiz-Larrañaga O(1), Migliorini P(2), Uribarri M(3), Czirják L(4), Alcaro MC(5), 
Del Amo J(3), Iriondo M(6), Manzano C(6), Escorza-Treviño S(3), Estonba A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology Department, University
of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain. otsanda.ruiz@ehu.eus. (2)Clinical 
Immunology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of 
Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (3)Department of Research and Development, Progenika Biopharma
S.A., Derio, Spain. (4)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, University of
Pécs, Pécs, Hungary. (5)Department of Research and Development, Toscana
Biomarkers S.r.l., Siena, Italy. (6)Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal
Physiology Department, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain.

Epidemiological studies suggest a strong contribution of genetic factors in the
pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In the last decades, many
risk loci have been identified in several genetic association studies following
both candidate gene and genome-wide approaches. The present work was conducted by
GAPAID (Genes And Proteins for AutoImmunity Diagnostics) consortium with a dual
aim: to replicate the association of several previously reported SLE
susceptibility loci in an independent European sample and to explore their
relation with some disease subphenotypes. A total of 48 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP) from 40 associated loci were typed in a cohort of 208 SLE
patients and 152 controls from Rheumatology Units of the University Hospital of
Pisa (Italy) and University of Pécs Medical Center (Hungary). Regression analyses
were performed to detect disease susceptibility loci and to identify genes
affecting specific disease manifestations (renal, neurological, or skin
involvement; arthritis; secondary Sjögren syndrome; and secondary
antiphospholipid syndrome). Association of previously described risk alleles from
HLA locus has been replicated, while IRF5, BLK, ITGAM, and IRF8 loci have been
found to be consistent with previous published results. In addition, two new
subphenotype-specific associations have been detected: SNP rs5754217 (UBE2L3)
with skin involvement and rs3093030 (ICAM1-ICAM4-ICAM5) with hematological
disorders. Overall, results from GAPAID project are consistent with previously
established associations for HLA, IRF5, BLK, ITGAM, and IRF8 SLE susceptibility
loci and report for the first time two subphenotype-specific associations.

PMID: 27021335  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Biol Chem. 2016 Mar 23. pii: jbc.M115.702092. [Epub ahead of print]

Emodin bi-directionally modulates macrophage polarization and epigenetically
regulates macrophage memory.

Iwanowycz S(1), Wang J(1), Altomare D(1), Hui Y(1), Fan D(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of South Carolina, United States. (2)University of South Carolina, 
United States daping.fan@uscmed.sc.edu.

Macrophages are pleiotropic cells capable of performing a broad spectrum of
functions. Macrophage phenotypes are classified along a continuum between the
extremes of pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages and anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages.
The seemingly opposing functions of M1 and M2 macrophages must be tightly
regulated for an effective and proper response to foreign molecules or damaged
tissue. Excessive activation of either M1 or M2 macrophages contributes to the
pathology of many diseases. Emodin is a Chinese herb derived compound and has
shown potential to inhibit inflammation in various settings. In this study, we
tested the ability of emodin to modulate macrophage response to both M1 and M2
stimuli. Primary mouse macrophages were stimulated with LPS/IFNgamma; or IL4 with
or without emodin, and the effects of emodin on gene transcription, cell
signaling pathways, and histone modifications were examined by a variety of
approaches including microarray, quantitative real-time PCR, Western blot,
chromatin immunoprecipitation, and functional assays. We found that emodin
bi-directionally tunes the induction of LPS/IFNgamma; and IL4 responsive genes
through inhibiting NFkB/IRF5/STAT1 signaling and IRF4/STAT6 signaling,
respectively; and thereby emodin modulates macrophage phagocytosis, migration,
and NO production. Further, emodin inhibited the removal of H3K27m3 marks and the
addition of H3K27ac marks on genes required for M1 or M2 polarization of
macrophages. In conclusion, our data suggests that emodin is uniquely able to
suppress excessive response of macrophages to both M1 and M2 stimuli and
therefore has the potential to restore macrophage homeostasis in various
pathologies.

Copyright © 2016, The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.

PMID: 27008857  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016 Mar 16. [Epub ahead of print]

M2 Macrophage Transplantation Ameliorates Cognitive Dysfunction in
Amyloid-ß-Treated Rats Through Regulation of Microglial Polarization.

Zhu D, Yang N, Liu YY, Zheng J, Ji C, Zuo PP.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common neurodegenerative disorder in the
elderly population. Neuroinflammation induced by amyloid-ß (Aß) aggregation is
considered to be the critical factor underlying AD pathological mechanisms.
Alternatively activated (M2) macrophages/microglia have been reported to have
neuroprotective effects in neurodegenerative disease. In this study, we
characterized the neuroprotective effects of M2 macrophage transplantation in AD 
model rats and investigated the underlying mechanisms. Intracerebroventricular
injection of Aß1 - 42 to rats was used to model AD and resulted in cognitive
impairment, neuronal damage, and inflammatory changes in the brain
microenvironment. We observed an increased interferon regulatory factor (IRF)
5/IRF4 ratio, resulting in greater production of classically activated (M1)
versus M2 microglia. M2 macrophage transplantation attenuated inflammation in the
brain, reversed Aß1 - 42-induced changes in the IRF4-IRF5 ratio, drove endogenous
microglial polarization toward the M2 phenotype, and ameliorated cognitive
impairment. Nerve growth factor (NGF) treatment reduced the IRF5/IRF4 ratio and
induced primary microglial polarization to the M2 phenotype in vitro; these
effects were prevented by tyrosine Kinase Receptor A (TrkA) inhibition. M2
macrophage transplantation restored the balance of IRF4-IRF5 by affecting the
expression of NGF and inflammatory cytokines in the brains of AD model rats. This
drove microglial polarization to the M2 phenotype, promoted termination of
neuroinflammation, and resulted in improved cognitive abilities.

PMID: 27003214  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Mar 12;52:248-257. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.03.011.
[Epub ahead of print]

Comparative analysis of the small RNA transcriptomes of miiuy croaker revealed
microRNA-mediated regulation of TLR signaling pathway response to Vibrio
anguillarum infection.

Xu G(1), Han J(1), Xu T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Fish Biogenetics & Immune Evolution, College of Marine Science, 
Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan, 316022, China. (2)Laboratory of Fish
Biogenetics & Immune Evolution, College of Marine Science, Zhejiang Ocean
University, Zhoushan, 316022, China. Electronic address: tianjunxu@163.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are an abundant class of endogenous noncoding small RNAs
(sRNAs) that are partially complementary to their target messenger RNA (mRNA),
which post-transcriptionally regulate various biological processes by repressing 
mRNA translation or inducing mRNA degradation. MiRNAs have been demonstrated to
play crucial roles in the host response to infection by diverse pathogens. As an 
important bacterial pathogen, Vibrio anguillarum has been caused great economic
losses in miiuy croaker aquaculture. To identify immune-related miRNAs of miiuy
croaker in response to V. anguillarum infection, we constructed two sRNA
libraries with or without bacterial infection. High-throughput deep sequencing
and subsequent bioinformatic analysis identified 241 conserved and 137 novel
miRNA precursors in miiuy croaker based on its whole genome sequences, encoding
293 and 124 mature miRNAs, respectively. Then we compared the expression patterns
of miRNAs in the two libraries. There were significant differences in the
expression of 12 miRNAs between the infection group (IG) and control group (CG). 
Further, the expressions of six miRNAs were validated by real-time quantitative
PCR. The target gene prediction and function analysis were conducted for the 12
differential miRNAs. This analysis revealed that these miRNAs participated in the
regulation multiple immune-related signaling pathways. Transcription factors in
TLR signaling, such as AP-1, IRF5, NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3, were activated by these miRNAs
via post-transcriptionally regulating the expression of TLRs and TLR-associated
signaling proteins, inducing effective host immune response to eradicate
infectious pathogens. This is the first study of the identification and
characterization of miiuy croaker miRNAs in response to V. anguillarum infection.
The comprehensive analysis of the expression of miRNAs and the target gene and
function prediction of differently expressed miRNAs may help to understand the
regulatory mechanisms of miRNA in fish during the interaction between host and
bacterial pathogens.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26980609  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Cell Host Microbe. 2016 Mar 9;19(3):375-87. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.02.003.

Type I Interferon Signaling Prevents IL-1ß-Driven Lethal Systemic
Hyperinflammation during Invasive Bacterial Infection of Soft Tissue.

Castiglia V(1), Piersigilli A(2), Ebner F(1), Janos M(1), Goldmann O(3), Damböck 
U(1), Kröger A(4), Weiss S(5), Knapp S(6), Jamieson AM(7), Kirschning C(8),
Kalinke U(9), Strobl B(10), Müller M(10), Stoiber D(11), Lienenklaus S(12),
Kovarik P(13).

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), 1030
Vienna, Austria. (2)Institute of Animal Pathology (COMPATH), University of Bern, 
3012 Bern, Switzerland; Life Science Faculty, EPFL, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(3)Infection Immunology Research Group, Helmholtz Center for Infection Research, 
38124 Braunschweig, Germany. (4)Institute of Medical Microbiology,
Otto-von-Guericke-University, 39106 Magdeburg, Germany; Department of Molecular
Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Department of Molecular Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research,
38124 Braunschweig, Germany. (6)Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian
Academy of Sciences, 1090 Vienna, Austria; Department of Medicine I, Laboratory
of Infection Biology, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(7)Division of Biology and Medicine, Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA. (8)Institute of Medical 
Microbiology, University of Duisburg-Essen, 45147 Essen, Germany. (9)Institute
for Experimental Infection Research, TWINCORE, Centre for Experimental and
Clinical Infection Research, Hannover Medical School and Helmholtz Centre for
Infection Research, 30625 Hannover, Germany. (10)Institute of Animal Breeding and
Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, 1210 Vienna, Austria.
(11)Institute of Pharmacology, Medical University of Vienna, 1090 Vienna,
Austria; Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Cancer Research, 1090 Vienna, Austria.
(12)Institute for Experimental Infection Research, TWINCORE, Centre for
Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, Hannover Medical School and
Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, 30625 Hannover, Germany; Institute for
Laboratory Animal Science, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.
(13)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter (VBC),
1030 Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: pavel.kovarik@univie.ac.at.

Type I interferons (IFN-Is) are fundamental for antiviral immunity, but their
role in bacterial infections is contradictory and incompletely described.
Streptococcus pyogenes activates IFN-I production in innate immune cells, and
IFN-I receptor 1 (Ifnar1)-deficient mice are highly susceptible to S. pyogenes
infection. Here we report that IFN-I signaling protects the host against invasive
S. pyogenes infection by restricting inflammation-driven damage in distant
tissues. Lethality following infection in Ifnar1-deficient mice is caused by
systemically exacerbated levels of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1ß. Critical
cellular effectors of IFN-I in vivo are LysM+ and CD11c+ myeloid cells, which
exhibit suppression of Il1b transcription upon Ifnar1 engagement. These cells are
also the major source of IFN-ß, which is significantly induced by S. pyogenes 23S
rRNA in an Irf5-dependent manner. Our study establishes IL-1ß and IFN-I levels as
key homeostatic variables of protective, yet tuned, immune responses against
severe invasive bacterial infection.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26962946  [PubMed - in process]


6. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 9;6:22401. doi: 10.1038/srep22401.

Epstein Barr Virus and Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis peptides are
recognized in sera and cerebrospinal fluid of MS patients.

Mameli G(1), Cocco E(2), Frau J(2), Marrosu MG(3), Sechi LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Sezione di Microbiologia e Virologia,
Università di Sassari, Viale San Pietro 43b, 07100 Sassari, Italy. (2)Centro
Sclerosi Multipla, Dipartimento di Sanità Pubblica Medicina Clinica e Molecolare,
Università di Cagliari, Via Is Guadazzonis 2, 09126 Cagliari, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche "Mario Aresu", Università di Cagliari, 09126
Cagliari, Italy.

Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
epitopes elicit a consistent humoral response in serum of multiple sclerosis
patients, but the cross reactivity against the homologous myelin basic protein
(MBP) and human interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) has not been searched
within the Cerebral Spinal Fluid (CSF). We evaluated in sera and CSF of patients 
with MS and with other neurological diseases (OND) the humoral response against
EBV/MAP peptides and the IRF5/MBP. Our data showed that EBV and MAP peptides are 
able to induce a specific humoral immune response in MS patients compared to OND 
controls both in serum and in CSF. An intrathecal specific synthesis of IgG
against MBP and their EBV and MAP homologous as indicated by the antibody index
was observed in MS patients. The humoral response against EBV, MAP, MBP and IRF5 
was significantly higher in MS patients compared to OND both in serum and in CSF.
The higher presence of antibodies against MBP and their MAP and EBV homologous in
CSF during relapses suggests a possible role of the pathogens in enhancing
inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4783662
PMID: 26956729  [PubMed - in process]


7. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2016 Mar 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic variants associated with rheumatoid arthritis patients and serotypes in
European populations.

Ruiz-Larrañaga O(1), Uribarri M(2), Alcaro MC(3), Escorza-Treviño S(2), Del Amo
J(2), Iriondo M(4), Manzano C(4), Migliorini P(5), Lóránd V(6), Estonba A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain. otsanda.ruiz@ehu.eus.
(2)Department of Research and Development, Progenika Biopharma S.A., Derio,
Spain. (3)Department of Research and Development, Toscana Biomarkers s.r.l.,
Siena, Italy. (4)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal
Physiology, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain. (5)Clinical
Immunology Unit, Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of 
Pisa, Italy. (6)Department of Rheumatology and Immunology, University of Pécs,
Medical Center, Pécs, Hungary.

OBJECTIVES: To replicate the association of rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
susceptibility loci in an independent European sample and to assess their
specificity with anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPA) status.
METHODS: A selection of 64 SNP previously associated with RA have been typed in a
cohort of 267 RA patients (169 ACPA-positive and 98 ACPA-negative) and 152
controls from the Rheumatology Units of the University Hospital of Pisa (Italy)
and the University of Pécs Medical Center (Hungary). Regression analyses were
performed first considering overall RA patients and secondly, taking both
serotype subgroups as different disease entities. The results have been adjusted 
for age, gender and origin of individuals.
RESULTS: The well-known CD2, REL, TNFAIP3, IRF5, PTPRC, and CCR6 have been
confirmed as RA disease associated loci together with recently discovered BACH2, 
RASGRP1, and IKZF3 loci, taking all RA patients as a unique phenotype. Results
from both serological subgroups separately reflect the specificity of these
susceptibility loci and show additional ACPA-positive specific associations for
variants at IL6R, IL2RA, BLK, DDX6, IL6, and TLE3 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results from GAPAID project are consistent with previously
established RA disease associations for CD2, PTPRC, REL, CCR6, TNFAIP3, IRF5,
BLK, IL2RA, and DDX6 loci. In addition, IL6R, BACH2, RASGRP1, TLE3, and IKZF3 are
replicated for the first time in an independent European population and IL6
appears to be a suggestive new RA associated locus. The stratified analysis based
on ACPA status provides further support for distinct genetic aetiologies of RA
subsets, which might have therapeutic implications.

PMID: 26939566  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Funct Integr Genomics. 2016 Feb 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of human breast milk cells: gene expression profiles during pregnancy,
lactation, involution, and mastitic infection.

Sharp JA(1,)(2), Lefèvre C(3), Watt A(4), Nicholas KR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, 3216,
Australia. julie.sharp@deakin.edu.au. (2)Department of Anatomy and Developmental 
Biology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia.
julie.sharp@deakin.edu.au. (3)Division of Bioinformatics, Walter and Eliza Hall
Medical Research Institute, Melbourne, 3000, Australia.
chris.lefevre@deakin.edu.au. (4)Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin
University, Geelong, VIC, 3216, Australia. ashalyn.watt@deakin.edu.au.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
VIC, 3800, Australia. k.nicholas@deakin.edu.au.

The molecular processes underlying human milk production and the effects of
mastitic infection are largely unknown because of limitations in obtaining tissue
samples. Determination of gene expression in normal lactating women would be a
significant step toward understanding why some women display poor lactation
outcomes. Here, we demonstrate the utility of RNA obtained directly from human
milk cells to detect mammary epithelial cell (MEC)-specific gene expression. Milk
cell RNA was collected from five time points (24 h prepartum during the colostrum
period, midlactation, two involutions, and during a bout of mastitis) in addition
to an involution series comprising three time points. Gene expression profiles
were determined by use of human Affymetrix arrays. Milk cells collected during
milk production showed that the most highly expressed genes were involved in milk
synthesis (e.g., CEL, OLAH, FOLR1, BTN1A1, and ARG2), while milk cells collected 
during involution showed a significant downregulation of milk synthesis genes and
activation of involution associated genes (e.g., STAT3, NF-kB, IRF5, and IRF7).
Milk cells collected during mastitic infection revealed regulation of a unique
set of genes specific to this disease state, while maintaining regulation of milk
synthesis genes. Use of conventional epithelial cell markers was used to
determine the population of MECs within each sample. This paper is the first to
describe the milk cell transcriptome across the human lactation cycle and during 
mastitic infection, providing valuable insight into gene expression of the human 
mammary gland.

PMID: 26909879  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. J Rheumatol. 2016 Feb 15. pii: jrheum.150836. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunochip Analyses of Epistasis in Rheumatoid Arthritis Confirm Multiple
Interactions within MHC and Suggest Novel Non-MHC Epistatic Signals.

Wei WH(1), Loh CY(1), Worthington J(1), Eyre S(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Arthritis Research UK Centre for Genetics and Genomics, Institute of 
Inflammation and Repair, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester; National Institute for 
Health Research (NIHR) Manchester Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit,
Central Manchester National Health Service (NHS) Foundation Trust, Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, Manchester, UK. Supported by the Higher Education
Funding Council for England. W.H. Wei*, PhD, Lecturer in Statistical Genetics,
Arthritis Research UK Centre for Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Inflammation
and Repair, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester Academic Health
Science Centre, University of Manchester; C.Y. Loh*, MRes, PhD Student, Arthritis
Research UK Centre for Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Inflammation and
Repair, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Science
Centre, University of Manchester; J. Worthington, PhD, Professor of Chronic
Disease Genetics, Arthritis Research UK Centre for Genetics and Genomics,
Institute of Inflammation and Repair, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, and NIHR
Manchester Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Central Manchester NHS
Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre; S. Eyre, PhD, Senior
Research Fellow on Rheumatological Disorders, Arthritis Research UK Centre for
Genetics and Genomics, Institute of Inflammation and Repair, Faculty of Medical
and Human Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, University of
Manchester, and NIHR Manchester Musculoskeletal Biomedical Research Unit, Central
Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre. *
These authors contributed equally to this study. Address correspondence to Dr.
W.H. Wei, Arthritis Research UK Centre for Genetics and Genomics, Institute of
Inflammation and Repair, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester
Academic Health Science Centre, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester
M13 9PT, UK. E-mail: wenhua.wei@manchester.ac.uk. Accepted for publication
January 6, 2016.

OBJECTIVE: Studying statistical gene-gene interactions (epistasis) has been
limited by the difficulties in performance, both statistically and
computationally, in large enough sample numbers to gain sufficient power. Three
large Immunochip datasets from cohort samples recruited in the United Kingdom,
United States, and Sweden with European ancestry were used to examine epistasis
in rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: A full pairwise search was conducted in the UK cohort using a
high-throughput tool and the resultant significant epistatic signals were tested 
for replication in the United States and Swedish cohorts. A forward selection
approach was applied to remove redundant signals, while conditioning on the
preidentified additive effects.
RESULTS: We detected abundant genome-wide significant (p < 1.0e-13) epistatic
signals, all within the MHC region. These signals were reduced substantially, but
a proportion remained significant (p < 1.0e-03) in conditional tests. We
identified 11 independent epistatic interactions across the entire MHC, each
explaining on average 0.12% of the phenotypic variance, nearly all replicated in 
both replication cohorts. We also identified non-MHC epistatic interactions
between RA susceptible loci LOC100506023 and IRF5 with Immunochip-wide
significance (p < 1.1e-08) and between 2 neighboring single-nucleotide
polymorphism near PTPN22 that were in low linkage disequilibrium with independent
interaction (p < 1.0e-05). Both non-MHC epistatic interactions were statistically
replicated with a similar interaction pattern in the US cohort only.
CONCLUSION: There are multiple but relatively weak interactions independent of
the additive effects in RA and a larger sample number is required to confidently 
assign additional non-MHC epistasis.

PMID: 26879349  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Feb 1. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10589. [Epub ahead of print]

A protease-activated receptor 2 agonist (AC-264613) suppresses interferon
regulatory factor 5 and decreases interleukin-12p40 production by
lipopolysaccharide-stimulated macrophages: Role of p53.

Yamaguchi R(1,)(2), Yamamoto T(1), Sakamoto A(1), Ishimaru Y(1), Narahara S(1),
Sugiuchi H(1), Yamaguchi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medical Science, Kumamoto Health Science University, Kitaku
Izumi-machi 325 Kumamoto 861-5598, Japan. (2)Graduate School of Medical Science, 
Kumamoto University Medical School, Chuo-ku Honjo 1-1-1 Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

The transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) has a key role in 
the production of interleukin (IL)-12 by macrophages. IRF5 is also a central
mediator of Toll-like receptor signaling and is a direct target of p53.
Activation of protease-activated receptor 2 (PAR-2) upregulates p53 and
suppresses apoptosis. This study investigated the influence of human neutrophil
elastase (HNE) and PAR-2 agonists on expression of IRF5 and IL-12p40 by
macrophages stimulated with lipopolysaccharide. Granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-dependent macrophages showed upregulation of
IRF5 expression, while HNE reduced expression of p53 and IRF5 in a
concentration-dependent manner. HNE also caused a concentration-dependent
decrease of IRF5 in macrophages transfected with small interfering RNA to silence
p53, while silencing of beta-arrestin 2 blunted the reduction of p53 or IRF5 by
HNE. Incubation of macrophages with a PAR-2 agonist, AC-264613, caused a decrease
of IRF5 expression and also significantly reduced p53 protein expression. HNE
upregulated the expression of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 
(TRAF6) and caused transactivation of TLR4, while AC-264613 did not promote TLR4 
transactivation. In conclusion, the PAR-2 agonist AC-264613 attenuated
IRF5-associated IL-12p40 production by macrophages.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26833899  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Autoimmun Rev. 2016 May;15(5):433-9. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2016.01.005. Epub 2016
Jan 21.

Genetic aspects of the antiphospholipid syndrome: An update.

Sebastiani GD(1), Iuliano A(2), Cantarini L(3), Galeazzi M(4).

Author information: 
(1)U.O.C. Reumatologia, Ospedale San Camillo-Forlanini, Roma, Italy. Electronic
address: giandoreum@libero.it. (2)U.O.C. Reumatologia, Ospedale San
Camillo-Forlanini, Roma, Italy. Electronic address: annamariaiuliano@hotmail.it. 
(3)Dip. Di Medicina Clinica e Scienze Immunologiche sez. di Reumatologia,
Policlinico Le Scotte, Università di Siena, Siena, Italy. Electronic address:
cantariniluca@hotmail.com. (4)Dip. Di Medicina Clinica e Scienze Immunologiche
sez. di Reumatologia, Policlinico Le Scotte, Università di Siena, Siena, Italy.
Electronic address: galeazzi@unisi.it.

Studies on the immunogenetic predisposition to antiphospholipid syndrome (APS)
and on other non-genetic and epigenetic factors are summarised and discussed.
Family studies suggest a genetic predisposition to APS. It appears that this
genetic predisposition is in part accounted for by the HLA system, the most
consistent associations being those with DR4 and DRw53. Furthermore, it appears
that lupus anticoagulant (LA) and anticardiolipin (aCL) antibodies are both
associated with the same HLA antigens. Population studies suggest that HLA genes 
have a role in conferring susceptibility to develop primary APS, with some
differences in different ethnic groups. Other genes, outside the MHC, give their 
contribution to the development of this autoimmune syndrome, such as IRF5, STAT4 
and those related to inherited thrombophilia - factor V Leiden and G20210A
prothrombin polymorphisms. Finally, post-transcriptional modifications of
anti-beta2GPI antibodies could be implicated too.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26804759  [PubMed - in process]


12. Pharmacol Res. 2016 Mar;105:216-25. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2015.11.010. Epub 2016
Jan 15.

Structure, mechanism and therapeutic utility of immunosuppressive
oligonucleotides.

Bayik D(1), Gursel I(2), Klinman DM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Inflammation Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer
Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA; Bilkent University, Molecular Biology and
Genetic Department, Therapeutic ODN Research Laboratory, Ankara, Turkey.
(2)Bilkent University, Molecular Biology and Genetic Department, Therapeutic ODN 
Research Laboratory, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address:
ihsangursel@bilkent.edu.tr. (3)Cancer and Inflammation Program, Frederick
National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA. Electronic
address: klinmand@mail.nih.gov.

Synthetic oligodeoxynucleotides that can down-regulate cellular elements of the
immune system have been developed and are being widely studied in preclinical
models. These agents vary in sequence, mechanism of action, and cellular
target(s) but share the ability to suppress a plethora of inflammatory responses.
This work reviews the types of immunosuppressive oligodeoxynucleotide (Sup ODN)
and compares their therapeutic activity against diseases characterized by
pathologic levels of immune stimulation ranging from autoimmunity to septic shock
to cancer (see graphical abstract). The mechanism(s) underlying the efficacy of
Sup ODN and the influence size, sequence and nucleotide backbone on function are 
considered.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26779666  [PubMed - in process]


13. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Mar;50:34-42. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.01.012. Epub
2016 Jan 13.

Positive Darwinian selection within interferon regulatory factor genes of
Gymnocypris przewalskii (Cyprinidae) on the Tibetan Plateau.

Tong C(1), Tian F(2), Tang Y(1), Feng C(1), Guan L(3), Zhang C(2), Zhao K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau Biota, Northwest
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China;
Laboratory of Plateau Fish Evolutionary and Functional Genomics, Northwest
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau Biota, Northwest Institute of
Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China; Laboratory
of Plateau Fish Evolutionary and Functional Genomics, Northwest Institute of
Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China.
(3)Department of Life Science and Technology, Xinxiang Medical University,
Xinxiang, 453003, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau
Biota, Northwest Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Xining, 810001, China; Laboratory of Plateau Fish Evolutionary and Functional
Genomics, Northwest Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Xining, 810001, China. Electronic address: zhaokai@nwipb.cas.cn.

Tibetan Plateau (TP) had experienced phased uplift, resulting in inhospitable
environment of low temperature, hypoxia and high ultraviolet radiation for
Tibetan wildlife. Many organisms can well adapt to TP, it is of ecological and
evolutionary interest to untangle how organisms adapt to extreme environment on
TP through evolution. Previous studies mainly focused on hypoxia and metabolism
related genes, but we know little about the evolutionary history of immune genes 
in Tibetan wildlife. In this study, we first identified 10 interferon regulatory 
factor (IRF) genes from Tibetan naked carp Gymnocypris przewalskii. Within this
gene family, IRF3, IRF5, IRF7 and IRF8 contained positive selection sites.
Evidences indicated that positive selection may lead to IRF genes functional
alternations, presumably driving genes towards adaptation to the environmental
changes. Taken together, our results suggested 4 candidate genes as interesting
targets for further experimental confirmation of their functional variations and 
contributions to high altitude adaptation in Tibet fish.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774494  [PubMed - in process]


14. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2016 Jan 4. [Epub ahead of print]

ROLES OF INTERFERON REGULATORY FACTORS IN CHRONIC MYELOID LEUKEMIA.

Manzella L(1), Tirrò E, Pennisi MS, Massimino M, Stella S, Romano C, Vitale SR,
Vigneri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Catania, Catania, Italy Via Androne, 85 - 95124 - Catania, Italy.
manzella@unict.it.

The Interferon Regulatory Factor (IRF) family consists of multiple transcription 
factors involved in the regulation of a variety of biological processes.
Originally identified as transcriptional regulators of the type I interferon
system, IRFs play a pivotal role in adaptive immunity, cell growth,
differentiation and tumorigenesis. Hence, understanding IRF biology has important
implications in the host response to cancer development and progression. Many
lines of evidence suggest that different IRFs are involved in the pathogenesis of
Chronic Myeloid Leukemia (CML), a myeloproliferative disorder caused by the
BCR-ABL oncoprotein. BCR-ABL displays constitutive tyrosine kinase activity that 
favors cell proliferation, inhibits apoptosis and allows cell survival even in
the absence of proper adhesion to the extracellular matrix. Different BCR-ABL
tyrosine kinase inhibitors are currently available for CML treatment. These drugs
are able to generate eight year CML-specific overall survival rates >90%, only a 
minority of patients will achieve molecular responses compatible with drug
discontinuation. Thus, there is an unmet need for additional therapeutic targets 
that may lead to the cure of most patients diagnosed with CML. A growing body of 
evidence has suggested a role for both IRF4 and IRF8 in the pathogenesis of CML. 
Furthermore, IRF1 is consistently deleted at one or both alleles in patients with
leukemia and myelodysplasia. Finally, we have recently demonstrated that IRF5 is 
a target of BCR-ABL kinase activity and reduces CML cell proliferation. In this
article, we provide an update on the current knowledge of the role of the IRFs in
CML.

PMID: 26728039  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Int J Dermatol. 2016 Apr;55(4):408-16. doi: 10.1111/ijd.12839. Epub 2015 Dec 29.

Polymorphisms in STAT4 and IRF5 increase the risk of systemic sclerosis: a
meta-analysis.

Xu Y(1), Wang W(1), Tian Y(1), Liu J(1), Yang R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, General Hospital of Beijing Military Command,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is the most severe connective tissue
disorder. Recent studies have demonstrated that genetic factors may play a role
in the development of SSc. The aim of this study was to investigate the
association of signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4)
rs7574865 and interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) rs2004640 polymorphisms with 
risk of SSc.
METHODS: Case-control studies were obtained from the electronic database of
PubMed, Medline, Embase, and CNKI (China National Knowledge Infrastructure) up to
December 2013. The association between STAT4 and IRF5 polymorphisms and SSc
susceptibility was assessed by pooled odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence
intervals (CI).
RESULTS: Six related studies, including 4746 SSc cases and 7399 healthy controls,
were pooled in this meta-analysis. For STAT4 polymorphism, we observed a
statistically significant positive association between risk factor T allele
carriers and SSc susceptibility (OR = 1.37, 95% CI = 1.27-1.48, P < 0.00001) in
the overall population. The presence of limited cutaneous (lcSSc) and diffuse
cutaneous (dcSSc) scleroderma also showed a significant association with each of 
the genetic models (P < 0.00001). For IRF5 polymorphism, the T allele was shown
to be strongly associated with increased SSc risk (OR = 1.27, 95% CI = 1.17-1.39,
P < 0.00001). No significant heterogeneity between studies was found.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrated that STAT4 rs7574865 and IRF5 rs2004640G/T 
substitution are associated with a susceptibility to SSc, and they may serve as
the SSc genetic susceptibility factor. These data confirmed that genetic
polymorphisms may play a role in the development of SSc and have provided new
insight into the pathogenesis of SSc.

© 2015 The International Society of Dermatology.

PMID: 26712637  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Pathol. 2016 Mar;238(4):571-83. doi: 10.1002/path.4680. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

Low-grade inflammatory polarization of monocytes impairs wound healing.

Yuan R(1), Geng S(1), Chen K(1), Diao N(1), Chu HW(2), Li L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, National Jewish Health, Denver, CO, USA.

Impaired wound healing often accompanies low-grade inflammatory conditions,
during which circulating levels of subclinical super-low-dose endotoxin may
persist. Low-grade inflammatory monocyte polarization may occur during chronic
inflammation and deter effective wound repair. However, little is understood
about the potential mechanisms of monocyte polarization by sustained insult of
subclinical super-low-dose endotoxin. We observed that super-low-dose endotoxin
preferentially programmes a low-grade inflammatory monocyte state in vitro and in
vivo, as represented by the elevated population of CD11b(+) Ly6C(high) monocytes 
and sustained expression of CCR5. Mechanistically, super-low-dose endotoxin
caused cellular stress, altered lysosome function and increased the transcription
factor IRF5. TUDCA, a potent inhibitor of cellular stress, effectively blocked
monocyte polarization and improved wound healing in mice injected with
super-low-dose endotoxin. Our data revealed the polarization of low-grade
inflammatory monocytes by sustained endotoxin challenge, its underlying
mechanisms and a potential intervention strategy. Copyright © 2015 Pathological
Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4760849 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26690561  [PubMed - in process]


17. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Dec 14. doi: 10.1002/art.39548. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of a systemic lupus erythematosus risk locus spanning ATG16L2,
FCHSD2, and P2RY2 in Koreans.

Lessard CJ(1), Sajuthi S(2), Zhao J(3), Kim K(4), Ice JA(1), Li H(1,)(5),
Ainsworth H(2), Rasmussen A(1), Kelly JA(1), Marion M(2), Bang SY(4), Bin Joo
Y(4), Choi J(4), Lee HS(4), Kang YM(6), Suh CH(7), Chung WT(8), Lee SK(9), Choe
JY(10), Shim SC(11), Oh JH(12), Kim YJ(12), Han BG(12), Shen N(13,)(14), Howe
HS(15), Wakeland EK(16), Li QZ(16), Song YW(17), Gaffney PM(1), Alarcón-Riquelme 
ME(1,)(18), Criswell LA(19), Jacob CO(20), Kimberly RP(21), Vyse TJ(22), Harley
JB(23,)(24), Sivils KL(1,)(5), Bae SC(4), Langefeld CD(2), Tsao BP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. (2)Center for Public Health Genomics
and Department of Biostatistical Sciences, Wake Forest University Health
Sciences, Winston-Salem, NC, 27157-106, USA. (3)Division of Rheumatology,
Department of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA,
90095, USA. (4)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for
Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, 133-792, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,
73014, USA. (6)Kyungpook National University Hospital, Daegu, 700-721, Republic
of Korea. (7)Ajou University Hospital, Suwon, 443-380, Republic of Korea.
(8)Dong-A University Hospital, Busan, 602-715, Republic of Korea. (9)Department
of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, 120-749,
Republic of Korea. (10)Department of Internal Medicine, Catholic University of
Daegu School of Medicine, Daegu, 705-718, Republic of Korea. (11)Daejeon
Rheumatoid & Degenerative Arthritis Center, Chungnam National University
Hospital, Daejeon, 305-764, Republic of Korea. (12)Korea National Institute of
Health, Osong, 361-709, Republic of Korea. (13)Shanghai Institute of
Rheumatology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai, China, 200001. (14)Shanghai JiaoTong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China, 200025. (15)Department of
Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore, 308433. 
(16)University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, 75390, USA.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101,
Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Republic of Korea. (18)Centro de Genomica e
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Pfizer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucia,
Granada, 18100, Spain. (19)Rosalind Russell/Ephraim P. Engleman Rheumatology
Research Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
94117, USA. (20)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, 90095. (21)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Immunology
and Rheumatology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 35294,
USA. (22)Divisions of Genetics and Molecular Medicine and Immunology, Infection
and Inflammatory Disease, King's College London, London, UK, WC2R 2LS.
(23)Division of Rheumatology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. (24)US Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, 45220, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disorder
whose etiology is incompletely understood, but likely involves environmental
triggers in genetically susceptible individuals. We sought to identify the
genetic loci associated with SLE in a Korean population by performing an unbiased
genome-wide association scan.
METHODS: A total of 1,174 Korean SLE cases and 4,248 population controls were
genotyped with strict quality control measures and analyzed for association. For 
select variants, replication was tested in an independent set of 1,412 SLE cases 
and 1,163 population controls of Korean and Chinese ancestries.
RESULTS: Eleven regions outside the HLA exceeded genome-wide significance
(P<5x10(-8) ). A novel SNP-SLE association was identified between FCHSD2 and
P2RY2 peaking at rs11235667 (P = 1.0x10(-8) , odds ratio (OR) = 0.59) on a 33kb
haplotype upstream to ATG16L2. Replication for rs11235667 resulted in Pmeta-rep
=0.001 and Pmeta-overall =6.67x10(-11) (OR=0.63). Within the HLA region,
association peaked in the Class II region at rs116727542 with multiple
independent effects. Classical HLA allele imputation identified HLA-DRB1*1501 and
HLA-DQB1*0602, both highly correlated, as most strongly associated with SLE. We
replicated ten previously established SLE risk loci: STAT1-STAT4, TNFSF4,
TNFAIP3, IKZF1, HIP1, IRF5, BLK, WDFY4, ETS1 and IRAK1-MECP2. Of these loci, we
identified previously unreported independent second effects in TNFAIP3 and TNFSF4
as well as differences in the association for a putative causal variant in the
WDFY4 region.
CONCLUSIONS: Further studies are needed to identify true SLE risk effects in
other suggestive loci and to identify the causal variant(s) in the regions of
ATG16L2, FCHSD2, and P2RY2. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 26663301  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Int Immunopharmacol. 2016 Jan;30:74-84. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.11.031. Epub
2015 Dec 3.

The pentacyclic triterpene Lupeol switches M1 macrophages to M2 and ameliorates
experimental inflammatory bowel disease.

Zhu Y(1), Li X(2), Chen J(3), Chen T(4), Shi Z(5), Lei M(6), Zhang Y(7), Bai
P(8), Li Y(9), Fei X(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive Internal Medicine, Tangshan Hospital of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Tangshan, Hebei Province, China. Electronic address:
zhuyeshan1965@163.com. (2)Department of Acupuncture, North China University of
Science and Technology School of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tangshan, Hebei
Province, China. Electronic address: 15531558238@163.com. (3)Department of
Traditional Chinese Medicine, Yutian Hospital, Tangshan, Hebei Province, China.
Electronic address: 741094776@qq.com. (4)Department of Digestive Internal
Medicine, Tangshan Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tangshan, Hebei
Province, China. Electronic address: tongjunchen@sina.com. (5)Department of
Digestive Internal Medicine, Tangshan Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Tangshan, Hebei Province, China. Electronic address: shizhimin0613@163.com.
(6)Department of Digestive Internal Medicine, Tangshan Hospital of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Tangshan, Hebei Province, China. Electronic address:
eimiaona001@sina.com. (7)Department of Digestive Internal Medicine, Tangshan
Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tangshan, Hebei Province, China.
Electronic address: zhangyj1312@126.com. (8)Department of Digestive Internal
Medicine, Tangshan Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tangshan, Hebei
Province, China. Electronic address: 854951455@qq.com. (9)Department of Digestive
Internal Medicine, Tangshan Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Tangshan,
Hebei Province, China. Electronic address: liyifang02@163.com. (10)Department of 
Digestive Internal Medicine, Tangshan Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Tangshan, Hebei Province, China. Electronic address: 1tsfuyou@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), including ulcerative colitis and
Crohn's disease, is a chronic inflammatory disease in the lower gastrointestinal 
tract. Mounting evidence suggests that the predominance of the classically
activated (M1) macrophages versus the alternatively activated (M2) macrophages
plays a role in the progression of IBD. Thus, agents able to shift
pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages to anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages may be
beneficial to IBD. The pentacyclic triterpene Lup-20(29)-en-3ß-ol (Lupeol), a
potent anti-inflammatory natural product, has been shown to inhibit
pro-inflammatory cytokine production, suggesting it is potentially able to
modulate macrophage polarization, thereby beneficial to IBD.
METHODS: CD4(+) monocytes were differentiated to M1 or M2 macrophages, which were
cocultured with epithelial cell lines, T84 and Caco-2, in the absence or presence
of Lupeol (10µM). Experimental colitis was induced with dextran sodium sulfate
(DSS), with or without oral administration of Lupeol (50mg/kg, q.d.). Cytokines
were measured with Luminex kits. M1/M2 genes were measured with real-time
polymerase chain reaction. Macrophage phenotypes were defined by measuring M1 and
M2 markers with confocal microscopy. Proteins were measured with Western
blotting, while cell surface markers were measured with confocal microscopy or
flow cytometry. Histology was evaluated with H&E staining.
RESULTS: Treatment of M1 macrophages with Lupeol resulted in a marked decrease in
the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including IL-12, IL6, IL-1ß and
TNFa, and a marked increase in the production of IL-10, an anti-inflammatory
cytokine. This was associated with a down-regulation of CD86, a typical marker of
M1 macrophages, and an up-regulation of CD206, a typical M2 macrophage marker.
IRF5, a transcription factor that is critically involved in M1 polarization, was 
down-regulated in M1 macrophages after being incubated with Lupeol, associated
with a marked decrease in the phosphorylation of p38 mitogen activated protein
kinase. Coculture of epithelial cells with M1 macrophages resulted in
down-regulation of the tight junction protein ZO-1 and disruption of epithelial
integrity, which were blocked by Lupeol treatment of the M1 macrophages.
Moreover, oral administration of Lupeol to dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced
colitis mice resulted in mitigated intestinal inflammation and increased survival
from lethal colitis, associated with decreased expression of M1-related genes and
increased expression of M2-related genes.
CONCLUSION: Lupeol ameliorates experimental inflammatory bowel disease through,
at least in part, inhibiting M1 and promoting M2 macrophages.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26655877  [PubMed - in process]


19. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec 8. [Epub ahead of print]

Zoledronic acid induces apoptosis via stimulating the expressions of ERN1, TLR2, 
and IRF5 genes in glioma cells.

Biray Avci C(1), Kurt CC(2), Tepedelen BE(3), Ozalp O(2), Goker B(2), Mutlu Z(2),
Dodurga Y(4), Elmas L(4), Gunduz C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Biology Department, Ege University Medical School, Bornova, Izmir,
Turkey. cbavci@gmail.com. (2)Medical Biology Department, Ege University Medical
School, Bornova, Izmir, Turkey. (3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, 
Avrasya University Faculty of Science and Letters, Trabzon, Turkey. (4)Medical
Biology Department, Pamukkale University Medical School, Denizli, Turkey.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common and aggressive brain tumor that 
affects older people. Although the current therapeutic approaches for GBM include
surgical resection, radiotherapy, and chemotherapeutic agent temozolomide, the
median survival of patients is 14.6 months because of its aggressiveness.
Zoledronic acid (ZA) is a nitrogen-containing bisphosphonate that exhibited
anticancer activity in different cancers. The purpose of this study was to assess
the potential effect of ZA in distinct signal transduction pathways in U87-MG
cells. In this study, experiments performed on U87-MG cell line (Human
glioblastoma-astrocytoma, epithelial-like cell line) which is an in vitro model
of human glioblastoma cells to examine the cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of ZA.
IC50 dose of ZA, 25 µM, applied on U87-MG cells during 72 h. ApoDIRECT In Situ
DNA Fragmentation Assay was used to investigate apoptosis of U87MG cells. The
quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
(LightCycler480 System) was carried out for 48 gene expression like NF-<U+03BA>B,
Toll-like receptors, cytokines, and inteferons. Our results indicated that ZA
(IC50 dose) increased apoptosis 1.27-fold in U87MG cells according to control
cells. According to qRT-PCR data, expression levels of the endoplasmic
reticulum-nuclei-1 (ERN1), Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2), and human IFN regulatory 
factor 5 (IRF5) tumor suppressor genes elevated 2.05-, 2.08-, and 2.3-fold by ZA,
respectively, in U87MG cells. Our recent results indicated that ZA have a key
role in GBM progression and might be considered as a potential agent in glioma
treatment.

PMID: 26646564  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Mar;46(3):647-55. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545911. Epub 2015 Dec
17.

IRF5 and IRF8 modulate the CAL-1 human plasmacytoid dendritic cell line response 
following TLR9 ligation.

Steinhagen F(1,)(2), Rodriguez LG(1), Tross D(1), Tewary P(1), Bode C(1,)(2),
Klinman DM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Inflammation Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer
Research, Frederick, MD, USA. (2)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care 
Medicine, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Synthetic oligonucleotides (ODNs) containing CpG motifs stimulate human
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) to produce type-1 interferons (IFNs) and
proinflammatory cytokines. Previous studies demonstrated that interferon
regulatory factors (IRFs) play a central role in mediating CpG-induced pDC
activation. This work explores the inverse effects of IRF5 and IRF8 (also known
as IFN consensus sequence-binding protein) on CpG-dependent gene expression in
the human CAL-1 pDC cell line. This cell line shares many of the phenotypic and
functional properties of freshly isolated human pDCs. Results from RNA
interference and microarray studies indicate that IRF5 upregulates TLR9-driven
gene expression whereas IRF8 downregulates the same genes. Several findings
support the conclusion that IRF8 inhibits TLR9-dependent gene expression by
directly blocking the activity of IRF5. First, the inhibitory activity of IRF8 is
only observed when IRF5 is present. Second, proximity ligation analysis shows
that IRF8 and IRF5 colocalize within the cytoplasm of resting human pDCs and
cotranslocate to the nucleus after CpG stimulation. Taken together, these
findings suggest that IRF5 and IRF8, two transcription factors with opposing
functions, control TLR9 signaling in human pDCs.

Published 2015. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMID: 26613957  [PubMed - in process]


21. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2016 Apr;68(4):932-43. doi: 10.1002/art.39504.

Genome-Wide Association Study in an Amerindian Ancestry Population Reveals Novel 
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Risk Loci and the Role of European Admixture.

Alarcón-Riquelme ME(1), Ziegler JT(2), Molineros J(1), Howard TD(2),
Moreno-Estrada A(3), Sánchez-Rodríguez E(4), Ainsworth HC(2), Ortiz-Tello P(3),
Comeau ME(2), Rasmussen A(1), Kelly JA(1), Adler A(1), Acevedo-Vázquez EM(5),
Mariano Cucho-Venegas J(5), García-De la Torre I(6), Cardiel MH(7), Miranda P(8),
Catoggio LJ(9), Maradiaga-Ceceña M(10), Gaffney PM(1), Vyse TJ(11), Criswell
LA(12), Tsao BP(13), Sivils KL(1), Bae SC(14), James JA(15), Kimberly RP(16),
Kaufman KM(17), Harley JB(17), Esquivel-Valerio JA(18), Moctezuma JF(19), García 
MA(20), Berbotto GA(21), Babini AM(22), Scherbarth H(23), Toloza S(24), Baca
V(25), Nath SK(1), Aguilar Salinas C(26), Orozco L(27), Tusié-Luna T(28),
Zidovetzki R(29), Pons-Estel BA(30), Langefeld CD(2), Jacob CO(31).

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City. (2)Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina. (3)Stanford University School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, and Laboratorio Nacional de Genómica para la
Biodiversidad, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto
Politécnico Nacional, Irapuato, Mexico. (4)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York. (5)Hospital Nacional Guillermo Almenara Irigoyen,
Lima, Peru. (6)Hospital General de Occidente, Zapopan, Mexico. (7)Centro de
Investigación Clínica de Morelia, Morelia, Mexico. (8)Centro de Estudios
Reumatológicos, Santiago, Chile. (9)Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires, Buenos
Aires, Argentina. (10)Hospital General de Culiacán, Culiacán, Mexico. (11)King's 
College London, London, UK. (12)University of California, San Francisco.
(13)University of California, Los Angeles. (14)Hanyang University Hospital for
Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (15)Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation and University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City.
(16)University of Alabama at Birmingham. (17)Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio. (18)Hospital Universitario Dr. José Eleuterio
González Universidad Autonoma de Nuevo León, Monterrey, Mexico. (19)Hospital
General de México, Mexico City, Mexico. (20)Hospital Interzonal General de Agudos
General San Martin, La Plata, Argentina. (21)Hospital Escuela Eva Perón,
Granadero Baigorria, Argentina. (22)Hospital Italiano de Córdoba, Córdoba,
Argentina. (23)Hospital Interzonal General de Agudos Oscar E. Alende, Mar del
Plata, Argentina. (24)Hospital Interzonal San Juan Bautista, San Fernando del
Valle de Catamarca, Argentina. (25)Hospital de Peditaria, Centro Médico Nacional 
Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro Social, Mexico City, Mexico.
(26)Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, Mexico
City, Mexico. (27)Instituto Nacional de Medicina Genómica, Mexico City, Mexico.
(28)Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán and
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de
México, Mexico City, Mexico. (29)University of California, Riverside.
(30)Sanatorio Parque, Rosario, Argentina. (31)University of Southern California
School of Medicine, Los Angeles.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease
with a strong genetic component. We undertook the present work to perform the
first genome-wide association study on individuals from the Americas who are
enriched for Native American heritage.
METHODS: We analyzed 3,710 individuals from the US and 4 countries of Latin
America who were diagnosed as having SLE, and healthy controls. Samples were
genotyped with HumanOmni1 BeadChip. Data on out-of-study controls genotyped with 
HumanOmni2.5 were also included. Statistical analyses were performed using
SNPtest and SNPGWA. Data were adjusted for genomic control and false discovery
rate. Imputation was performed using Impute2 and, for classic HLA alleles, HiBag.
Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (95% CIs) were calculated.
RESULTS: The IRF5-TNPO3 region showed the strongest association and largest OR
for SLE (rs10488631: genomic control-adjusted P [Pgcadj ] = 2.61 × 10(-29) , OR
2.12 [95% CI 1.88-2.39]), followed by HLA class II on the DQA2-DQB1 loci
(rs9275572: Pgcadj <U+2009>=<U+2009>1.11 × 10(-16) , OR 1.62 [95% CI 1.46-1.80] and rs9271366: 
Pgcadj <U+2009>=<U+2009>6.46 × 10(-12) , OR 2.06 [95% CI 1.71-2.50]). Other known SLE loci
found to be associated in this population were ITGAM, STAT4, TNIP1, NCF2, and
IRAK1. We identified a novel locus on 10q24.33 (rs4917385: Pgcadj <U+2009>=<U+2009>1.39 ×
10(-8) ) with an expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) effect (Peqtl <U+2009>=<U+2009>8.0 
× 10(-37) at USMG5/miR1307), and several new suggestive loci. SLE risk loci
previously identified in Europeans and Asians were corroborated. Local ancestry
estimation showed that the HLA allele risk contribution is of European ancestral 
origin. Imputation of HLA alleles suggested that autochthonous Native American
haplotypes provide protection against development of SLE.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that studying admixed populations provides
new insights in the delineation of the genetic architecture that underlies
autoimmune and complex diseases.

© 2016, American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 26606652  [PubMed - in process]


22. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 8;112(49):15136-41. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1520997112. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Multifaceted contribution of the TLR4-activated IRF5 transcription factor in
systemic sclerosis.

Saigusa R(1), Asano Y(2), Taniguchi T(1), Yamashita T(1), Ichimura Y(1),
Takahashi T(1), Toyama T(1), Yoshizaki A(1), Sugawara K(3), Tsuruta D(3),
Taniguchi T(4), Sato S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan; (2)Department of Dermatology, University of
Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan;
yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp tada@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp. (3)Department of Dermatology, Osaka
City University Graduate School of Medicine, Abeno-ku, Osaka-shi, Osaka 545-8585,
Japan; (4)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Industrial Science,
The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan; Max Planck-The
University of Tokyo Center for Integrative Inflammology, Meguro-ku, Tokyo
153-8505, Japan yasano-tky@umin.ac.jp tada@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a multisystem autoimmune disorder with clinical
manifestations resulting from tissue fibrosis and extensive vasculopathy. A
potential disease susceptibility gene for SSc is IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), 
whose SNP is associated with milder clinical manifestations; however, the
underlying mechanisms of this association remain elusive. In this study we
examined IRF5-deficient (Irf5(-/-)) mice in the bleomycin-treated SSc murine
model. We show that dermal and pulmonary fibrosis induced by bleomycin is
attenuated in Irf5(-/-) mice. Interestingly, we find that multiple SSc-associated
events, such as fibroblast activation, inflammatory cell infiltration,
endothelial-to-mesenchymal transition, vascular destabilization, Th2/Th17 skewed 
immune polarization, and B-cell activation, are suppressed in these mice. We
further provide evidence that IRF5, activated by Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4),
binds to the promoters of various key genes involved in SSc disease pathology.
These observations are congruent with the high level of expression of IRF5, TLR4,
and potential endogenous TLR4 ligands in SSc skin lesions. Our study sheds light 
on the TLR4-IRF5 pathway in the pathology of SSc with clinical implications of
targeting the IRF5 pathways in the suppression of disease development.

PMCID: PMC4679033 [Available on 2016-06-08]
PMID: 26598674  [PubMed - in process]


23. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2015 Dec;89(Pt B):168-72. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2015.10.034.
Epub 2015 Oct 30.

Low shear stress induces M1 macrophage polarization in murine thin-cap
atherosclerotic plaques.

Seneviratne AN(1), Cole JE(2), Goddard ME(2), Park I(2), Mohri Z(3), Sansom S(2),
Udalova I(2), Krams R(3), Monaco C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics,
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, United Kingdom; 
Department of Bioengineering, Imperial College London, United Kingdom. (2)Kennedy
Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and 
Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. (3)Department of 
Bioengineering, Imperial College London, United Kingdom. (4)Kennedy Institute of 
Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and
Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. Electronic
address: claudia.monaco@kennedy.ox.ac.uk.

Macrophages, a significant component of atherosclerotic plaques vulnerable to
acute complications, can be pro-inflammatory (designated M1), regulatory (M2),
lipid- (Mox) or Heme-induced (Mhem). We showed previously that low (LSS) and
oscillatory (OSS) shear stress cause thin-cap fibroatheroma and stable smooth
muscle cell-rich plaque formation respectively in ApoE-knockout (ApoE(-/-)) mice.
Here we investigated whether different shear stress conditions relate to specific
changes in macrophage polarization and plaque morphology by applying a shear
stress-altering cast to the carotid arteries of high fat-fed ApoE(-/-) mice. The 
M1 markers iNOS and IRF5 were highly expressed in macrophage-rich areas of LSS
lesions compared to OSS lesions 6weeks after cast placement, while the M2 marker 
Arginase-1, and Mox/Mhem markers HO-1 and CD163 were elevated in OSS lesions. Our
data indicates shear stress could be an important determinant of macrophage
polarization in atherosclerosis, with low shear promoting M1 programming.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26523517  [PubMed - in process]


24. J Immunol. 2015 Dec 1;195(11):5327-36. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501684. Epub 2015
Oct 30.

Sex Differences in Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cell Levels of IRF5 Drive Higher IFN-a 
Production in Women.

Griesbeck M(1), Ziegler S(2), Laffont S(3), Smith N(4), Chauveau L(5), Tomezsko
P(6), Sharei A(7), Kourjian G(6), Porichis F(6), Hart M(6), Palmer CD(6),
Sirignano M(6), Beisel C(8), Hildebrandt H(2), Cénac C(3), Villani AC(9),
Diefenbach TJ(6), Le Gall S(6), Schwartz O(5), Herbeuval JP(4), Autran B(10),
Guéry JC(3), Chang JJ(11), Altfeld M(12).

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; Centre
d'Immunonologie et des Maladies Infectieuses-Paris, Université Pierre et Marie
Curie/INSERM U1135, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris 75013, France; (2)Heinrich
Pette Institute-Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg 20246,
Germany; (3)INSERM U1043, Toulouse F-31300, France; CNRS, U5282, Toulouse
F-31300, France; Université de Toulouse, Université Paul Sabatier, Centre de
Physiopathologie de Toulouse Purpan, Toulouse F-31300, France; (4)Chemistry and
Biology, Nucleotides and Immunology for Therapy, CNRS UMR-8601, Université Paris 
Descartes, Paris 75270, France; (5)Institut Pasteur, Unité de recherche associée 
CNRS 3015, Unite Virus et Immunité, Paris 75015, France; (6)Ragon Institute of
MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; (7)The David H. Koch Institute for
Integrative Cancer Research, Cambridge, MA 02139; (8)Heinrich Pette
Institute-Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg 20246, Germany;
Medical Department, University Hospital Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg 20246,
Germany; (9)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; and.
(10)Centre d'Immunonologie et des Maladies Infectieuses-Paris, Université Pierre 
et Marie Curie/INSERM U1135, Hôpital Pitié Salpêtrière, Paris 75013, France;
(11)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; Department of
Infectious Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne, Victoria 3800, Australia.
(12)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02139; Heinrich Pette 
Institute-Leibniz Institute for Experimental Virology, Hamburg 20246, Germany;
marcus.altfeld@hpi.uni-hamburg.de.

Increased IFN-a production contributes to the pathogenesis of infectious and
autoimmune diseases. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) from females produce
more IFN-a upon TLR7 stimulation than pDCs from males, yet the mechanisms
underlying this difference remain unclear. In this article, we show that basal
levels of IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 5 in pDCs were significantly higher in
females compared with males and positively correlated with the percentage of
IFN-a-secreting pDCs. Delivery of recombinant IRF5 protein into human primary
pDCs increased TLR7-mediated IFN-a secretion. In mice, genetic ablation of the
estrogen receptor 1 (Esr1) gene in the hematopoietic compartment or DC lineage
reduced Irf5 mRNA expression in pDCs and IFN-a production. IRF5 mRNA levels
furthermore correlated with ESR1 mRNA levels in human pDCs, consistent with IRF5 
regulation at the transcriptional level by ESR1. Taken together, these data
demonstrate a critical mechanism by which sex differences in basal pDC IRF5
expression lead to higher IFN-a production upon TLR7 stimulation in females and
provide novel targets for the modulation of immune responses and inflammation.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4654231
PMID: 26519527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Virol. 2015 Oct 14;90(1):189-205. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02276-15.

Interferon-Regulatory Factor 5-Dependent Signaling Restricts Orthobunyavirus
Dissemination to the Central Nervous System.

Proenca-Modena JL(1), Hyde JL(2), Sesti-Costa R(3), Lucas T(2), Pinto AK(2),
Richner JM(2), Gorman MJ(4), Lazear HM(5), Diamond MS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Genetics, Evolution and Bioagents, Institute of
Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. (2)Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (3)Department
of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, University of São Paulo,
Ribeirão Preto School of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. (4)Department of
Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Molecular
Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA 
Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA diamond@wusm.wustl.edu.

Interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) is a transcription factor that
induces inflammatory responses after engagement and signaling by pattern
recognition receptors. To define the role of IRF-5 during bunyavirus infection,
we evaluated Oropouche virus (OROV) and La Crosse virus (LACV) pathogenesis and
immune responses in primary cells and in mice with gene deletions in Irf3, Irf5, 
and Irf7 or in Irf5 alone. Deletion of Irf3, Irf5, and Irf7 together resulted in 
uncontrolled viral replication in the liver and spleen, hypercytokinemia,
extensive liver injury, and an early-death phenotype. Remarkably, deletion of
Irf5 alone resulted in meningoencephalitis and death on a more protracted
timeline, 1 to 2 weeks after initial OROV or LACV infection. The clinical signs
in OROV-infected Irf5(-/-) mice were associated with abundant viral antigen and
terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling
(TUNEL)-positive cells in several regions of the brain. Circulating dendritic
cell (DC) subsets in Irf5(-/-) mice had higher levels of OROV RNA in vivo yet
produced lower levels of type I IFN than wild-type (WT) cells. This result was
supported by data obtained in vitro, since a deficiency of IRF-5 resulted in
enhanced OROV infection and diminished type I IFN production in bone
marrow-derived DCs. Collectively, these results indicate a key role for IRF-5 in 
modulating the host antiviral response in peripheral organs that controls
bunyavirus neuroinvasion in mice.IMPORTANCE: Oropouche virus (OROV) and La Crosse
virus (LACV) are orthobunyaviruses that are transmitted by insects and cause
meningitis and encephalitis in subsets of individuals in the Americas. Recently, 
we demonstrated that components of the type I interferon (IFN) induction pathway,
particularly the regulatory transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7, have key
protective roles during OROV infection. However, the lethality in Irf3(-/-)
Irf7(-/-) (DKO) mice infected with OROV was not as rapid or complete as observed 
in Ifnar(-/-) mice, indicating that other transcriptional factors associated with
an IFN response contribute to antiviral immunity against OROV. Here, we evaluated
bunyavirus replication, tissue tropism, and cytokine production in primary cells 
and mice lacking IRF-5. We demonstrate an important role for IRF-5 in preventing 
neuroinvasion and the ensuing encephalitis caused by OROV and LACV.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702527 [Available on 2016-06-17]
PMID: 26468541  [PubMed - in process]


26. Ann Rheum Dis. 2015 Oct 6. pii: annrheumdis-2015-207601. doi:
10.1136/annrheumdis-2015-207601. [Epub ahead of print]

Genetic variants in ANCA-associated vasculitis: a meta-analysis.

Rahmattulla C(1), Mooyaart AL(1), van Hooven D(1), Schoones JW(2), Bruijn JA(1), 
Dekkers OM(3); European Vasculitis Genetics Consortium, Bajema IM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (2)Walaeus Library, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (3)Department of Clinical Epidemiology, Leiden University Medical
Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands Department of Medicine, Division Endocrinology,
Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands Department of Clinical 
Epidemiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Genetic factors may influence the pathogenic pathways leading to
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV). We
performed a meta-analysis to determine the genetic variants most likely
associated with AAV and investigated whether diagnostic and serological subtypes 
within AAV have distinct genetic backgrounds.
METHODS: Studies investigating the association between genetic variants and AAV
in humans were searched in PubMed, EMBASE and Web of Science. All variants
investigated in at least two studies were selected. Subsequently, all studies
assessing these variants were included in this meta-analysis. Additionally, data 
on these variants from the largest genome-wide association studies in AAV were
included to increase the validity of this meta-analysis.
RESULTS: The literature search yielded 5180 articles. 62 articles investigating
140 genetic variants were included, 33 of which were associated with AAV in a
meta-analysis. These genetic variants were in or near the following genes: CD226,
CTLA-4, FCGR2A, HLA-B, HLA-DP, HLA-DQ, HLA-DR, HSD17B8, IRF5, PTPN22, RING1/RXRB,
RXRB, STAT4, SERPINA1 and TLR9. Moreover, we identified genetic distinctions
between granulomatosis with polyangiitis and microscopic polyangiitis and between
proteinase 3 ANCA vasculitis and myeloperoxidase ANCA vasculitis. In 76% of the
genetic variants, subdivision based on ANCA serotype resulted in higher ORs than 
subdivision based on clinical diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis identified 33 genetic variants associated with
AAV, supporting a role for alpha-1-antitrypsin, the major histocompatibility
complex system, and several distinct inflammatory processes in AAV pathogenesis. 
Our results indicate that subdivision of AAV based on ANCA serotype has a
stronger genetic basis than subdivision based on clinical diagnosis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26443607  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 6;10(10):e0138770. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138770.
eCollection 2015.

Host Transcriptional Profiles and Immunopathologic Response following
Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis Infection in Mice.

Shin MK(1), Park H(2), Shin SW(2), Jung M(2), Lee SH(3), Kim DY(3), Yoo HS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul
National University, Seoul, Korea; Department of Microbiology, Gyeonsang National
University School of Medicine, Jinju, Korea. (2)Department of Infectious
Diseases, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Korea. (3)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Infectious Diseases,
College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea;
Institute of Green Bio Science and Technology, Seoul National University,
Pyeongchang, Korea.

Paratuberculosis or Johne's disease is a chronic granulomatous enteropathy in
ruminants caused by Mycobacterium avium subsp. paratuberculosis (MAP) infection. 
In the present study, we examined the host response to MAP infection in spleens
of mice in order to investigate the host immunopathology accompanying
host-pathogen interaction. Transcriptional profiles of the MAP-infected mice at 3
and 6 weeks p.i. showed severe histopathological changes, whereas those at 12
weeks p.i. displayed reduced lesion severity in the spleen and liver.
MAP-infected mice at 3 and 6 weeks p.i. showed up-regulation of
interferon-related genes, scavenger receptor, and complement components,
suggesting an initial innate immune reaction, such as macrophage activation,
bactericidal activity, and macrophage invasion of MAP. Concurrently, MAP-infected
mice at 3 and 6 weeks p.i. were also suggested to express M2 macrophage phenotype
with up-regulation of Mrc1, and Marco and down-regulation of MHC class II, Ccr7, 
and Irf5, and canonical pathways related to the T cell response including
ICOS-ICOSL signaling in T helper cells, calcium-induced T lymphocyte apoptosis,
and CD28 signaling in T helper cell. These results provide information which
furthers the understanding of the immunopathologic response to MAP infection in
mice, thereby providing insights valuable for research into the pathogenesis for 
MAP infection.

PMCID: PMC4595071
PMID: 26439498  [PubMed - in process]


28. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2016 Jan;22(1):13-9. doi: 10.1097/MIB.0000000000000584.

Identification of Ten Additional Susceptibility Loci for Ulcerative Colitis
Through Immunochip Analysis in Koreans.

Ye BD(1), Choi H, Hong M, Yun WJ, Low HQ, Haritunians T, Kim KJ, Park SH, Lee I, 
Bang SY, Kim TH, Shin HD, Kang D, Youn HS, Li Y, Liu J, McGovern DP, Yang SK,
Song K.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Gastroenterology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; The F. Widjaja
Foundation Inflammatory Bowel and Immunobiology Research Institute; Cedars-Sinai 
Medical Center, Los Angeles, California; §Department of Pathology, Asan Medical
Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; <U+2016>Department of
Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Seoul, Korea;
¶Department of Life Science, Sogang University, Seoul, Korea; **Department of
Preventive Medicine, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea;
Department of Pediatrics, Gyeongsang National University School of Medicine,
Jinju, Korea; and Human Genetics, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Recent genetic association studies identified more than 160
susceptibility loci for inflammatory bowel disease in Caucasian populations, but 
studies in Asian populations are limited. We have previously reported 3 loci
associated with Korean ulcerative colitis (UC).
METHODS: Using the Immunochip custom single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) array 
designed for dense genotyping of 186 known disease loci from 12 immune-mediated
diseases, we analyzed 705 patients with UC and 1178 controls for 536,821 SNPs
(89,057 genotyped and 447,764 imputed) in the discovery stage followed by
replication in additional 980 affected individuals and 2694 controls in a Korean 
population.
RESULTS: We confirmed the associations of 10 known UC risk loci in Koreans:
rs76418789 in IL23R (combined P = 1.25 × 10), rs4728142 in IRF5 (combined P =
3.17 × 10), rs1830610 near JAK2 (combined P = 2.28 × 10), rs1555791 near TNFRSF14
(combined P = 1.62 × 10), rs880790 between IL10-IL19 (combined P = 3.73 × 10),
rs10185424 between IL1R2-IL1R1 (combined P = 1.54 × 10), rs6478108 in TNFSF15
(combined P = 9.28 × 10), rs861857 between UBE2L3-YDJC (combined P = 3.05 × 10), 
rs1801274 in FCGR2A (discovery P = 1.54 × 10), and rs17085007 between GPR12-USP12
(discovery P = 3.64 × 10). The percentage of phenotype variance explained by the 
13 risk loci (including 3 previously reported loci) was 5.61% in Koreans (on the 
liability scale, population prevalence = 0.0308%).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study increased the number of UC susceptibility loci in Koreans 
to 13 and highlighted the extensive sharing of genetic risk across populations of
UC.

PMID: 26398853  [PubMed - in process]


29. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2015 Oct;11(10):562. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2015.127. Epub 2015 
Sep 15.

Autoimmunity. IRF5 mediates joint inflammation.

Duarte JH.

Comment on
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Dec;67(12):3146-57.

PMID: 26369611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Clin Exp Rheumatol. 2015 Sep-Oct;33(5):632-8. Epub 2015 Aug 31.

Association of GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 polymorphisms with systemic lupus erythematosus
in a Chinese Han population.

Li Y(1), Li P(2), Chen S(2), Wu Z(2), Li J(2), Zhang S(2), Cao C(2), Wang L(2),
Liu B(3), Zhang F(2), Li YZ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology & Clin.Immunology, Chinese Academy Med. Sciences & Peking Union
Med.College, Key Lab.of Rheumatology & Clin.Immunology, Ministry of Education,
Beijing; and Dept. Rheumatology, Affiliated Hosp. of Qingdao Univ. Med.College,
Shangdong, China. (2)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking
Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking
Union Medical College, Key Laboratory of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology,
Ministry of Education, Beijing, China. (3)Department of Rheumatology, The
Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University Medical College, Shangdong, China.

OBJECTIVES: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is the most common systemic
autoimmune disease which likely involves complex interactions between genes and
the environment. Two large-scale genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have
implicated many loci as genetic risk factors associated with primary Sjögren's
syndrome (pSS). Among them there are a number of pSS associated gene
polymorphisms including the MHC-II, STAT4, IRF5, BLK, and TNIP1 genes that are
shared with SLE. However, the association of other genes such as GTF2I, GTF2IRD1,
and IL12A with SLE remain unknown. This study aimed to determine whether single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in GTF2I, GTF2IRD1 or IL12A genetically
predispose a Chinese Han population to SLE.
METHODS: Four SNPs in the GTF2I region (rs117026326), the GTF2IRD1 region
(rs4717901), and the IL12A region (rs485497, rs583911) were genotyped in a cohort
of 948 SLE patients and 938 healthy controls, using the polymerase chain
reaction-ligation detection reaction (PCR-LDR) method.
RESULTS: he frequency of risk allele of rs117026326 was notably higher in SLE
patients than in controls (37.2% vs. 14.9%, OR: 3.39, 95%CI: 2.89-3.97, pc
=3.31×10-54). Similarly, rs4717901 was also associated with SLE (35.3% vs. 20.2%,
OR: 2.16, 95%CI: 1.86-2.50, pc =1.50×10-24). The frequencies of alleles and
genotypes of IL12A SNPs were not significantly different between the SLE patients
and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates a significant association between SLE and
the GTF2I rs117026326 T allele, GTF2IRD1 rs4717901 C allele. The association of
GTF2I and GTF2IRD1 as common genetic susceptibility factor in SLE will require
further validation in other ethnic lines.

PMID: 26320362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015 Dec;67(12):3146-57. doi: 10.1002/art.39321.

Promotion of Inflammatory Arthritis by Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 in a Mouse 
Model.

Duffau P(1), Menn-Josephy H(2), Cuda CM(3), Dominguez S(3), Aprahamian TR(2),
Watkins AA(2), Yasuda K(2), Monach P(2), Lafyatis R(2), Rice LM(2), Kenneth
Haines G 3rd(4), Gravallese EM(5), Baum R(5), Richez C(6), Perlman H(3), Bonegio 
RG(2), Rifkin IR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, and Hôpital
Saint-André, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bordeaux and Université de
Bordeaux, CNRS UMR 5164, Bordeaux, France. (2)Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(4)Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. (5)University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester. (6)Hôpital Pellegrin, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Bordeaux, and Université de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR 5164, Bordeaux,
France.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2015 Oct;11(10):562.

OBJECTIVE: Polymorphisms in the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor
5 (IRF5) are associated with an increased risk of developing rheumatoid arthritis
(RA). This study was undertaken to determine the role of IRF5 in a mouse model of
arthritis development.
METHODS: K/BxN serum-transfer arthritis was induced in mice deficient in IRF5, or
lacking IRF5 only in myeloid cells, and arthritis severity was evaluated. K/BxN
arthritis was also induced in mice deficient in TRIF, Toll-like receptor 2
(TLR2), TLR3, TLR4, and TLR7 to determine the pathways through which IRF5 might
promote arthritis. In vitro studies were performed to determine the role of IRF5 
in interleukin-1 (IL-1) receptor and TLR signaling.
RESULTS: Arthritis severity was reduced in IRF5-deficient, TRIF-deficient,
TLR3-deficient, and TLR7-deficient mice. The expression of multiple genes
regulating neutrophil recruitment or function and bioactive IL-1ß formation was
reduced in the joints during active arthritis in IRF5-deficient mice. In vitro
studies showed that TLR7 and the TRIF-dependent TLR3 pathway induce
proinflammatory cytokine production in disease-relevant cell types in an
IRF5-dependent manner.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that IRF5 contributes to disease pathogenesis
in inflammatory arthritis. This is likely due at least in part to the role of
IRF5 in mediating proinflammatory cytokine production downstream of TLR7 and
TLR3. Since TLR7 and TLR3 are both RNA-sensing TLRs, this suggests that
endogenous RNA ligands present in the inflamed joint promote arthritis
development. These findings may be relevant to human RA, since RNA capable of
activating TLR7 and TLR3 is present in synovial fluid and TLR7 and TLR3 are
up-regulated in the joints of RA patients.

© 2015, American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC4661118 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26315890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Inflamm Res. 2015 Oct;64(10):817-24. doi: 10.1007/s00011-015-0865-2. Epub 2015
Aug 21.

Genetic association and interaction between the IRF5 and TYK2 genes and systemic 
lupus erythematosus in the Han Chinese population.

Tang L(1,)(2), Wan P(3), Wang Y(4), Pan J(4), Wang Y(5), Chen B(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Institute of
Neuroscience, Changsha Medical University, Changsha, People's Republic of China. 
tlcool318@163.com. (2)School of Basic Medical Science, Changsha Medical
University, Changsha, 410219, People's Republic of China. tlcool318@163.com.
(3)Department of Clinical Medicine, Second School of Clinical Medicine, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (4)Department of
Biological Science and Biotechnology, School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering
and Life Sciences, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, People's
Republic of China. (5)School of Basic Medical Science, Changsha Medical
University, Changsha, 410219, People's Republic of China. (6)Department of
Biological Science and Biotechnology, School of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering
and Life Sciences, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, 430070, People's
Republic of China. cbifeng@whut.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this case-control study was to investigate whether
polymorphisms and gene-gene interactions of the two type I interferon (IFN) genes
(IRF5 and TYK2) are the susceptible factors of systemic Lupus erythematosus (SLE)
in the Han Chinese population.
METHODS: The four variants [rs2004640, rs2070197, rs10954213 and exon6
insertion/deletion (in/de)] of IRF5 gene and five single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) (rs280500, rs280519, rs2304256, rs8108236, rs12720270) of TYK2 gene were
examined in a cohort of 642 SLE patients and 642 healthy controls. Genotyping was
conducted using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) and confirmed by direct sequencing in 10 % sample
randomly.
RESULTS: Rs2070197 was not polymorphic in this study, and was excluded in further
analysis. Significant association was found for loci on IRF5 (rs2004640: p =
0.0003, p corr = 0.0012) and TYK2 (rs280500: p = 8.83 × 10(-6), p corr = 4.41 ×
10(-5); rs2304256: p = 3.71 × 10(-6), p corr = 1.85 × 10(-5); rs8108236: p =
0.0004, p corr = 0.002), but not for other SNPs. Significant association was also
observed for genotypes of IRF5 (rs2004640, p = 0.0009, p corr = 0.0036) and TYK2 
SNPs (rs280500: p = 5.21 × 10(-5), p corr = 2.61 × 10(-4); rs2304256: p = 7.72 × 
10(-6), p corr = 3.86 × 10(-5); rs8108236: p = 0.002, p corr = 0.01).
Nevertheless, two haplotypes based on the 3 variants [exon6(in/de), rs10954213,
rs2004640] of IRF5 (DAG and IAT) could define protective or susceptibility
haplotype in SLE. Similarly, three haplotypes containing 5 SNPs (rs280500,
rs280519, rs2304256, rs8108236, rs12720270) of TYK2 (GATAT, AGGAT and GAGGT) may 
also be associated with SLE in Han Chinese. Additionally, the gene-gene
interaction analysis was conducted on the IRF5 and TYK2 SNPs. And a three-way
interaction between TYK2 rs280500, rs2304256 and IRF5 rs10954213 and SLE was
found (p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic associations and gene-gene interactions of IRF5 and TYK2
were significantly detected in Han Chinese with SLE. Our results had important
implications for future research on the role of type I IFN function in SLE
susceptibility.

PMID: 26294277  [PubMed - in process]


33. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 1;112(35):11001-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1506254112. Epub 2015 Aug 17.

IRF5 controls both acute and chronic inflammation.

Weiss M(1), Byrne AJ(2), Blazek K(1), Saliba DG(1), Pease JE(3), Perocheau D(1), 
Feldmann M(4), Udalova IA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7FY,
United Kingdom; (2)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX3 7FY, United Kingdom; National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial
College, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. (3)National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College, London SW7 2AZ, United Kingdom. (4)Kennedy Institute of
Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7FY, United Kingdom;
irina.udalova@kennedy.ox.ac.uk marc.feldmann@kennedy.ox.ac.uk.

Whereas the importance of macrophages in chronic inflammatory diseases is well
recognized, there is an increasing awareness that neutrophils may also play an
important role. In addition to the well-documented heterogeneity of macrophage
phenotypes and functions, neutrophils also show remarkable phenotypic diversity
among tissues. Understanding the molecular pathways that control this
heterogeneity should provide abundant scope for the generation of more specific
and effective therapeutics. We have shown that the transcription factor IFN
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) polarizes macrophages toward an inflammatory
phenotype. IRF5 is also expressed in other myeloid cells, including neutrophils, 
where it was linked to neutrophil function. In this study we explored the role of
IRF5 in models of acute inflammation, including antigen-induced inflammatory
arthritis and lung injury, both involving an extensive influx of neutrophils.
Mice lacking IRF5 accumulate far fewer neutrophils at the site of inflammation
due to the reduced levels of chemokines important for neutrophil recruitment,
such as the chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 1. Furthermore we found that
neutrophils express little IRF5 in the joints and that their migratory properties
are not affected by the IRF5 deficiency. These studies extend prior ones
suggesting that inhibiting IRF5 might be useful for chronic macrophage-induced
inflammation and suggest that IRF5 blockade would ameliorate more acute forms of 
inflammation, including lung injury.

PMCID: PMC4568217
PMID: 26283380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.308. [Epub ahead of print]

Onco-exaptation of an endogenous retroviral LTR drives IRF5 expression in Hodgkin
lymphoma.

Babaian A(1), Romanish MT(1), Gagnier L(1), Kuo LY(2), Karimi MM(3), Steidl C(4),
Mager DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada [2] Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (2)Terry Fox Laboratory, British
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (3)1] Department of 
Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada [2] Biomedical Research Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada. (4)1] Department of Lymphoid Cancer Research, British
Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada [2] Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

The transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is upregulated in 
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) and is a key regulator of the aberrant transcriptome
characteristic of this disease. Here we show that IRF5 upregulation in HL is
driven by transcriptional activation of a normally dormant endogenous retroviral 
LOR1a long terminal repeat (LTR) upstream of IRF5. Specifically, through
screening of RNA-sequencing libraries, we detected LTR-IRF5 chimeric transcripts 
in multiple HL cell lines but not in normal B-cell controls. In HL, the LTR was
in an open and hypomethylated epigenetic state, and we further show the LTR is
the site of transcriptional initiation. Among HL cell lines, usage of the LTR
promoter strongly correlates with overall levels of IRF5 mRNA and protein,
indicating that LTR transcriptional awakening is a major contributor to IRF5
upregulation in HL. Taken together, oncogenic IRF5 overexpression in HL is the
result of a specific LTR transcriptional activation. We propose that such LTR
derepression is a distinct mechanism of oncogene activation ('onco-exaptation'), 
and that such a mechanism warrants further investigation in molecular and cancer 
research.Oncogene advance online publication, 17 August 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.308.

PMID: 26279299  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


35. Clin Rheumatol. 2015 Sep;34(9):1495-501. doi: 10.1007/s10067-015-3036-5. Epub
2015 Aug 2.

Association of the IRF5 rs2070197 polymorphism with systemic lupus erythematosus:
a meta-analysis.

Li Y(1), Chen S, Li P, Wu Z, Li J, Liu B, Zhang F, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, Key Laboratory of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Ministry of
Education, Beijing, China.

The aim of this study was to explore whether the interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF5) gene rs2070197 polymorphism was associated with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) in multiple ethic populations. A meta-analysis was conducted 
on the C allele of the IRF5 rs2070197 polymorphism. A total of 7 published
case-control studies with 12 comparisons involving 8171 SLE patients and 8904
controls were available for this meta-analysis. This meta-analysis demonstrated
the IRF5 rs2070197 polymorphism conferred susceptibility to SLE in all subjects
(odds ratio (OR)<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.128, 95 % confidence interval (CI): 1.856-2.441, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) 
without inter-study heterogeneity. The IRF5 rs2070197 polymorphism was identified
as risk factors for SLE in Caucasian populations (OR 1.82, 95 % CI 1.70-1.96),
but it had no effects (monomorphic) in Asians. Large-scale multicenter
epidemiological studies in selected populations with other risk factors were
urgently required.

PMID: 26233721  [PubMed - in process]


36. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 May 15;8(5):7872-80. eCollection 2015.

Associations of genetic polymorphisms of TLR5, TLR9 and transduction molecules in
MyD88 signaling pathway with systemic lupus erythematosus in Zhuang and Han
ethnics of Guangxi province, China.

Wen SJ(1), Wu FY(1), Fang L(2), Liu H(1), Zheng WJ(1), Lin YK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University Nanning 530021, China. (2)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics,
Guangxi Medical University Nanning 530021, China.

OBJECTIVES: To discuss the associations of SNPs of TLR5, TLR9 and transduction
molecules in MyD88 signaling pathway with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) risk
in Zhuang and Han ethnics and to compare the difference between the two ethnics.
METHODS: PCR and direct sequencing method were used to detect gene polymorphisms 
of TLR5, TLR9 and transduction molecules in MyD88 signaling pathway in 77
patients with SLE and 72 healthy controls, in order to explore their
relationships with SLE incidence and compare the differences in genotypes and
allele frequencies between groups.
RESULTS: TLR5 rs5744168 gene polymorphism was unrelated with SLE susceptibility
of Guangxi Zhuang and Han. Among the Han population, there was a statistically
significant difference in TLR9 rs352140 genotype frequency between SLE group and 
control group (P = 0.043). In the Han and Zhuang populations, there were no
significant differences in MyD88 rs7744 genotype and allele frequencies (all P > 
0.05) between SLE group and control group; but there was a statistically
significant difference in allele frequencies between the case group and the
control group (P = 0.033). For TRAF6 rs5030472, GA + AA genotype frequency of
Zhuang SLE group was significantly higher than that of control group and the
difference was statistically significant (P = 0.006); an allele frequency was
also significantly higher. IRF5 rs2004640 GG/TT genotype and the corresponding G 
allele frequencies of Zhuang SLE group were significantly higher than that of
control group, with statistically significant differences (P = 0.008 and P =
0.000, respectively).
CONCLUSION: TLR5 rs5744168 gene polymorphism may have no correlation with SLE
susceptibility in Guangxi Zhuang and Han populations; TLR9 rs352140 gene
polymorphism may be associated with SLE susceptibility in Guangxi Han population,
while TRAF6 rs5030472 and IRF5 rs2004640 gene polymorphisms may relate to SLE
susceptibility in Guangxi Zhuang population.

PMCID: PMC4509288
PMID: 26221343  [PubMed]


37. Transl Res. 2016 Jan;167(1):167-82. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.06.018. Epub 2015
Jul 4.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 in human autoimmunity and murine models of
autoimmune disease.

Eames HL(1), Corbin AL(2), Udalova IA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: hayley.eames@kennedy.ox.ac.uk. (2)Kennedy Institute 
of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics Rheumatology and
Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics
Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. Electronic address: irina.udalova@kennedy.ox.ac.uk.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) has been demonstrated as a key
transcription factor of the immune system, playing important roles in modulating 
inflammatory immune responses in numerous cell types including dendritic cells,
macrophages, and B cells. As well as driving the expression of type I interferon 
in antiviral responses, IRF5 is also crucial for driving macrophages toward a
proinflammatory phenotype by regulating cytokine and chemokine expression and
modulating B-cell maturity and antibody production. This review highlights the
functional importance of IRF5 in a disease setting, by discussing polymorphic
mutations at the human Irf5 locus that lead to susceptibility to systemic lupus
erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, and inflammatory bowel disease. In
concordance with this, we also discuss lessons in IRF5 functionality learned from
murine in vivo models of autoimmune disease and inflammation and hypothesize that
modulation of IRF5 activity and expression could provide potential therapeutic
benefits in the clinic.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26207886  [PubMed - in process]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Aug 4;112(31):E4272-80. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1423449112. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Keap1 regulates inflammatory signaling in Mycobacterium avium-infected human
macrophages.

Awuh JA(1), Haug M(1), Mildenberger J(2), Marstad A(1), Do CP(1), Louet C(1),
Stenvik J(1), Steigedal M(1), Damås JK(3), Halaas Ø(4), Flo TH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway; Department of Cancer Research and Molecular
Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway;
(2)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway; Department of Technology, University College 
of Sør-Trøndelag, 7004 Trondheim, Norway; (3)Centre of Molecular Inflammation
Research, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway;
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway; Department of Infectious
Diseases, St. Olavs Hospital, 7006 Trondheim, Norway. (4)Department of Cancer
Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 
7491 Trondheim, Norway; (5)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway; Department of
Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway; trude.flo@ntnu.no.

Several mechanisms are involved in controlling intracellular survival of
pathogenic mycobacteria in host macrophages, but how these mechanisms are
regulated remains poorly understood. We report a role for Kelch-like
ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1), an oxidative stress sensor, in regulating
inflammation induced by infection with Mycobacterium avium in human primary
macrophages. By using confocal microscopy, we found that Keap1 associated with
mycobacterial phagosomes in a time-dependent manner, whereas siRNA-mediated
knockdown of Keap1 increased M. avium-induced expression of inflammatory
cytokines and type I interferons (IFNs). We show evidence of a mechanism whereby 
Keap1, as part of an E3 ubiquitin ligase complex with Cul3 and Rbx1, facilitates 
ubiquitination and degradation of I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK)-ß thus terminating IKK
activity. Keap1 knockdown led to increased nuclear translocation of transcription
factors NF-<U+03BA>B, IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 1, and IRF5 driving the expression of 
inflammatory cytokines and IFN-ß. Furthermore, knockdown of other members of the 
Cul3 ubiquitin ligase complex also led to increased cytokine expression, further 
implicating this ligase complex in the regulation of the IKK family. Finally,
increased inflammatory responses in Keap1-silenced cells contributed to decreased
intracellular growth of M. avium in primary human macrophages that was
reconstituted with inhibitors of IKKß or TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1). Taken
together, we propose that Keap1 acts as a negative regulator for the control of
inflammatory signaling in M. avium-infected human primary macrophages. Although
this might be important to avoid sustained or overwhelming inflammation, our data
suggest that a negative consequence could be facilitated growth of pathogens like
M. avium inside macrophages.

PMCID: PMC4534286
PMID: 26195781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Jul 5;128(13):1743-7. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.159347.

Variants of Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 are Associated with Neither
Neuromyelitis Optica Nor Multiple Sclerosis in the Southeastern Han Chinese
Population.

Liu QB, Wu L, Zhao GX, Cai PP, Li ZX, Wu ZY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital,
Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou, Fujian 350005; Department of Neurology,
Research Center of Neurology in Second Affiliated Hospital, and The Collaborative
Innovation Center for Brain Science, Zhejiang University School of Medicine,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009; Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurology,
Huashan Hospital, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200040,
China.

BACKGROUND: Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) and multiple sclerosis (MS) are
demyelinating disorders of the central nervous system. Interferon regulatory
factor 5 (IRF5) is a common susceptibility gene to different autoimmune
disorders. However, the association of IRF5 variants with NMO and MS patients has
not been well studied. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate whether IRF5 variants were
associated with NMO and MS in the Southeastern Han Chinese population.
METHODS: Four single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were selected and genotyped 
by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time of flight mass spectrometry
in 111 NMO patients, 145 MS patients and 300 controls from Southeastern China.
RESULTS: None of these 4 SNPs was associated with NMO or MS patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary study indicates that genetic variants in IRF5 may
affect neither NMO nor MS in the Southeastern Han Chinese population. Further
studies with a large sample size and diverse ancestry populations are needed to
clarify this issue.

PMID: 26112714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Hypertens. 2015 Jun;33 Suppl 1:e115. doi: 10.1097/01.hjh.0000467661.76779.b2.

8D.07: GENE EXPRESSION ANALYSIS AND BIOINFORMATICS REVEALED POTENTIAL
TRANSCRIPTION FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH RENIN-ANGIOTENSIN-ALDOSTERONE SYSTEM IN
ATHEROMA.

Nehme A(1), Zibara K, Cerutti C, Bricca G.

Author information: 
(1)1EA4173 Functional Genomics of Arterial Hypertension, Claude Bernard
University-Lyon 1 (UCBL1), Hôpital Nord-Ouest, Lyon, FRANCE 2Biology Department, 
Lebanese University, Beirut, LEBANON.

OBJECTIVE: The implication of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system (RAAS) in 
atheroma development is well described. However, a complete view of the local
RAAS in atheroma is still missing. In this study we aimed to reveal the
organization of RAAS in atheroma at the transcriptomic level and identify the
transcriptional regulators behind it.
DESIGN AND METHOD: Extended RAAS (extRAAS) was defined as the set of 37 genes
coding for classical and novel RAAS participants (Figure 1). Five microarray
datasets containing overall 590 samples representing carotid and peripheral
atheroma were downloaded from the GEO database. Correlation-based hierarchical
clustering (R software) of extRAAS genes within each dataset allowed the
identification of modules of co-expressed genes. Reproducible co-expression
modules across datasets were then extracted. Transcription factors (TFs) having
common binding sites (TFBSs) in the promoters of coordinated genes were
identified using the Genomatix database tools and analyzed for their correlation 
with extRAAS genes in the microarray datasets.
RESULTS: Expression data revealed the expressed extRAAS components and their
relative abundance displaying the favored pathways in atheroma. Three
co-expression modules with more than 80% reproducibility across datasets were
extracted. Two of them (M1 and M2) contained genes coding for angiotensin
metabolizing enzymes involved in different pathways: M1 included ACE, MME, RNPEP,
and DPP3, in addition to 7 other genes; and M2 included CMA1, CTSG, and CPA3. The
third module (M3) contained genes coding for receptors known to be implicated in 
atheroma (AGTR1, MR, GR, LNPEP, EGFR and GPER). M1 and M3 were negatively
correlated in 3 of 5 datasets. We identified 19 TFs that have enriched TFBSs in
the promoters of genes of M1, and two for M3, but none was found for M2. Among
the extracted TFs, ELF1, MAX, and IRF5 showed significant positive correlations
with peptidase-coding genes from M1 and negative correlations with
receptors-coding genes from M3 (p<U+200A><<U+200A>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The identified co-expression modules display the transcriptional
organization of local extRAAS in human carotid atheroma. The identification of
several TFs potentially associated to extRAAS genes may provide a frame for the
discovery of atheroma-specific modulators of extRAAS activity.(Figure is included
in full-text article.).

PMID: 26102694  [PubMed]


41. Hum Immunol. 2015 Jul;76(7):525-31. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2015.06.001. Epub 2015 
Jun 17.

IRF5, PTPN22, CD28, IL2RA, KIF5A, BLK and TNFAIP3 genes polymorphisms and lupus
susceptibility in a cohort from the Egypt Delta; relation to other ethnic groups.

Elghzaly AA(1), Metwally SS(2), El-Chennawi FA(3), Elgayaar MA(4), Mosaad YM(5), 
El-Toraby EE(6), Hegab MM(7), Ibrahim SM(8).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University,
Mansoura, Egypt. Electronic address: drashrafantar@mans.edu.eg. (2)Clinical
Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt. 
Electronic address: shereen_salah@ymail.com. (3)Clinical Pathology Department,
Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt. Electronic address:
dr_farha@mans.edu.eg. (4)Dermatology and Andrology Department, Faculty of
Medicine, Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt. Electronic address:
elgayar_m@yahoo.com. (5)Clinical Pathology Department, Faculty of Medicine,
Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt. Electronic address:
youssefmosaad@yahoo.com. (6)Internal Medicine Department, Faculty of Medicine,
Mansoura University, Mansoura, Egypt. Electronic address: Ehabeltoraby@yahoo.com.
(7)Molecular Medicine Group, Department of Reproductive Medicine, Division of
Medical Research, National Research Center, Egypt. Electronic address:
mohsenhegab@gmail.com. (8)Dermatology Department, Lübeck University, Lübeck,
Germany. Electronic address: Saleh.Ibrahim@uksh.de.

OBJECTIVE: To replicate a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of known genes for
lupus (IRF5 rs10488631, PTPN22 rs2476601, BLK rs2736340 and TNFAIP3 rs5029939)
and other autoimmune diseases (CD28 rs1980422, IL2RA rs2104286 and KIF5A
rs1678542) on a newly studied Egyptian cohort to investigate the genetic
disparity with different studied ethnic groups in relation to lupus
susceptibility.
METHODS: 170 Egyptian patients from Egypt Delta with SLE and 241 matched healthy 
controls were genotyped by Taqman real time PCR for the selected SNPs.
RESULTS: The results revealed significant association with IRF5 (p<0.0001) and
PTPN22 (p=0.008) and insignificant association with KIF5A, CD28, IL2RA, BLK and
TNFAIP3 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study may provide an additional evidence for the association
between IRF5 and PTPN22 and lupus susceptibility and may exclude it for CD28,
IL2RA, and KIF5A.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26092158  [PubMed - in process]


42. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 1;195(3):1100-11. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1403176. Epub 2015
Jun 17.

TLR8 Senses Staphylococcus aureus RNA in Human Primary Monocytes and Macrophages 
and Induces IFN-ß Production via a TAK1-IKKß-IRF5 Signaling Pathway.

Bergstrøm B(1), Aune MH(1), Awuh JA(1), Kojen JF(1), Blix KJ(1), Ryan L(1), Flo
TH(1), Mollnes TE(2), Espevik T(1), Stenvik J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of Cancer Research and
Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Trondheim
N-7491, Norway; (2)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research, Department of
Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of Science and
Technology, Trondheim N-7491, Norway; Department of Immunology, Oslo University
Hospital Rikshospitalet, Oslo N-0027, Norway; K.G. Jebsen Inflammation Research
Center, University of Oslo, Oslo N-0027, Norway; Research Laboratory, Nordland
Hospital, Bodø N-8092, Norway; and Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of 
Tromsø, Tromsø N-9037, Norway. (3)Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research,
Department of Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology, Trondheim N-7491, Norway; jorgen.stenvik@ntnu.no.

Staphylococcus aureus may cause serious infections and is one of the most lethal 
and common causes of sepsis. TLR2 has been described as the main pattern
recognition receptor that senses S. aureus and elicits production of
proinflammatory cytokines via MyD88 -: NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. S. aureus can also induce
the production of IFN-ß, a cytokine that requires IFN regulatory factors (IRFs)
for its transcription, but the signaling mechanism for IFN-ß induction by S.
aureus are unclear. Surprisingly, we demonstrate that activation of TLR2 by
lipoproteins does not contribute to IFN-ß production but instead can suppress the
induction of IFN-ß in human primary monocytes and monocyte-derived macrophages.
The production of IFN-ß was induced by TLR8-mediated sensing of S. aureus RNA,
which triggered IRF5 nuclear accumulation, and this could be antagonized by
concomitant TLR2 signaling. The TLR8-mediated activation of IRF5 was dependent on
TAK1 and I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK)ß, which thus reveals a physiological role of the
recently described IRF5-activating function of IKKß. TLR8 -: IRF5 signaling was
necessary for induction of IFN-ß and IL-12 by S. aureus, and it also contributed 
to the induction of TNF. In conclusion, our study demonstrates a physiological
role of TLR8 in the sensing of entire S. aureus in human primary phagocytes,
including the induction of IFN-ß and IL-12 production via a TAK1 -: IKKß -: IRF5 
pathway that can be inhibited by TLR2 signaling.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26085680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Inflammation. 2015 Dec;38(6):2067-75. doi: 10.1007/s10753-015-0188-z.

Anti-Citrullinated Protein Antibodies Induce Macrophage Subset Disequilibrium in 
RA Patients.

Zhu W(1,)(2,)(3), Li X(4), Fang S(5,)(3), Zhang X(2), Wang Y(4), Zhang T(1), Li
Z(1), Xu Y(1), Qu S(1), Liu C(1), Gao F(6), Pan H(7), Wang G(1), Li H(8,)(9), Sun
B(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Neurobiology Key Laboratory, Harbin Medical
University, Education Department of Heilongjiang Province, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 
150081, China. (2)Department of Immunology, Mudanjiang Medical College,
Mudanjiang, Heilongjiang, 157011, China. (3)The Key Laboratory of Myocardial
Ischemia, Harbin Medical University, Ministry of Education, Harbin, Heilongjiang 
Province, China. (4)Department of Rheumatology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 150086, China. (5)Department of 
Cardiology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 
Heilongjiang, 150086, China. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine, The Second
Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China,
150086. (7)Department of Sports Medicine, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China, 150086. (8)Department of 
Neurobiology, Neurobiology Key Laboratory, Harbin Medical University, Education
Department of Heilongjiang Province, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 150081, China.
lihulun@aliyun.com. (9)The Key Laboratory of Myocardial Ischemia, Harbin Medical 
University, Ministry of Education, Harbin, Heilongjiang Province, China.
lihulun@aliyun.com. (10)Department of Neurobiology, Neurobiology Key Laboratory, 
Harbin Medical University, Education Department of Heilongjiang Province, Harbin,
Heilongjiang, 150081, China. sunbo720@aliyun.com. (11)The Key Laboratory of
Myocardial Ischemia, Harbin Medical University, Ministry of Education, Harbin,
Heilongjiang Province, China. sunbo720@aliyun.com.

We used samples from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients to examine whether
Anti-citrullinated protein antibodies (ACPAs) alter macrophage subset
distribution and promote RA development. Macrophage subset distributions and
interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) and IRF5 expressions were analyzed. ACPAs
were purified by affinity column. After RA and osteoarthritis (OA) patients'
macrophages were cocultured with ACPAs, macrophage subsets and IRF4 and IRF5
expressions were measured. Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) were transfected into 
ACPA-activated cells to suppress IRF4 or IRF5. Fluorescence-activated cell
sorting (FACS), Western blot, and immunohistochemistry were performed. Macrophage
subset disequilibrium occurred in RA patient synovial fluids. IRF4 and IRF5 were 
all expressed in the synovial fluid and synovium. ACPAs (40 IU/ml) could induce
macrophages to polarize to M1 subsets, and the percentage of increased M1/M2
ratio of RA patients was higher than that of the OA patients. ACPAs also induce
IRF4 and IRF5 protein expressions. IRF5 siRNA transfection impaired ACPA activity
significantly. We demonstrated that macrophage subset disequilibrium occurred in 
RA patients. ACPAs induced IRF5 activity and led to M1 macrophage polarization.

PMID: 26063186  [PubMed - in process]


44. J Transl Med. 2015 Jun 2;13:173. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0525-x.

Novel and rare functional genomic variants in multiple autoimmune syndrome and
Sjögren's syndrome.

Johar AS(1), Mastronardi C(2), Rojas-Villarraga A(3), Patel HR(4), Chuah A(5),
Peng K(6), Higgins A(7), Milburn P(8), Palmer S(9), Silva-Lara MF(10), Velez
JI(11), Andrews D(12), Field M(13), Huttley G(14), Goodnow C(15), Anaya JM(16),
Arcos-Burgos M(17).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome Biology Department, John Curtin
School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. u4842377@anu.edu.au.
(2)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome Biology Department, John Curtin
School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
claudio.mastronardi@anu.edu.au. (3)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research
(CREA), School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, 
Colombia. adrirojas@gmail.com. (4)Genome Discovery Unit, Genome Biology
Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine,
Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia. Hardip.Patel@anu.edu.au. (5)Genome Discovery Unit, Genome Biology
Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine,
Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia. Aaron.Chuah@anu.edu.au. (6)Biomolecular Resource Facility, John Curtin
School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. kaiman.peng@anu.edu.au.
(7)Biomolecular Resource Facility, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU
College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian National University,
Canberra, ACT, Australia. angela.higgins@anu.edu.au. (8)Biomolecular Resource
Facility, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine,
Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia. peter.milburn@anu.edu.au. (9)Biomolecular Resource Facility, John
Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and
Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
stephanie.palmer@anu.edu.au. (10)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome Biology
Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine,
Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, ACT,
Australia. maria.silva@anu.edu.au. (11)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome
Biology Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College of
Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian National University, Canberra, 
ACT, Australia. jorge.velez@anu.edu.au. (12)Immunogenomics and Bioinformatics
Group, Immunology Department, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU College
of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian National University,
Canberra, ACT, Australia. dan.andrews@anu.edu.au. (13)Immunogenomics and
Bioinformatics Group, Immunology Department, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian
National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. matthew.field@anu.edu.au.
(14)Biomolecular Resource Facility, John Curtin School of Medical Research, ANU
College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian National University,
Canberra, ACT, Australia. gavin.huttley@anu.edu.au. (15)Immunogenomics and
Bioinformatics Group, Immunology Department, John Curtin School of Medical
Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The Australian
National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia. chris.goodnow@anu.edu.au.
(16)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Universidad del Rosario, Bogota, Colombia. anayajm@gmail.com.
(17)Genomics and Predictive Medicine, Genome Biology Department, John Curtin
School of Medical Research, ANU College of Medicine, Biology and Environment, The
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia.
mauricio.arcos-burgos@anu.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Multiple autoimmune syndrome (MAS), an extreme phenotype of
autoimmune disorders, is a very well suited trait to tackle genomic variants of
these conditions. Whole exome sequencing (WES) is a widely used strategy for
detection of protein coding and splicing variants associated with inherited
diseases.
METHODS: The DNA of eight patients affected by MAS [all of whom presenting with
Sjögren's syndrome (SS)], four patients affected by SS alone and 38 unaffected
individuals, were subject to WES. Filters to identify novel and rare functional
(pathogenic-deleterious) homozygous and/or compound heterozygous variants in
these patients and controls were applied. Bioinformatics tools such as the Human 
gene connectome as well as pathway and network analysis were applied to test
overrepresentation of genes harbouring these variants in critical pathways and
networks involved in autoimmunity.
RESULTS: Eleven novel and rare functional variants were identified in cases but
not in controls, harboured in: MACF1, KIAA0754, DUSP12, ICA1, CELA1, LRP1/STAT6, 
GRIN3B, ANKLE1, TMEM161A, and FKRP. These were subsequently subject to network
analysis and their functional relatedness to genes already associated with
autoimmunity was evaluated. Notably, the LRP1/STAT6 novel mutation was homozygous
in one MAS affected patient and heterozygous in another. LRP1/STAT6 disclosed the
strongest plausibility for autoimmunity. LRP1/STAT6 are involved in extracellular
and intracellular anti-inflammatory pathways that play key roles in maintaining
the homeostasis of the immune system. Further; networks, pathways, and
interaction analyses showed that LRP1 is functionally related to the HLA-B and
IL10 genes and it has a substantial impact within immunological pathways and/or
reaction to bacterial and other foreign proteins (phagocytosis, regulation of
phospholipase A2 activity, negative regulation of apoptosis and response to
lipopolysaccharides). Further, ICA1 and STAT6 were also closely related to AIRE
and IRF5, two very well known autoimmunity genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Novel and rare exonic mutations that may account for autoimmunity
were identified. Among those, the LRP1/STAT6 novel mutation has the strongest
case for being categorised as potentially causative of MAS given the presence of 
intriguing patterns of functional interaction with other major genes shaping
autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC4450850
PMID: 26031516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Immunol Cell Biol. 2015 May-Jun;93(5):425-6. doi: 10.1038/icb.2015.39.

IRF5: a rheostat for tumor-infiltrating lymphocyte trafficking in breast cancer?

Garaud S(1), Willard-Gallo K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology Unit, Institut Jules Bordet, Université Libre de
Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

Comment on
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2015 May-Jun;93(5):486-99.

PMID: 26010613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Oncol. 2015 Jul;47(1):361-9. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.3020. Epub 2015 May 22.

Constitutive expression of IRF-5 in HTLV-1-infected T cells.

Ishikawa C(1), Senba M(2), Barnes BJ(3), Mori N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Transdisciplinary Research Organization for Subtropics and Island Studies,
University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0213, Japan. (2)Department of
Pathology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki
852-8523, Japan. (3)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine,
University of the Ryukyus, Nishihara, Okinawa 903-0215, Japan.

Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is the etiologic agent of adult
T-cell leukemia (ATL), an aggressive and fatal leukemia of T cells. Interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-5 plays a critical role in the induction of interferon
genes in viral infected cells. We examined the specific mechanisms underlying the
expression and regulation of IRF-5 in HTLV-1-infected T cells. IRF-5 was
constitutively transcribed into three distinct alternatively spliced isoforms
(V1, V3 and V4) in HTLV-1-infected T-cell lines but not in uninfected T-cell
lines. IRF-5 was also upregulated in HTLV-1-infected T-cell lines at protein
level. Nuclear IRF-5 expression was noted in ATL cells present in lymph nodes and
skin lesions. IRF-5 mRNA expression was induced following infection of T cells
with HTLV-1, and specifically by viral oncoprotein Tax. Tax also activated V3
promoter. Microarray analysis of IRF-5-expressing uninfected T cells demonstrated
that IRF-5 induced the expression of tumor necrosis factor family cytokines. The 
results suggest that IRF-5 is a Tax-regulated gene, and its expression may be
associated with the pathogenesis of ATL.

PMID: 26004104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Postepy Hig Med Dosw (Online). 2015 Apr 22;69:496-502. doi:
10.5604/17322693.1150133.

Different pathways of macrophage activation and polarization.

Juhas U(1), Ryba-Stanislawowska M(1), Szargiej P(1), Mysliwska J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Medical University of Gdansk.

Monocytes are short-lived cells and undergo spontaneous apoptosis every day.
Inflammatory responses may induce dramatic up-regulation of monocyte survival and
differentiation. When monocytes are recruited to an area of infection they may
differentiate into macrophages. In different microenvironments macrophages
polarize into two types. The M1 or classically activated macrophages are
characterized by the high ability to produce pro-inflammatory cytokines and the
production of NO through the induced synthesis of iNOS. The M2 or alternatively
activated macrophages are divided into 3 subtypes, M2 a, b and c, and they have
anti-inflammatory properties. Mediators of M1 macrophage TLR-dependent
polarization include transcription factors such as NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1, PU.1,
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (C/EBP-a), STAT1 as well as interferon
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), while the transcription factors which promote M2
activation include IRF4, C/EBP-ß, Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4), STAT6 and PPAR<U+03B3>
receptor.

PMID: 25983288  [PubMed - in process]


48. Nat Med. 2015 Jun;21(6):610-8. doi: 10.1038/nm.3829. Epub 2015 May 4.

Irf5 deficiency in macrophages promotes beneficial adipose tissue expansion and
insulin sensitivity during obesity.

Dalmas E(1), Toubal A(2), Alzaid F(3), Blazek K(4), Eames HL(4), Lebozec K(3),
Pini M(1), Hainault I(3), Montastier E(5), Denis RG(6), Ancel P(1), Lacombe A(7),
Ling Y(1), Allatif O(1), Cruciani-Guglielmacci C(6), André S(1), Viguerie N(8),
Poitou C(9), Stich V(10), Torcivia A(11), Foufelle F(3), Luquet S(6),
Aron-Wisnewsky J(9), Langin D(12), Clément K(9), Udalova IA(4), Venteclef N(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie-Curie; INSERM UMR_S
1166-ICAN, Nutriomics, Paris, France. [2] Institute of Cardiometabolism and
Nutrition, Paris, France. (2)1] Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et
Marie-Curie; INSERM UMR_S 1166-ICAN, Nutriomics, Paris, France. [2] Institute of 
Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Paris, France. [3] Sorbonne Universités,
Université Pierre et Marie-Curie, INSERM, UMR_S 1138 Cordeliers Research Center, 
Paris, France. (3)1] Institute of Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Paris, France. 
[2] Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie-Curie, INSERM, UMR_S 1138
Cordeliers Research Center, Paris, France. (4)Kennedy Institute Trust of
Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (5)1] INSERM, University of
Toulouse, Paul Sabatier University, UMR 1048, Toulouse, France. [2] Department of
Clinical Biochemistry, Toulouse University Hospitals, Toulouse, France. [3]
Department of Nutrition, Toulouse University Hospitals, Toulouse, France.
(6)Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Unité de Biologie Fonctionnelle
et Adaptative, CNRS UMR 8251, Paris, France. (7)Institute of Cardiometabolism and
Nutrition, Paris, France. (8)1] Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Toulouse
University Hospitals, Toulouse, France. [2] Department of Nutrition, Toulouse
University Hospitals, Toulouse, France. (9)1] Sorbonne Universités, Université
Pierre et Marie-Curie; INSERM UMR_S 1166-ICAN, Nutriomics, Paris, France. [2]
Institute of Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Paris, France. [3] Heart and
Metabolism Division, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de 
Paris, Paris, France. (10)1] Department of Sports Medicine, Third Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. [2] Franco-Czech 
Laboratory for Clinical Research on Obesity, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (11)Visceral Surgery Division,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(12)1] Heart and Metabolism Division, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. [2] Department of Sports Medicine,
Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

Accumulation of visceral adipose tissue correlates with elevated inflammation and
increased risk of metabolic diseases. However, little is known about the
molecular mechanisms that control its pathological expansion. Transcription
factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) has been implicated in polarizing
macrophages towards an inflammatory phenotype. Here we demonstrate that mice
lacking Irf5, when placed on a high-fat diet, show no difference in the growth of
their epididymal white adipose tissue (epiWAT) but they show expansion of their
subcutaneous white adipose tissue, as compared to wild-type (WT) mice on the same
diet. EpiWAT from Irf5-deficient mice is marked by accumulation of alternatively 
activated macrophages, higher collagen deposition that restricts adipocyte size, 
and enhanced insulin sensitivity compared to epiWAT from WT mice. In obese
individuals, IRF5 expression is negatively associated with insulin sensitivity
and collagen deposition in visceral adipose tissue. Genome-wide analysis of gene 
expression in adipose tissue macrophages highlights the transforming growth
factor ß1 (TGFB1) gene itself as a direct target of IRF5-mediated inhibition.
This study uncovers a new function for IRF5 in controlling the relative mass of
different adipose tissue depots and thus insulin sensitivity in obesity, and it
suggests that inhibition of IRF5 may promote a healthy metabolic state during
this condition.

PMID: 25939064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochem J. 2015 Jun 15;468(3):363-72. doi: 10.1042/BJ20141523. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Suppression of interferon ß gene transcription by inhibitors of bromodomain and
extra-terminal (BET) family members.

Malik N(1), Vollmer S(1), Nanda SK(1), Lopez-Pelaez M(1), Prescott A(2), Gray
N(3), Cohen P(4).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences,
Dow Street, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, U.K. (2)Division of
Cell Signalling and Immunology, College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee,
Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, U.K. (3)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, U.S.A. (4)MRC Protein Phosphorylation and
Ubiquitylation Unit, College of Life Sciences, Dow Street, University of Dundee, 
Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, U.K. p.cohen@dundee.ac.uk.

PLK (Polo-like kinase) inhibitors, such as BI-2536, have been reported to
suppress IFNB (encoding IFNß, interferon ß) gene transcription induced by ligands
that activate TLR3 (Toll-like receptor 3) and TLR4. In the present study, we
found that BI-2536 is likely to exert this effect by preventing the interaction
of the transcription factors IRF3 (interferon-regulatory factor 3) and c-Jun with
the IFNB promoter, but without affecting the TBK1 {TANK [TRAF
(tumour-necrosis-factor-receptor-associated factor)-associated nuclear factor <U+03BA>B 
activator]-binding kinase 1}-catalysed phosphorylation of IRF3 at Ser³<U+2079>6, the
dimerization and nuclear translocation of IRF3 or the phosphorylation of c-Jun
and ATF2 (activating transcription factor 2). Although BI-2536 inhibits few other
kinases tested, it interacts with BET (bromodomain and extra-terminal) family
members and displaces them from acetylated lysine residues on histones. We found 
that BET inhibitors that do not inhibit PLKs phenocopied the effect of BI-2536 on
IFNB gene transcription. Similarly, BET inhibitors blocked the interaction of
IRF5 with the IFNB promoter and the secretion of IFNß induced by TLR7 or TLR9
ligands in the human plasmacytoid dendritic cell line GEN2.2, but without
affecting the nuclear translocation of IRF5. We found that the BET family member 
BRD4 (bromodomain-containing protein 4) was associated with the IFNB promoter and
that this interaction was enhanced by TLR3- or TLR4-ligation and prevented by
BI-2536 and other BET inhibitors. Our results establish that BET family members
are essential for TLR-stimulated IFNB gene transcription by permitting
transcription factors to interact with the IFNB promoter. They also show that the
interaction of the IFNB promoter with BRD4 is regulated by TLR ligation and that 
BI-2536 is likely to suppress IFNB gene transcription by targeting BET family
members.

© 2015 The Author(s).

PMCID: PMC4613535
PMID: 25891802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 13;11(4):e1005111. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005111.
eCollection 2015.

Host genetic variation influences gene expression response to rhinovirus
infection.

Çaliskan M(1), Baker SW(1), Gilad Y(1), Ober C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
United States of America.

Rhinovirus (RV) is the most prevalent human respiratory virus and is responsible 
for at least half of all common colds. RV infections may result in a broad
spectrum of effects that range from asymptomatic infections to severe lower
respiratory illnesses. The basis for inter-individual variation in the response
to RV infection is not well understood. In this study, we explored whether host
genetic variation is associated with variation in gene expression response to RV 
infections between individuals. To do so, we obtained genome-wide genotype and
gene expression data in uninfected and RV-infected peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) from 98 individuals. We mapped local and distant genetic variation 
that is associated with inter-individual differences in gene expression levels
(eQTLs) in both uninfected and RV-infected cells. We focused specifically on
response eQTLs (reQTLs), namely, genetic associations with inter-individual
variation in gene expression response to RV infection. We identified local reQTLs
for 38 genes, including genes with known functions in viral response (UBA7, OAS1,
IRF5) and genes that have been associated with immune and RV-related diseases
(e.g., ITGA2, MSR1, GSTM3). The putative regulatory regions of genes with reQTLs 
were enriched for binding sites of virus-activated STAT2, highlighting the role
of condition-specific transcription factors in genotype-by-environment
interactions. Overall, we suggest that the 38 loci associated with
inter-individual variation in gene expression response to RV-infection represent 
promising candidates for affecting immune and RV-related respiratory diseases.

PMCID: PMC4395341
PMID: 25874939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Mar 26;7(1):34. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0064-6.
eCollection 2015.

Age-associated DNA methylation changes in immune genes, histone modifiers and
chromatin remodeling factors within 5 years after birth in human blood
leukocytes.

Acevedo N(1), Reinius LE(2), Vitezic M(3), Fortino V(4), Söderhäll C(2), Honkanen
H(5), Veijola R(6), Simell O(7), Toppari J(8), Ilonen J(9), Knip M(10), Scheynius
A(11), Hyöty H(12), Greco D(4), Kere J(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine Solna, Translational Immunology Unit, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden ; Department of Biosciences and Nutrition,
Center for Innovative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(2)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Center for Innovative Medicine,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Department of Biology,
Bioinformatics Centre, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Unit of 
Systems Toxicology, Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, Helsinki, Finland. 
(5)Department of Virology, School of Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Oulu University Hospital, University of
Oulu, Oulu, Finland. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital,
Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of 
Turku, Turku, Finland. (8)Department of Physiology and Pediatrics, Turku
University Hospital, University of Turku, Turku, Finland. (9)Immunogenetics
Laboratory, University of Turku, Finland and Department of Clinical Microbiology,
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. (10)Children's Hospital, Helsinki
University Central Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland ;
Department of Paediatrics, Tampere University Hospital, Tampere, Finland ;
Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, and Research Programs Unit,
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (11)Department of Medicine Solna,
Translational Immunology Unit, Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
(12)Department of Virology, School of Medicine, University of Tampere, Tampere,
Finland ; Fimlab Laboratories, Tampere, Finland. (13)Department of Biosciences
and Nutrition, Center for Innovative Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden ; Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, and Research Programs Unit, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Age-related changes in DNA methylation occurring in blood leukocytes 
during early childhood may reflect epigenetic maturation. We hypothesized that
some of these changes involve gene networks of critical relevance in leukocyte
biology and conducted a prospective study to elucidate the dynamics of DNA
methylation. Serial blood samples were collected at 3, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48 and
60 months after birth in ten healthy girls born in Finland and participating in
the Type 1 Diabetes Prediction and Prevention Study. DNA methylation was measured
using the HumanMethylation450 BeadChip.
RESULTS: After filtering for the presence of polymorphisms and
cell-lineage-specific signatures, 794 CpG sites showed significant DNA
methylation differences as a function of age in all children (41.6%
age-methylated and 58.4% age-demethylated, Bonferroni-corrected P value <0.01).
Age-methylated CpGs were more frequently located in gene bodies and within +5 to 
+50 kilobases (kb) of transcription start sites (TSS) and enriched in
developmental, neuronal and plasma membrane genes. Age-demethylated CpGs were
associated to promoters and DNAse-I hypersensitivity sites, located within -5 to 
+5 kb of the nearest TSS and enriched in genes related to immunity, antigen
presentation, the polycomb-group protein complex and cytoplasm.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that susceptibility loci for complex inflammatory
diseases (for example, IRF5, NOD2, and PTGER4) and genes encoding histone
modifiers and chromatin remodeling factors (for example, HDAC4, KDM2A, KDM2B,
JARID2, ARID3A, and SMARCD3) undergo DNA methylation changes in leukocytes during
early childhood. These results open new perspectives to understand leukocyte
maturation and provide a catalogue of CpG sites that may need to be corrected for
age effects when performing DNA methylation studies in children.

PMCID: PMC4396570
PMID: 25874017  [PubMed]


52. Blood. 2015 May 14;125(20):3202-12. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-11-611046. Epub 2015 
Apr 2.

Endothelial cells suppress monocyte activation through secretion of extracellular
vesicles containing antiinflammatory microRNAs.

Njock MS(1), Cheng HS(1), Dang LT(1), Nazari-Jahantigh M(2), Lau AC(1), Boudreau 
E(1), Roufaiel M(1), Cybulsky MI(1), Schober A(3), Fish JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Toronto General Research Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, ON,
Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada; Heart and Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence
in Cardiovascular Research, Toronto, ON, Canada; (2)Institute for Cardiovascular 
Prevention, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich, Munich, Germany; and.
(3)Institute for Cardiovascular Prevention, Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich,
Munich, Germany; and DZHK (German Center for Cardiovascular Research), Partner
Site Munich Heart Alliance, Munich, Germany.

The blood contains high concentrations of circulating extracellular vesicles
(EVs), and their levels and contents are altered in several disease states,
including cardiovascular disease. However, the function of circulating EVs,
especially the microRNAs (miRNAs) that they contain, are poorly understood. We
sought to determine the effect of secreted vesicles produced by quiescent
endothelial cells (ECs) on monocyte inflammatory responses and to assess whether 
transfer of microRNAs occurs between these cells. We observed that monocytic
cells cocultured (but not in contact) with ECs were refractory to inflammatory
activation. Further characterization revealed that endothelium-derived EVs
(EC-EVs) suppressed monocyte activation by enhancing immunomodulatory responses
and diminishing proinflammatory responses. EVs isolated from mouse plasma also
suppressed monocyte activation. Importantly, injection of EC-EVs in vivo
repressed monocyte/macrophage activation, confirming our in vitro findings. We
found that several antiinflammatory microRNAs were elevated in EC-EV-treated
monocytes. In particular, miR-10a was transferred to monocytic cells from EC-EVs 
and could repress inflammatory signaling through the targeting of several
components of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, including IRAK4. Our findings reveal that ECs
secrete EVs that can modulate monocyte activation and suggest that altered EV
secretion and/or microRNA content may affect vascular inflammation in the setting
of cardiovascular disease.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4440888
PMID: 25838349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2015 Feb;35(1):1-4.

[Mechanisms underlying the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain revealing by the role
of glial cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuda M.

Injury to the nervous system results in debilitating chronic pain states (called 
neuropathic pain) whose mechanisms remain unclear. Emerging lines of evidence
indicate the pivotal role of spinal glial cells in neuropathic pain. Spinal
microglia rapidly respond to peripheral nerve injury (PNI) and become activated
with changing expression of a variety of genes. The best known example is
purinergic P2X4 receptors, an ATP-gated cation channel. The expression of P2X4
receptors is upregulated in spinal microglia after PNI, and inhibition of P2X4
activity suppresses neuropathic pain. Furthermore, interferon regulatory factor-8
(IRF8) and IRF5 are identified as microglial transcription factors whose
expression is upregulated in spinal microglia after PNI, and the IRF8-IRF5
transcriptional cascade is the core process for shifting spinal microglia toward 
a state with high expression of P2X4 receptors. Astrocytes in the spinal cord
show a delayed onset of activation and play an important role in the maintenance 
of neuropathic pain via the transcription factor STAT3 and the intracellular
kinase JNK. These results obtained from glial cell research will advance our
understanding of the development and maintenance of neuropathic pain and provide 
a new target for treating this pain.

PMID: 25816633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 27;6:6676. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7676.

Myeloid cell-derived inducible nitric oxide synthase suppresses M1 macrophage
polarization.

Lu G(1), Zhang R(1), Geng S(2), Peng L(1), Jayaraman P(1), Chen C(2), Xu F(1),
Yang J(1), Li Q(1), Zheng H(1), Shen K(1), Wang J(1), Liu X(1), Wang W(3), Zheng 
Z(1), Qi CF(4), Si C(5), He JC(1), Liu K(6), Lira SA(1), Sikora AG(1), Li L(2),
Xiong H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Immunology Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences,
Center for Inflammation, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA. (3)The
Ronald O. Perelman and Claudia Cohen Center for Reproductive Medicine, Weill
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10021, USA.
(4)Laboratory of Immunogenetics, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
(5)Institute of Immunology and Molecular Medicine, Jining Medical College,
Jining, Shandong 272067, China. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia
30912, USA. (7)1] Department of Medicine, Immunology Institute, Icahn School of
Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York 10029, USA [2] Institute of
Immunology and Molecular Medicine, Jining Medical College, Jining, Shandong
272067, China.

Here we show that iNOS-deficient mice display enhanced classically activated M1
macrophage polarization without major effects on alternatively activated M2
macrophages. eNOS and nNOS mutant mice show comparable M1 macrophage polarization
compared with wild-type control mice. Addition of N6-(1-iminoethyl)-L-lysine
dihydrochloride, an iNOS inhibitor, significantly enhances M1 macrophage
polarization while S-nitroso-N-acetylpenicillamine, a NO donor, suppresses M1
macrophage polarization. NO derived from iNOS mediates nitration of tyrosine
residues in IRF5 protein, leading to the suppression of IRF5-targeted M1
macrophage signature gene activation. Computational analyses corroborate a
circuit that fine-tunes the expression of IL-12 by iNOS in macrophages,
potentially enabling versatile responses based on changing microenvironments.
Finally, studies of an experimental model of endotoxin shock show that iNOS
deficiency results in more severe inflammation with an enhanced M1 macrophage
activation phenotype. These results suggest that NO derived from iNOS in
activated macrophages suppresses M1 macrophage polarization.

PMCID: PMC4389243
PMID: 25813085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jun 15;24(12):3571-81. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv095. Epub 2015 Mar
16.

IFN-a production by plasmacytoid dendritic cell associations with polymorphisms
in gene loci related to autoimmune and inflammatory diseases.

Berggren O(1), Alexsson A(2), Morris DL(3), Tandre K(2), Weber G(4), Vyse TJ(3), 
Syvänen AC(5), Rönnblom L(2), Eloranta ML(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Rheumatology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, Uppsala 75185, Sweden, olof.berggren@medsci.uu.se.
(2)Department of Medical Sciences, Rheumatology, Science for Life Laboratory,
Uppsala University, Uppsala 75185, Sweden. (3)Department of Medical & Molecular
Genetics, King's College London School of Medicine, Guy's Hospital, London W12
0NN, UK and. (4)Free University of Berlin, Berlin 14195, Germany. (5)Department
of Medical Sciences, Molecular Medicine, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala
University, Uppsala 75185, Sweden.

The type I interferon (IFN) system is persistently activated in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) and many other systemic autoimmune diseases. Studies have
shown an association between SLE and several gene variants within the type I IFN 
system. We investigated whether single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated
with SLE and other autoimmune diseases affect the IFN-a production in healthy
individuals. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), B cells and NK cells were
isolated from peripheral blood of healthy individuals and stimulated with
RNA-containing immune complexes (ICs), herpes simplex virus (HSV) or the
oligonucleotide ODN2216. IFN-a production by pDCs alone or in cocultures with B
or NK cells was measured by an immunoassay. All donors were genotyped with the
200K ImmunoChip, and a 5 bp CGGGG length polymorphism in the IFN regulatory
factor 5 gene (IRF5) was genotyped by PCR. We found associations between IFN-a
production and 18-86 SNPs (P = 0.001), depending on the combination of the
stimulated cell types. However, only three of these associated SNPs were shared
between the cell-type combinations. Several SNPs showed novel associations to the
type I IFN system among all the associated SNPs, whereas some loci have been
described earlier for their association with SLE. Furthermore, we found that the 
SLE-risk variant of the IRF5 CGGGG-indel was associated with lower IFN-a
production. We conclude that the genetic variants affecting the IFN-a production 
highlight the intricate regulation of the type I IFN system and the importance of
understanding the mechanisms behind the dysregulated type I IFN system in SLE.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25779693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 May;44(1):272-82. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.02.033.
Epub 2015 Feb 28.

Molecular characterization and expression analysis of eleven interferon
regulatory factors in half-smooth tongue sole, Cynoglossus semilaevis.

Zhang J(1), Li YX(2), Hu YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, China. (2)Taishan Vocational
College of Nursing, 8 Ying Sheng East Road, Tai'an, 271000, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, China. Electronic address:
huyonghua@qdio.ac.cn.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) act as transcription mediators in virus-,
bacteria-, and interferon (IFN)-induced signaling pathways and play diverse
functions in antimicrobial defense, immune modulation, hematopoietic
differentiation, and cell apoptosis. In this study, we described for the first
time eleven IRFs (IRF1, IRF1L, IRF2X1, IRF3, IRF4a, IRF4b, IRF5, IRF6, IRF7,
IRF8, and IRF9) from half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) and
examined their tissue distributions and expression patterns under different
conditions. The deduced protein sequences of these IRFs (except IRF1) share high 
identities (71.8-86.6%) with other corresponding IRFs in other teleosts, whereas 
the sequence identity of IRF1 with the corresponding IRF1 in other teleosts is
only 58.1%. A conserved N-terminal DNA binding domain (DBD), which is
characterized by a winged type helix-loop-helix motif with four to six tryptophan
repeats, is present in all IRFs. Another conserved IRF associated domain (IAD),
which mediates the interactions in the C-terminal part of the protein, is present
in all IRFs except IRF1 and IRF2X1, which instead contain the IAD2 domain.
Several special domains also were found, including a serine-rich domain (SRD) in 
IRF3, IRF4a, IRF4b, and IRF7; a proline-rich domain (PRD) in IRF9; nuclear
localization signals (NLSs) in IRF5, IRF8, and IRF9; and a virus activated domain
(VAD) in IRF5. Quantitative real time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis showed that
expression of all IRFs occurred in multiple tissues. IRF1, IRF2X1, IRF4a, IRF5,
IRF7, and IRF8 exhibited relatively high levels of expression in immune organs,
whereas the other five IRFs displayed high levels of expression in non-immune
organs. Infection with extracellular and intracellular bacterial pathogens and
virus upregulated the expression of IRFs in a manner that depended on tissue
type, pathogen, and infection stage. Specifically, IRF1 and IRF2X1 were highly
induced by bacterial and viral pathogens; IRF1L and IRF6 responded mainly to
extracellular and intracellular bacterial pathogens; IRF3, IRF5, IRF7, IRF8, and 
IRF9 were markedly induced by intracellular bacterial pathogen and virus; IRF4a
and IRF4b were mainly induced by virus and intracellular bacterial pathogen
respectively. These results indicate that the IRFs of C. semilaevis can be
categorized into several groups which exhibit different expression patterns in
response to the infection of different microbial pathogens. These results provide
new insights into the roles of teleost IRFs in antimicrobial immunity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25731919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cancer. 2015 Feb 4;14:32. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0305-5.

A conserved region within interferon regulatory factor 5 controls breast cancer
cell migration through a cytoplasmic and transcription-independent mechanism.

Pimenta EM(1,)(2), Barnes BJ(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, Rutgers
Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, NJ, 07103, USA.
pimentem@njms.rutgers.edu. (2)Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, New Jersey 
Medical School-Cancer Center Rm. G1224, 205 South Orange Ave, Newark, NJ, 07103, 
USA. pimentem@njms.rutgers.edu. (3)Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry &
Molecular Genetics, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, NJ, 07103,
USA. barnesbe@njms.rutgers.edu. (4)Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, New
Jersey Medical School-Cancer Center Rm. G1224, 205 South Orange Ave, Newark, NJ, 
07103, USA. barnesbe@njms.rutgers.edu.

BACKGROUND: Migration of breast cancer cells out of a duct or lobule is a
prerequisite for invasion and metastasis. However, the factors controlling breast
cancer cell migration are not fully elucidated. We previously found that
expression of the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is
significantly decreased as a breast lesion progresses from a non-malignant stage 
to ductal carcinoma in situ and is eventually lost in ~80% of invasive ductal
carcinomas examined. Human in vitro and murine in vivo models of invasive breast 
cancer confirmed an important role for IRF5 in regulating cell motility, invasion
and/or metastasis; yet, the mechanism(s) by which this occurs is not known. Since
IRF5 is primarily expressed in the cytoplasm of human mammary epithelial cells,
we hypothesized that IRF5 may function in a transcription-independent manner to
control intrinsic cell migration.
RESULTS: A series of IRF5 deletion mutants were tested in cell motility, invasion
and migration assays. A novel, conserved 10 amino acid domain was identified that
regulates mammary epithelial cell migration. This region (<U+2206>115-125) is downstream
of IRF5's DNA binding domain and therefore when absent, retains IRF5
transcription activity but loses cell migration control. An IRF5 construct with a
mutated nuclear localization signal further confirmed that IRF5 controls
migration in a cytoplasmic and transcription-independent manner. Candidate
cytoskeletal molecules were identified in MDA-MB-231 cells to interact with IRF5 
by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis. a6-tubulin was
independently confirmed to interact with endogenous IRF5 in MCF-10A cells.
Alterations in F-actin bundling after staining EV- and IRF5-231 cells with
phalloidin suggests that IRF5 may control cell migration/motility through its
interaction with cytoskeletal molecules that contribute to the formation of
F-actin networks. Last and most notably, we found that IRF5's control of cell
migration is not restricted to mammary epithelial cells but functions in other
epithelial cell types suggesting a more global role for this newly identified
cell migratory function of IRF5.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings are significant as they identify a new regulator of
epithelial cell migration and provide specific insight into the mechanism(s) by
which loss of IRF5 expression in mammary epithelial cells contributes to breast
cancer metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4326371
PMID: 25649192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Immunol. 2015 Feb 15;194(4):1467-79. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402807. Epub 2015
Jan 16.

IRF5 deficiency ameliorates lupus but promotes atherosclerosis and metabolic
dysfunction in a mouse model of lupus-associated atherosclerosis.

Watkins AA(1), Yasuda K(1), Wilson GE(1), Aprahamian T(1), Xie Y(1),
Maganto-Garcia E(2), Shukla P(1), Oberlander L(1), Laskow B(1), Menn-Josephy
H(1), Wu Y(3), Duffau P(1), Fried SK(3), Lichtman AH(2), Bonegio RG(1), Rifkin
IR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118; (2)Vascular Research Division, Department of Pathology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; and.
(3)Endocrinology Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02118. (4)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston
University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118; irifkin@bu.edu.

Premature atherosclerosis is a severe complication of lupus and other systemic
autoimmune disorders. Gain-of-function polymorphisms in IFN regulatory factor 5
(IRF5) are associated with an increased risk of developing lupus, and IRF5
deficiency in lupus mouse models ameliorates disease. However, whether IRF5
deficiency also protects against atherosclerosis development in lupus is not
known. In this study, we addressed this question using the gld.apoE(-/-) mouse
model. IRF5 deficiency markedly reduced lupus disease severity. Unexpectedly,
despite the reduction in systemic immune activation, IRF5-deficient mice
developed increased atherosclerosis and also exhibited metabolic dysregulation
characterized by hyperlipidemia, increased adiposity, and insulin resistance.
Levels of the atheroprotective cytokine IL-10 were reduced in aortae of
IRF5-deficient mice, and in vitro studies demonstrated that IRF5 is required for 
IL-10 production downstream of TLR7 and TLR9 signaling in multiple immune cell
types. Chimera studies showed that IRF5 deficiency in bone marrow-derived cells
prevents lupus development and contributes in part to the increased
atherosclerosis. Notably, IRF5 deficiency in non-bone marrow-derived cells also
contributes to the increased atherosclerosis through the generation of
hyperlipidemia and increased adiposity. Together, our results reveal a protective
role for IRF5 in lupus-associated atherosclerosis that is mediated through the
effects of IRF5 in both immune and nonimmune cells. These findings have
implications for the proposed targeting of IRF5 in the treatment of autoimmune
disease as global IRF5 inhibition may exacerbate cardiovascular disease in these 
patients.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4323680
PMID: 25595782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cytokine. 2015 Mar;72(1):115-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.12.012. Epub 2015 Jan
10.

Cytokine and proinflammatory gene expression in classical Hodgkin lymphoma: its
more than NF-<U+03BA>B!

Kreher S(1), Cauchy P(2), Bonifer C(2), Mathas S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany; Hematology,
Oncology and Tumor Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353
Berlin, Germany. (2)School of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical and Dental
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.
(3)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany; Hematology,
Oncology and Tumor Immunology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353
Berlin, Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany. Electronic address: stephan.mathas@charite.de.

PMID: 25585876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int J Immunopathol Pharmacol. 2014 Oct-Dec;27(4):635-8.

Association of the IRF5 SNP rs2004640 with systemic sclerosis in Han Chinese.

Wang J(1), Yi L(2), Guo X(2), Liu M(2), Li H(2), Zou H(3), Gu Y(4), Tu W(5), Guo 
G(6), Yang L(7), Lai S(8), He D(9), Zhou X(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical
Immunogenetics, University of Texas Medical School at Houston, TX , USA.
(3)Institute of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. (4)Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, China. (5)Shanghai Traditional
Chinese Medicine-Integrated Hospital, Shanghai, China. (6)Yiling Hospital,
Shijiazhuang, China. (7)Teaching Hospital of Chengdu University of TCM, Chengdu, 
China. (8)Baylor College of Medicine and Houston VA Hospital, Houston, USA.
(9)Institute of Arthritis Research, Shanghai Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences,
Shanghai Guanghua Integrative Medicine Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a complex disease involving multiple genetic factors.
An association of the IRF5 polymorphism with SSc was reported in Caucasian
populations of Europe and North America, as well as in Japanese populations. The 
present study aimed to examine whether the SSc-associated SNP rs2004640 of IRF5
gene confer susceptibility to SSc and clinical features of SSc in a Han Chinese
population. A Han Chinese cohort consisting of 424 SSc patients and 502 healthy
controls were examined in the study. TaqMan assays were carried out to examine
the SNP. Exact p-values were obtained (Fisher<U+0092>s test) from 2x2 tables of allele
counts and disease status. SSc patients of Han Chinese showed increased
homozygous TT genotype of the rs2004640 (p = 0.027, odds ratio (OR) = 1.4, CI
=1.03-1.93), which was significantly associated with pulmonary fibrosis of SSc
and ATA-positive SSc of Han Chinese. The lcSSc and ACA-positive SSc of Han
Chinese appeared also in association with the increased T allele frequency.
However, the Chinese dcSSc did not show any association with the rs2004640. The
results were consistent with previous reports in other ethnic populations in
supporting the notion that polymorphisms of IRF5 may play an important role in
susceptibility to SSc.

PMID: 25572744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nat Commun. 2015 Jan 7;6:5930. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6930.

Proinflammatory TLR signalling is regulated by a TRAF2-dependent proteolysis
mechanism in macrophages.

Jin J(1), Xiao Y(1), Hu H(1), Zou Q(1), Li Y(1), Gao Y(2), Ge W(2), Cheng X(1),
Sun SC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
7455 Fannin Street, Box 902, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. (2)National Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Dongdan Santiao 5#, Beijing 100005, China.
(3)1] Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, 7455 Fannin Street, Box 902, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [2] Center for
Inflammation and Cancer, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 7455 
Fannin Street, Box 902, Houston, Texas 77030, USA [3] The University of Texas
Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Signal transduction from toll-like receptors (TLRs) is important for innate
immunity against infections, but deregulated TLR signalling contributes to
inflammatory disorders. Here we show that myeloid cell-specific ablation of TRAF2
greatly promotes TLR-stimulated proinflammatory cytokine expression in
macrophages and exacerbates colitis in an animal model of inflammatory bowel
disease. TRAF2 deficiency does not enhance upstream signalling events, but it
causes accumulation of two transcription factors, c-Rel and IRF5, known to
mediate proinflammatory cytokine induction. Interestingly, TRAF2 controls the
fate of c-Rel and IRF5 via a proteasome-dependent mechanism that also requires
TRAF3 and the E3 ubiquitin ligase cIAP. We further show that TRAF2 also regulates
inflammatory cytokine production in tumour-associated macrophages and facilitates
tumour growth. These findings demonstrate an unexpected anti-inflammatory
function of TRAF2 and suggest a proteasome-dependent mechanism that limits the
proinflammatory TLR signalling.

PMCID: PMC4286812
PMID: 25565375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Dig Dis. 2015 Apr;16(4):205-16. doi: 10.1111/1751-2980.12229.

Association between genetic polymorphisms in interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF5) gene and Malaysian patients with Crohn's disease.

Chua KH(1), Lian LH, Khor WC, Lee WS, Hilmi I, Goh KL, Kee BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.

OBJECTIVE: The study aimed to investigate the association between the interferon 
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene polymorphisms and the onset of Crohn's disease
(CD) in a Malaysian cohort.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from blood samples collected from 91 CD
patients and 100 healthy individuals via a conventional phenol-chloroform
extraction method. Screening of the four target single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), including rs3807306, rs4728142, rs10954213 and rs11770589 was carried out
in a real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) thermal cycler using TaqMan
genotyping assay. The genetic data obtained was subsequently subjected to
statistical analysis to relate the SNPs to the onset of CD in the Malaysian
population. The genotyping assay and data were further validated selectively by
conventional PCR amplification of the SNP sites and DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: The rs3807306 G allele was a risk factor for CD (OR 2.3630, P =
0.00004), whereas the homozygous T genotype was protective against the disease
(OR 0.2038, P = 0.00004). The heterozygous A/G genotype of rs10954213 was
significantly associated with CD (OR 4.319, P = 0.0377). On the other hand, the
homozygous A and heterozygous A/G genotypes of the rs11770589 were significant in
the controls (OR 0.4242, P = 0.0166) and patients (OR 2.000, P = 0.0179),
respectively. In the ethnic-stratification analysis, the rs11770589 homozygous A 
genotype was protective in Indians (OR 0.1551, P = 0.0112).
CONCLUSION: IRF5 gene polymorphisms may play a role in the development of CD in
the Malaysian population.

© 2015 Chinese Medical Association Shanghai Branch, Chinese Society of
Gastroenterology, Renji Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai Jiaotong University
School of Medicine and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 25564941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Microbiol. 2015 Jan;53(1):70-6. doi: 10.1007/s12275-014-4654-3. Epub 2015 Jan
4.

Hypermethylation of the interferon regulatory factor 5 promoter in Epstein-Barr
virus-associated gastric carcinoma.

Dong SM(1), Lee HG, Cho SG, Kwon SH, Yoon H, Kwon HJ, Lee JH, Kim H, Park PG, Kim
H, Hayward SD, Park JH, Lee JM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi-do, 410-769,
Republic of Korea.

Interferon regulatory factor-5 (IRF-5), a member of the mammalian IRF
transcription factor family, is regulated by p53, type I interferon and virus
infection. IRF-5 participates in virus-induced TLR-mediated innate immune
responses and may play a role as a tumor suppressor. It was suppressed in various
EBV-infected transformed cells, thus it is valuable to identify the suppression
mechanism. We focused on a promoter CpG islands methylation, a kind of epigenetic
regulation in EBV-associated Burkitt's lymphomas (BLs) and gastric carcinomas.
IRF-5 is not detected in most of EBV-infected BL cell lines due to
hypermethylation of IRF-5 distal promoter (promoter-A), which was restored by a
demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. Hypomethylation of CpG islands in
promoter-A was observed only in EBV type III latent infected BL cell lines (LCL
and Mutu III). Similarly, during EBV infection to Akata-4E3 cells, IRF-5 was
observed at early time periods (2 days to 8 weeks), concomitant unmethylation of 
promoter-A, but suppressed in later infection periods as observed in latency I BL
cell lines. Moreover, hypermethylation in IRF-5 promoter-A region was also
observed in EBV-associated gastric carcinoma (EBVaGC) cell lines or primary
gastric carcinoma tissues, which show type I latent infection. In summary, IRF-5 
is suppressed by hypermethylation of its promoter-A in most of EBV-infected
transformed cells, especially BLs and EBVaGC. EBV-induced carcinogenesis takes an
advantage of proliferative effects of TLR signaling, while limiting IRF-5
mediated negative effects in the establishment of EBVaGCs.

PMID: 25557482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Medicine (Baltimore). 2014 Dec;93(29):e349. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000349.

IFNAR1 is a predictor for overall survival in colorectal cancer and its mRNA
expression correlated with IRF7 but not TLR9.

Chang LC(1), Fan CW, Tseng WK, Chein HP, Hsieh TY, Chen JR, Hwang CC, Hua CC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology (L-CC, T-YH, H-PC, J-RC, C-CH); Division of
Colon and Rectal Surgery (C-WF, W-KT); and Department of Internal Medicine
(C-CH), Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung, and Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) 9 plays a role in intestinal inflammation that, in turn,
is related to the tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer. Nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF<U+03BA>B),
and interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 5 and IRF7 can be activated by TLR9 and
induce the production of proinflammatory cytokines and type I interferon,
respectively. This study investigated the mRNA expressions of TLR9 and its
downstream signaling molecules in both the tumor and the normal tissues of
colorectal cancer. Eighty-four subjects with colorectal cancer were consecutively
recruited at a community-based hospital, and the mRNA expression of TLR9, NF<U+03BA>B,
IRF5, IRF7, interleukin 6 (IL6), and interferon a/ß/<U+03C9> receptor 1 (IFNAR1) in the 
tumor and normal tissue were determined by real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction using TaqMan FAM-labeled MGB probes (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA). The tumor had higher percentages of detection of TLR9, IFNAR1, and
IL6 mRNA expressions than normal tissue. The absence of detectable TLR9 mRNA
expression was associated with an absence of significance in the correlation
between IL6 and NF<U+03BA>B or IRF5, but not that between IRF7 and IFNAR1 in both the
tumor and the normal tissues. An absence of detectable IFNAR1 mRNA expression in 
the tumor (hazard ratio: 3.77; 95% confidence interval: 1.22-11.60) and advanced 
stage (stages III and IV, 7.86; 1.76-35.40) were significant predictors for
overall survival. IFNAR1 is a predictor for overall survival and mRNA expression 
is correlated to IRF7, but not TLR9 in colorectal cancer. The results cast doubt 
on the usefulness of TLR9 agonist in treating colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4602595
PMID: 25546690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Immunol Cell Biol. 2015 May-Jun;93(5):486-99. doi: 10.1038/icb.2014.110. Epub
2014 Dec 23.

IRF5 is a novel regulator of CXCL13 expression in breast cancer that regulates
CXCR5(+) B- and T-cell trafficking to tumor-conditioned media.

Pimenta EM(1), De S(1), Weiss R(1), Feng D(1), Hall K(2), Kilic S(3), Bhanot
G(4), Ganesan S(5), Ran S(2), Barnes BJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Rutgers
Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, NJ, USA [2] Rutgers Biomedical and Health
Sciences, New Jersey Medical School-Cancer Center, UMDNJ, Newark, NJ, USA.
(2)Department of Medical Microbiology, Immunology and Cell Biology, Southern
Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, IL, USA. (3)Rutgers
Biomedical and Health Sciences, New Jersey Medical School-Cancer Center, UMDNJ,
Newark, NJ, USA. (4)1] Department of Molecular Biology, Biochemistry & Physics,
Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA [2] Rutgers Cancer Institute of New
Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ, USA. (5)Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ, USA.

Comment in
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2015 May-Jun;93(5):425-6.

Clinical studies using prognostic and predictive signatures have shown that an
immune signal emanating from whole tumors reflects the level of immune cell
infiltration--a high immune signal linked to improved outcome. Factors regulating
immune cell trafficking to the tumor, however, are not known. Previous work has
shown that expression of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), a critical immune
regulator, is lost in ~80% of invasive ductal carcinomas examined. We postulated 
that IRF5-positive and -negative breast tumors would differentially regulate
immune cell trafficking to the tumor. Using a focused tumor inflammatory array,
differences in cytokine and chemokine expression were examined between
IRF5-positive and -negative MDA-MB-231 cells grown in three-dimensional culture. 
A number of cytokines/chemokines were found to be dysregulated between cultures. 
CXCL13 was identified as a direct target of IRF5 resulting in the enhanced
recruitment of B and T cells to IRF5-positive tumor-conditioned media. The
ability of IRF5 to regulate mediators of cell migration was confirmed by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation assay, small
interfering RNA knockdown and immunofluorescence staining of human breast tumor
tissues. Analysis of primary immune cell subsets revealed that IRF5 specifically 
recruits CXCR5(+) B and T cells to the tumor; CXCR5 is the receptor for CXCL13.
Analysis of primary breast tumor tissues revealed a significant correlation
between IRF5 and CXCL13 expression providing clinical relevance to the study.
Together, these data support that IRF5 directly regulates a network of genes that
shapes a tumor immune response and may, in combination with CXCL13, serve as a
novel prognostic marker for antitumor immunity.

PMID: 25533286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2015 Apr;26(2):249-61. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2014.10.008. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Pharmacogenomics of interferon-ß in multiple sclerosis: what has been
accomplished and how can we ensure future progress?

Carlson RJ(1), Doucette JR(2), Knox K(3), Nazarali AJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, College of Pharmacy and Nutrition,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK S7N 5E5, Canada; Neuroscience Research 
Cluster, Health Sciences Building, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK S7K 
5E5, Canada. (2)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK S7N 5E5, Canada; Neuroscience Research 
Cluster, Health Sciences Building, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK S7K 
5E5, Canada; Cameco Multiple Sclerosis Neuroscience Research Center, City
Hospital, Saskatoon, SK S7K 0M7, Canada. (3)Department of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, College of Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK
S7N 5E5, Canada; Cameco Multiple Sclerosis Neuroscience Research Center, City
Hospital, Saskatoon, SK S7K 0M7, Canada. (4)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology,
College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK S7N 
5E5, Canada; Neuroscience Research Cluster, Health Sciences Building, University 
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK S7K 5E5, Canada; Cameco Multiple Sclerosis
Neuroscience Research Center, City Hospital, Saskatoon, SK S7K 0M7, Canada.
Electronic address: aj.nazarali@usask.ca.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a progressive disorder of the central nervous system, 
often resulting in significant disability in early adulthood. The field of
pharmacogenomics holds promise in distinguishing responders from non-responders
to drug treatment. Most studies on genetic polymorphisms in MS have addressed
treatment with interferon-ß, yet few findings have been replicated. This review
outlines the barriers that currently hinder the validity, reproducibility, and
inter-study comparison of pharmacogenomics research as it relates to the use of
interferon-ß. Notably, statistical power, varying definitions of responder
status, varying assay and genotyping methodologies, and anti-interferon-ß
neutralizing antibodies significantly confound existing data. Future work should 
focus on addressing these factors in order to optimize interferon-ß treatment
outcomes in MS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25524087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Immunol Lett. 2015 Jan;163(1):84-95. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2014.11.013. Epub 2014 
Nov 29.

Human megakaryocyte progenitors derived from hematopoietic stem cells of normal
individuals are MHC class II-expressing professional APC that enhance Th17 and
Th1/Th17 responses.

Finkielsztein A(1), Schlinker AC(2), Zhang L(1), Miller WM(3), Datta SK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, Northwestern University
Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (2)Department of Chemical
and Biological Engineering, McCormick School of Engineering, Northwestern
University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA. (3)Department of Chemical and Biological
Engineering, McCormick School of Engineering, Northwestern University, Evanston, 
IL 60208, USA; Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (4)Division of Rheumatology, Department of
Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA; Department of Microbiology-Immunology, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
skd257@northwestern.edu.

Platelets, like stromal cells, present antigen only via MHC class I, but the
immune potential of their progenitors has not been explored in humans. We derived
CD34(+)CD117(+)CD41(+)CD151(+) megakaryocyte progenitors (MKp) in vitro from
mobilized peripheral blood hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPC) of
normal subjects using culture conditions akin to bone marrow niche, or organs
that support extramedullary hematopoiesis. The MKp expressed MHC Class II in
contrast to platelets and functioned as professional APC before they matured
further. Moreover, MKp constitutively expressed mRNA encoding mediators for human
Th17 expansion, including IL-1, IL-18, IL-6, TGFß, IL-23, BAFF, and COX2. MKp
also expressed high levels of type I interferon and IRF5 mRNA. In contrast to
platelets, MKp augmented the expansion of Th17, Th1, and potent Th17/Th1
double-positive cells in normal PBMC and CD4 line T cells from normal subjects or
lupus patients. The Th cell augmentation involved pre-committed memory cells, and
was significant although modest, because only non-cognate MKp-T cell interactions
could be studied, under non-polarizing conditions. Importantly, the MKp-mediated 
expansion was observed in the presence or absence of direct MKp-T cell contact.
Furthermore, MKp augmented Th17 responses against Candida albicans, a serious
opportunistic pathogen. These results indicate an immunologic role of MKp in
situations associated with extramedullary hematopoiesis and mobilization of HSPC.

Copyright © 2014 European Federation of Immunological Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4278953
PMID: 25454068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 9;111(49):17348-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1419689111. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Innate sense of purpose for IKKß.

Hayden MS(1), Ghosh S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032
mh3046@columbia.edu sg2715@columbia.edu. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032 mh3046@columbia.edu sg2715@columbia.edu.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 9;111(49):17432-7.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 9;111(49):17438-43.

PMCID: PMC4267387
PMID: 25427798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Acta Reumatol Port. 2015 Jan-Mar;40(1):56-62.

Association of PTPN22 (rs2476601) and STAT4 (rs7574865) polymorphisms with
Rheumatoid Arthritis in the Western Algerian population.

Fodil M, Benzaoui A, Zemani-Fodil F, Aberkane M, Boughrara W, Saidi-Mehtar N,
Petit-Teixeira E, Boudjema A.

AIM: The aim of the present study was to replicate the association of five risk
gene polymorphisms (PTPN22-rs2476601, STAT4-rs7574865, 6q23-rs6927172,
IRF5-rs2004640 and TRAF1/C5-rs10818488) with RA in a specific population of the
Western Algeria.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The study group comprised 110 patients with RA and 197
ethnically matched healthy control subjects. All polymorphisms were genotyped
using predesigned TaqMan® assays. Allele and genotype frequencies in patients and
control subjects were compared by chi-square test and odds ratios with 95%
confidence intervals. Correction for multiple testing was carried out using the
Bonferroni adjustment.
RESULTS: Statistically significant associations with RA were detected. The
strongest signal was obtained for PTPN22-rs2476601 with an allelic Pvalue 3.32 x 
10(-11) (OR = 9.83, 95% CI [4.28 - 22.56]). A second significant association was 
obtained with STAT4-rs7574865 (allelic Pvalue = 4 x 10(-3); OR = 1.75, 95% CI
[1.16 - 2.63]). The third SNP, 6q23-rs6927172, showed a significant result of
association with RA, but missed our criteria for significance at allelic level
after Bonferroni's correction (allelic Pvalue = 0.027; OR = 0.64, 95% CI [0.42 - 
0.97]). Finally, IRF5-rs2004640 and TRAF1/C5-rs10818488 showed a significant
association only at genotypic level (Pvalues: 3 x 10(-4) and 2.9 x 10(-3)
respectively) but did not reach statistical significance when comparing allele
frequencies (Pvalues: 0.96 and 0.21 respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: From this initial study, we can conclude that PTPN22-rs2476601 and
STAT4-rs7574865 polymorphisms are clearly associated with the risk of RA in the
Western Algerian population.

PMID: 25351936  [PubMed - in process]


70. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 28;9(10):e111061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111061.
eCollection 2014.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms within interferon signaling pathway genes are
associated with colorectal cancer susceptibility and survival.

Lu S(1), Pardini B(2), Cheng B(1), Naccarati A(3), Huhn S(1), Vymetalkova V(4),
Vodickova L(5), Buchler T(6), Hemminki K(7), Vodicka P(4), Försti A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Human Genetics Foundation (HuGeF), Turin, Italy. 
(3)Human Genetics Foundation (HuGeF), Turin, Italy; Department of Molecular
Biology of Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. (4)Department of Molecular Biology of
Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Prague, Czech Republic; Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st 
Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. (5)Department of
Molecular Biology of Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic; Institute of Biology and 
Medical Genetics, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech
Republic; Biomedical Centre, Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University in
Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic. (6)Department of Oncology, Thomayer Hospital,
Prague, Czech Republic. (7)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; Center of Primary Health Care
Research, Clinical Research Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

Interferon (IFN) signaling has been suggested to play an important role in
colorectal carcinogenesis. Our study aimed to examine potentially functional
genetic variants in interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), IRF5, IRF7, type I and
type II IFN and their receptor genes with respect to colorectal cancer (CRC) risk
and clinical outcome. Altogether 74 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
covered by the 34 SNPs genotyped in a hospital-based case-control study of 1327
CRC cases and 758 healthy controls from the Czech Republic. We also analyzed
these SNPs in relation to overall survival and event-free survival in a subgroup 
of 483 patients. Seven SNPs in IFNA1, IFNA13, IFNA21, IFNK, IFNAR1 and IFNGR1
were associated with CRC risk. After multiple testing correction, the
associations with the SNPs rs2856968 (IFNAR1) and rs2234711 (IFNGR1) remained
formally significant (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0015 and P<0.0001, respectively). Multivariable
survival analyses showed that the SNP rs6475526 (IFNA7/IFNA14) was associated
with overall survival of the patients (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.041 and event-free survival among
patients without distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.034). The
hazard ratios (HRs) for rs6475526 remained statistically significant even after
adjustment for age, gender, grade and stage (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.029 and P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.036,
respectively), suggesting that rs6475526 is an independent prognostic marker for 
CRC. Our data suggest that genetic variation in the IFN signaling pathway genes
may play a role in the etiology and survival of CRC and further studies are
warranted.

PMCID: PMC4211713
PMID: 25350395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 22;9(10):e110044. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110044.
eCollection 2014.

Genetic association study of TNFAIP3, IFIH1, IRF5 polymorphisms with
polymyositis/dermatomyositis in Chinese Han population.

Chen S(1), Wang Q(1), Wu Z(1), Li Y(1), Li P(1), Sun F(1), Zheng W(1), Wu Q(1),
Wu C(1), Deng C(1), Zhang F(1), Li Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical
College, Key Laboratory of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Ministry of
Education, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the TNFAIP3, IFIH1, and
IRF5 genes have been associated with several auto-inflammation diseases, while
the susceptibility between these genes and idiopathic inflammatory myopathies
(IIMs) were not reported. This study aimed to investigate whether TNFAIP3, IFIH1,
and IRF5 gene polymorphisms confer susceptibility for the IIMs in Chinese Han
population.
METHODS: A large case-control study of Chinese subjects with polymyositis (PM)
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>298) and dermatomyositis (DM) (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>530) was accomplished. 968 healthy and
ethnically matched controls were available for comparison. Six SNPs in the
TNFAIP3 region (rs2230926 and rs5029939), the IFIH1 gene (rs1990760 and
rs3747517) and the IRF5 region (rs4728142 and rs729302) were assessed and
genotyped using the Sequenom MassArray iPLEX platform.
RESULTS: Our study indicated a strong allele association was observed in PM/DM
and PM patients for rs2230926 (OR: 1.61, 95%CI: 1.20-2.16, P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.5×10(-3); OR:
1.88, 95%CI: 1.30-2.74, P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.0×10(-3), respectively) and rs5029939 (OR: 1.64,
95%CI: 1.21-2.21, P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.0×10(-3); OR: 1.88, 95%CI: 1.28-2.76,
P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.5×10(-3), respectively). And rs2230926 and rs5029939 were significantly 
associated with interstitial lung disease (ILD) in PM/DM and PM patients
(P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.04 and P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.016; P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.02 and P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03, respectively). In
addition, rs4728142 allele and genotype had significant association with PM/DM
patients (P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.026 and P(c)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.048, respectively). Further analysis with
three logistic regression genetic models revealed statistically significant
difference in the genotypic distribution in the PM/DM, PM or DM patients when the
additive and dominant models were used.
CONCLUSIONS: This was the first study to reveal TNFAIP3 and IRF5 polymorphisms
were associated with PM/DM patients or these patients with ILD, indicating that
TNFAIP3 and IRF5 might be the susceptibility gene for PM/DM patients in Chinese
Han population.

PMCID: PMC4206287
PMID: 25337792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 21;9(10):e110913. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110913.
eCollection 2014.

A systems model of phosphorylation for inflammatory signaling events.

Sadreev II(1), Chen MZ(2), Welsh GI(3), Umezawa Y(4), Kotov NV(5), Valeyev NV(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Systems, Dynamics and Control, College of Engineering, Mathematics 
and Physical Sciences, University of Exeter, Harrison Building, Exeter, United
Kingdom. (2)Department of Mechanical Engineering, The University of Hong Kong,
Hong Kong, China. (3)Academic Renal Unit, School of Clinical Sciences, University
of Bristol, Dorothy Hodgkin Building, Bristol, United Kingdom. (4)Department of
Dermatology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Biophysics and Bionics Lab, Institute of Physics, Kazan Federal University,
Kazan, Russia. (6)Academic Renal Unit, School of Clinical Sciences, University of
Bristol, Dorothy Hodgkin Building, Bristol, United Kingdom; Biophysics and
Bionics Lab, Institute of Physics, Kazan Federal University, Kazan, Russia.

Phosphorylation is a fundamental biochemical reaction that modulates protein
activity in cells. While a single phosphorylation event is relatively easy to
understand, multisite phosphorylation requires systems approaches for deeper
elucidation of the underlying molecular mechanisms. In this paper we develop a
mechanistic model for single- and multi-site phosphorylation. The proposed model 
is compared with previously reported studies. We compare the predictions of our
model with experiments published in the literature in the context of inflammatory
signaling events in order to provide a mechanistic description of the multisite
phosphorylation-mediated regulation of Signal Transducer and Activator of
Transcription 3 (STAT3) and Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 (IRF-5) proteins. The 
presented model makes crucial predictions for transcription factor
phosphorylation events in the immune system. The model proposes potential
mechanisms for T cell phenotype switching and production of cytokines. This study
also provides a generic framework for the better understanding of a large number 
of multisite phosphorylation-regulated biochemical circuits.

PMCID: PMC4205014
PMID: 25333362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014 Oct 21;16(5):438. doi: 10.1186/s13075-014-0438-8.

An Immunochip-based interrogation of scleroderma susceptibility variants
identifies a novel association at DNASE1L3.

Zochling J, Newell F, Charlesworth JC, Leo P, Stankovich J, Cortes A, Zhou Y,
Stevens W, Sahhar J, Roddy J, Nash P, Tymms K, Rischmueller M, Lester S, Proudman
S, Brown MA.

INTRODUCTION: The aim of the study was to interrogate the genetic architecture
and autoimmune pleiotropy of scleroderma susceptibility in the Australian
population.
METHODS: We genotyped individuals from a well-characterized cohort of Australian 
scleroderma patients with the Immunochip, a custom array enriched for single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at immune loci. Controls were taken from the 1958
British Birth Cohort. After data cleaning and adjusting for population
stratification the final dataset consisted of 486 cases, 4,458 controls and
146,525 SNPs. Association analyses were conducted using logistic regression in
PLINK. A replication study was performed using 833 cases and 1,938 controls.
RESULTS: A total of eight loci with suggestive association (P <10-4.5) were
identified, of which five showed significant association in the replication
cohort (HLA-DRB1, DNASE1L3, STAT4, TNP03-IRF5 and VCAM1). The most notable
findings were at the DNASE1L3 locus, previously associated with systemic lupus
erythematosus, and VCAM1, a locus not previously associated with human disease.
This study identified a likely functional variant influencing scleroderma
susceptibility at the DNASE1L3 locus; a missense polymorphism rs35677470 in
DNASE1L3, with an odds ratio of 2.35 (P = 2.3 × 10(-10)) in anti-centromere
antibody (ACA) positive cases.
CONCLUSIONS: This pilot study has confirmed previously reported scleroderma
associations, revealed further genetic overlap between scleroderma and systemic
lupus erythematosus, and identified a putative novel scleroderma susceptibility
locus.

PMCID: PMC4230517
PMID: 25332064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Open Rheumatol J. 2014 Sep 29;8:29-42. doi: 10.2174/1874312901408010029.
eCollection 2014.

Systemic Sclerosis is a Complex Disease Associated Mainly with Immune Regulatory 
and Inflammatory Genes.

Jin J(1), Chou C(2), Lima M(3), Zhou D(4), Zhou X(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of Texas Medical School at Houston, USA ; Duke University, USA.
(2)University of Texas Medical School at Houston, USA. (3)University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, USA ; Rice University, USA. (4)University of Texas
Medical School at Houston, USA ; Washington University, USA.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a fibrotic and autoimmune disease characterized
clinically by skin and internal organ fibrosis and vascular damage, and
serologically by the presence of circulating autoantibodies. Although
etiopathogenesis is not yet well understood, the results of numerous genetic
association studies support genetic contributions as an important factor to SSc. 
In this paper, the major genes of SSc are reviewed. The most recent genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) are taken into account along with robust candidate
gene studies. The literature search was performed on genetic association studies 
of SSc in PubMed between January 2000 and March 2014 while eligible studies
generally had over 600 total participants with replication. A few genetic
association studies with related functional changes in SSc patients were also
included. A total of forty seven genes or specific genetic regions were reported 
to be associated with SSc, although some are controversial. These genes include
HLA genes, STAT4, CD247, TBX21, PTPN22, TNFSF4, IL23R, IL2RA, IL-21,
SCHIP1/IL12A, CD226, BANK1, C8orf13-BLK, PLD4, TLR-2, NLRP1, ATG5, IRF5, IRF8,
TNFAIP3, IRAK1, NFKB1, TNIP1, FAS, MIF, HGF, OPN, IL-6, CXCL8, CCR6, CTGF, ITGAM,
CAV1, MECP2, SOX5, JAZF1, DNASEIL3, XRCC1, XRCC4, PXK, CSK, GRB10, NOTCH4, RHOB, 
KIAA0319, PSD3 and PSOR1C1. These genes encode proteins mainly involved in immune
regulation and inflammation, and some of them function in transcription, kinase
activity, DNA cleavage and repair. The discovery of various SSc-associated genes 
is important in understanding the genetics of SSc and potential pathogenesis that
contribute to the development of this disease.

PMCID: PMC4200700
PMID: 25328554  [PubMed]


75. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 20;5:5236. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6236.

Characterizing the genetic basis of innate immune response in TLR4-activated
human monocytes.

Kim S(1), Becker J(2), Bechheim M(3), Kaiser V(3), Noursadeghi M(4), Fricker
N(2), Beier E(3), Klaschik S(5), Boor P(6), Hess T(2), Hofmann A(2), Holdenrieder
S(7), Wendland JR(8), Fröhlich H(9), Hartmann G(7), Nöthen MM(2), Müller-Myhsok
B(10), Pütz B(11), Hornung V(3), Schumacher J(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn 53127, Germany [2]
Department of Genomics, Life &Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn 53127,
Germany [3] Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn 53127,
Germany. (2)1] Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn 53127,
Germany [2] Department of Genomics, Life &Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn 
53127, Germany. (3)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn
53127, Germany. (4)Division of Infection and Immunity, University College London,
London WC1E 6BT, UK. (5)Department for Anesthesiology and Intensive Care
Medicine, University of Bonn, Bonn 53127, Germany. (6)Institute of Pathology and 
Department of Nephrology, University Clinic of RWTH Aachen, Aachen 52074,
Germany. (7)Institute for Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology,
University of Bonn, Bonn 53127, Germany. (8)Worldwide R&D, Pfizer Inc.,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. (9)Bonn-Aachen International Center for IT
(B-IT), University of Bonn, Bonn 53113, Germany. (10)1] Statistical Genetics, Max
Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich 80804, Germany [2] Munich Cluster for
Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Munich 80804, Germany [3] Institute of Translational
Medicine, University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 3GL, UK. (11)Statistical
Genetics, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich 80804, Germany.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play a key role in innate immunity. Apart from their
function in host defense, dysregulation in TLR signalling can confer risk to
autoimmune diseases, septic shock or cancer. Here we report genetic variants and 
transcripts that are active only during TLR signalling and contribute to
interindividual differences in immune response. Comparing unstimulated versus
TLR4-stimulated monocytes reveals 1,471 expression quantitative trait loci
(eQTLs) that are unique to TLR4 stimulation. Among these we find functional SNPs 
for the expression of NEU4, CCL14, CBX3 and IRF5 on TLR4 activation. Furthermore,
we show that SNPs conferring risk to primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC),
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and celiac disease are immune response eQTLs for
PDGFB and IL18R1. Thus, PDGFB and IL18R1 represent plausible candidates for
studying the pathophysiology of these disorders in the context of TLR4
activation. In summary, this study presents novel insights into the genetic basis
of the innate immune response and exemplifies the value of eQTL studies in the
context of exogenous cell stimulation.

PMID: 25327457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 9;111(49):17438-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1418516111. Epub 2014 Oct 17.

IKKß is an IRF5 kinase that instigates inflammation.

Ren J(1), Chen X(1), Chen ZJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and. (2)Department of Molecular Biology and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390 Zhijian.Chen@UTSouthwestern.edu.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 9;111(49):17348-9.

The transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is essential for
the induction of inflammatory cytokines, but the mechanism by which IRF5 is
activated is not well understood. Here we present evidence that the kinase IKKß
phosphorylates and activates IRF5 in response to stimulation in several
inflammatory pathways, including those emanated from Toll-like receptors and
retinoic acid-inducible gene I-like receptors. IKKß phosphorylates mouse IRF5 at 
specific residues, including serine 445 (S446 in human IRF5 isoform 1), as
evidenced by mass spectrometry analysis and detection with a phosphospecific
antibody. Recombinant IKKß phosphorylated IRF5 at Ser-445 in vitro, and a point
mutation of this serine abolished IRF5 activation and cytokine production.
Depletion or pharmacologic inhibition of IKKß prevented IRF5 phosphorylation.
These results indicate that IKKß is an IRF5 kinase that instigates inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4267374
PMID: 25326420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 9;111(49):17432-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1418399111. Epub 2014 Oct 17.

Protein kinase IKKß-catalyzed phosphorylation of IRF5 at Ser462 induces its
dimerization and nuclear translocation in myeloid cells.

Lopez-Pelaez M(1), Lamont DJ(2), Peggie M(1), Shpiro N(1), Gray NS(3), Cohen
P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, and.
(2)College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland,
United Kingdom; and. (3)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215. (4)Medical Research Council Protein Phosphorylation and
Ubiquitylation Unit, and p.cohen@dundee.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 9;111(49):17348-9.

The siRNA knockdown of IFN Regulatory Factor 5 (IRF5) in the human plasmacytoid
dendritic cell line Gen2.2 prevented IFNß production induced by compound CL097, a
ligand for Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7). CL097 also stimulated the phosphorylation
of IRF5 at Ser462 and stimulated the nuclear translocation of wild-type IRF5, but
not the IRF5[Ser462Ala] mutant. The CL097-stimulated phosphorylation of IRF5 at
Ser462 and its nuclear translocation was prevented by the pharmacological
inhibition of protein kinase IKKß or the siRNA knockdown of IKKß or its
"upstream" activator, the protein kinase TAK1. Similar results were obtained in a
murine macrophage cell line stimulated with the TLR7 agonist compound R848 or the
nucleotide oligomerization domain 1 (NOD1) agonist KF-1B. IKKß phosphorylated
IRF5 at Ser462 in vitro and induced the dimerization of wild-type IRF5 but not
the IRF5[S462A] mutant. These findings demonstrate that IKKß activates two
"master" transcription factors of the innate immune system, IRF5 and NF-<U+03BA>B.

PMCID: PMC4267347
PMID: 25326418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Oct 21;111(42):E4513-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1406985111. Epub 2014 Oct 6.

Mapping of transcription factor motifs in active chromatin identifies IRF5 as key
regulator in classical Hodgkin lymphoma.

Kreher S(1), Bouhlel MA(2), Cauchy P(3), Lamprecht B(4), Li S(1), Grau M(5),
Hummel F(1), Köchert K(1), Anagnostopoulos I(6), Jöhrens K(6), Hummel M(7),
Hiscott J(8), Wenzel SS(9), Lenz P(5), Schneider M(10), Küppers R(10),
Scheidereit C(11), Giefing M(12), Siebert R(13), Rajewsky K(11), Lenz G(9),
Cockerill PN(3), Janz M(1), Dörken B(4), Bonifer C(14), Mathas S(15).

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany; Hematology,
Oncology, and Tumor Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin,
Germany; (2)Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Leeds, Leeds LS9
7TF, United Kingdom; (3)School of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical and Dental 
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom;
(4)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany; Hematology,
Oncology, and Tumor Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin,
Germany; German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; (5)Department of Physics, Philipps University, 35052
Marburg, Germany; (6)Institute of Pathology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 
10117 Berlin, Germany; (7)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; Institute of Pathology,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 10117 Berlin, Germany; (8)Vaccine and Gene
Therapy Institute of Florida, Port St. Lucie, FL 34987; (9)Hematology, Oncology, 
and Tumor Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; 
(10)Institute of Cell Biology (Cancer Research), University of Duisburg-Essen,
45122 Essen, Germany; (11)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, 13125
Berlin, Germany; (12)Institute of Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts University 
Kiel and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, 24105 Kiel,
Germany; and Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, 60-479
Poznan, Poland. (13)Institute of Human Genetics, Christian-Albrechts University
Kiel and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, 24105 Kiel,
Germany; and. (14)School of Cancer Sciences, College of Medical and Dental
Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom;
c.bonifer@bham.ac.uk stephan.mathas@charite.de. (15)Max-Delbrück-Center for
Molecular Medicine, 13125 Berlin, Germany; Hematology, Oncology, and Tumor
Immunology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, 13353 Berlin, Germany; German
Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany; c.bonifer@bham.ac.uk stephan.mathas@charite.de.

Deregulated transcription factor (TF) activities are commonly observed in
hematopoietic malignancies. Understanding tumorigenesis therefore requires
determining the function and hierarchical role of individual TFs. To identify TFs
central to lymphomagenesis, we identified lymphoma type-specific accessible
chromatin by global mapping of DNaseI hypersensitive sites and analyzed enriched 
TF-binding motifs in these regions. Applying this unbiased approach to classical 
Hodgkin lymphoma (HL), a common B-cell-derived lymphoma with a complex pattern of
deregulated TFs, we discovered interferon regulatory factor (IRF) sites among the
top enriched motifs. High-level expression of the proinflammatory TF IRF5 was
specific to HL cells and crucial for their survival. Furthermore, IRF5 initiated 
a regulatory cascade in human non-Hodgkin B-cell lines and primary murine B cells
by inducing the TF AP-1 and cooperating with NF-<U+03BA>B to activate essential
characteristic features of HL. Our strategy efficiently identified a lymphoma
type-specific key regulator and uncovered a tumor promoting role of IRF5.

PMCID: PMC4210307
PMID: 25288773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Tissue Antigens. 2014 Nov;84(5):465-70. doi: 10.1111/tan.12441. Epub 2014 Oct 6.

IRF5rs2004640 single nucleotide polymorphism is associated with susceptibility to
rheumatoid arthritis in South Indian Tamils.

Negi VS(1), Muralidharan N, Mehra S, Devaraju P, Mariaselvam CM, Gulati R, Salah 
S, Fortier C, Charron D, Krishnamoorthy R, Tamouza R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Immunology, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate
Medical Education and Research (JIPMER), Puducherry, India.

Polymorphism of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), a latent transcription
factor gene has been associated with various auto-immune diseases. Our aim was to
study the IRF5rs2004640 gene polymorphism and its association with disease
susceptibility, disease phenotype and treatment response in South Indian Tamil
patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).The study was conducted on 217 RA
patients fulfilling the American College of Rheumatology (ACR) 2010 criteria and 
482 healthy controls (HCs) without family history of autoimmune disease. The
IRF5rs2004640 genotyping was performed using a TaqMan 5' allelic discrimination
assay. We found that the IRF5rs2004640T allele [P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001, odds ratio (OR) 3.25,
95% confidence interval (CI) 2.55-4.12] and TT genotype (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001, OR 4.60, 95%
CI 3.23-6.57) were significantly more frequent in RA patients as compared with
HCs. No association was found between IRF5rs2004640 polymorphism, clinical
manifestations, autoantibody profile and treatment response. IRF5rs2004640 T
(mutant) allele may be a susceptibility factor conferring risk for RA in South
Indian Tamils, whereas G allele (wild type) may be protective.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25284481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 3;9(10):e108553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108553.
eCollection 2014.

Gene expression during the generation and activation of mouse neutrophils:
implication of novel functional and regulatory pathways.

Ericson JA(1), Duffau P(2), Yasuda K(2), Ortiz-Lopez A(1), Rothamel K(1), Rifkin 
IR(2), Monach PA(2); ImmGen Consortium.

Collaborators: Best AJ, Knell J, Goldrath A, Jojic V, Koller D, Shay T, Regev A, 
Cohen N, Brennan P, Brenner M, Kim F, Rao TN, Wagers A, Heng T, Ericson J,
Rothamel K, Ortiz-Lopez A, Mathis D, Benoist C, Bezman NA, Sun JC, Min-Oo G, Kim 
CC, Lanier LL, Miller J, Brown B, Merad M, Gautier EL, Jakubzick C, Randolph GJ, 
Monach P, Blair DA, Dustin ML, Shinton SA, Hardy RR, Laidlaw D, Collins J, Gazit 
R, Rossi DJ, Malhotra N, Sylvia K, Kang J, Kreslavsky T, Fletcher A, Elpek K,
Bellemare-Pelletier A, Malhotra D, Turley S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, United States of America. (2)Department of Medicine, 
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, United States of America.

As part of the Immunological Genome Project (ImmGen), gene expression was
determined in unstimulated (circulating) mouse neutrophils and three populations 
of neutrophils activated in vivo, with comparison among these populations and to 
other leukocytes. Activation conditions included serum-transfer arthritis
(mediated by immune complexes), thioglycollate-induced peritonitis, and uric
acid-induced peritonitis. Neutrophils expressed fewer genes than any other
leukocyte population studied in ImmGen, and down-regulation of genes related to
translation was particularly striking. However, genes with expression relatively 
specific to neutrophils were also identified, particularly three genes of unknown
function: Stfa2l1, Mrgpr2a and Mrgpr2b. Comparison of genes up-regulated in
activated neutrophils led to several novel findings: increased expression of
genes related to synthesis and use of glutathione and of genes related to uptake 
and metabolism of modified lipoproteins, particularly in neutrophils elicited by 
thioglycollate; increased expression of genes for transcription factors in the
Nr4a family, only in neutrophils elicited by serum-transfer arthritis; and
increased expression of genes important in synthesis of prostaglandins and
response to leukotrienes, particularly in neutrophils elicited by uric acid.
Up-regulation of genes related to apoptosis, response to microbial products, NFkB
family members and their regulators, and MHC class II expression was also seen,
in agreement with previous studies. A regulatory model developed from the ImmGen 
data was used to infer regulatory genes involved in the changes in gene
expression during neutrophil activation. Among 64, mostly novel, regulatory genes
predicted to influence these changes in gene expression, Irf5 was shown to be
important for optimal secretion of IL-10, IP-10, MIP-1a, MIP-1ß, and TNF-a by
mouse neutrophils in vitro after stimulation through TLR9. This data-set and its 
analysis using the ImmGen regulatory model provide a basis for additional
hypothesis-based research on the importance of changes in gene expression in
neutrophils in different conditions.

PMCID: PMC4184787
PMID: 25279834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Clin Periodontol. 2014 Dec;41(12):1122-31. doi: 10.1111/jcpe.12314. Epub 2014
Nov 15.

A large candidate-gene association study suggests genetic variants at IRF5 and
PRDM1 to be associated with aggressive periodontitis.

Schaefer AS(1), Jochens A, Dommisch H, Graetz C, Jockel-Schneider Y, Harks I,
Staufenbiel I, Meyle J, Eickholz P, Folwaczny M, Laine M, Noack B, Wijmenga C,
Lieb W, Bruckmann C, Schreiber S, Jepsen S, Loos BG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University,
Kiel, Germany.

AIM: Epidemiological and clinical studies indicated a relationship of
periodontitis with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). We aimed to identify shared genetic
susceptibility loci of RA and periodontitis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Forty-seven risk genes of genome-wide significance of RA
and SLE were genotyped in a German case-control sample of aggressive
periodontitis (AgP), using Immunochip genotyping arrays (Illumina, 600 cases,
1440 controls) and Affymetrix 500 K Genotyping Arrays (280 cases and 983
controls). Significant associations were replicated in 168 Dutch AgP cases and
679 controls and adjusted for the confounders smoking and sex.
RESULTS: Variants at IRF5 and PRDM1 showed association with AgP. Upon covariate
adjustment for smoking and sex, the most strongly associated variant at IRF5 was 
the rare variant rs62481981 (ppooled  = 0.0012, odds ratio [OR] = 3.1, 95%
confidence interval [95% CI] = 1.6-6.1; 801 cases, 1476 controls).Within PRDM1 it
was rs6923419 (ppooled  = 0.004, OR = 0.7, 95% CI = 0.6-0.9; 833 cases, 1440
controls). The associations lost significance after correction for multiple
testing in the replication. Both genes are implicated in beta-interferon
signalling and are also genome-wide associated with SLE and inflammatory bowel
disease.
CONCLUSION: The study gives no definite evidence for a pathogenic genetic link of
periodontitis and RA but suggests IRF5 and PRDM1 as shared susceptibility
factors.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25263394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2015 Feb;35(2):71-8. doi: 10.1089/jir.2014.0023. Epub 
2014 Sep 26.

Activation and function of interferon regulatory factor 5.

Ryzhakov G(1), Eames HL, Udalova IA.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal
Sciences, Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford , Oxford,
United Kingdom .

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is a crucial transcription factor in a
number of immune and homeostatic processes, including host defense against
pathogens, tumorigenesis, and autoimmunity. Upon induction of immune signaling
pathways, IRF5 undergoes post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation
and ubiqutination, which are believed to trigger IRF5 nuclear translocation from 
the cytosol, followed by recruitment to promoters where transcription of its gene
targets is initiated. In this review, we systematically analyze the data
published in the last decade on IRF5 activation, including the role of
post-translational modifications and the proposed enzymes targeting IRF5 in this 
process. We discuss suggested models of IRF5 activation in connection to
pathway-specific functions of IRF5.

PMID: 25259415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Med. 2015 Feb 5;20:559-68. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00185.

C1q-mediated repression of human monocytes is regulated by leukocyte-associated
Ig-like receptor 1 (LAIR-1).

Son M(1), Diamond B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Autoimmune and Musculoskeletal Diseases, Feinstein Institute for
Medical Research, Manhasset, New York, United States of America.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a chronic autoimmune disease characterized 
by abnormal function of both the innate and the adaptive immune system, leading
to a loss of tolerance to self-antigens. Monocytes are a key component of the
innate immune system and are efficient producers of multiple cytokines. In SLE,
inappropriate activation of monocytes is thought to contribute to the loss of
self-tolerance. In this study, we demonstrate that type 1 interferon (IFN)
production by CpG-challenged monocytes can be suppressed by C1q through
activating leukocyte-associated Ig-like receptor-1 (LAIR-1), which contains
immunoreceptor tyrosine-based inhibition motifs (ITIMs). The phosphorylation of
LAIR-1 and the interaction of LAIR-1 with SH2 domain-containing protein tyrosine 
phosphatase-1 (SHP-1) were enhanced after LAIR-1 engagement by C1q. Moreover,
engagement of LAIR-1 by C1q inhibited nuclear translocation of interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF5 in CpG-stimulated monocytes. These data
suggest a model in which LAIR-1 engagement by C1q helps maintain monocyte
tolerance, specifically with respect to Toll-like receptor-9-mediated monocyte
activation.

PMCID: PMC4365071
PMID: 25247291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Inflammation. 2015 Apr;38(2):800-11. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-9990-2.

Aurora kinase a regulates m1 macrophage polarization and plays a role in
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Ding L(1), Gu H, Gao X, Xiong S, Zheng B.

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, Institutes of Biology and
Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, 215123, China.

Macrophage polarization is a dynamic and integral process of tissue inflammation 
and remodeling. Here we demonstrate an important role of Aurora kinase A in the
regulation of inflammatory M1 macrophage polarization. We found that there was an
elevated expression of Aurora-A in M1 macrophages and inhibition of Aurora-A by
small molecules or specific siRNA selectively led to the suppression of M1
polarization, sparing over the M2 macrophage differentiation. At the molecular
level, we found that the effects of Aurora-A in M1 macrophages were mediated
through the down-regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and subsequent IRF5 expression. In
an autoimmune disease model, experimental autoimmune encephalitis (EAE),
treatment with Aurora kinase inhibitor blocked the disease development and
shifted the macrophage phenotype from inflammatory M1 to anti-inflammatory M2.
Thus, this study reveals a novel function of Aurora-A in controlling the
polarization of macrophages, and modification of Aurora-A activity may lead to a 
new therapeutic approach for chronic inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 25227280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jan 15;24(2):582-96. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu455. Epub 2014 Sep
8.

The IRF5-TNPO3 association with systemic lupus erythematosus has two components
that other autoimmune disorders variably share.

Kottyan LC(1), Zoller EE(2), Bene J(3), Lu X(3), Kelly JA(4), Rupert AM(5),
Lessard CJ(6), Vaughn SE(3), Marion M(7), Weirauch MT(8), Namjou B(3), Adler
A(4), Rasmussen A(4), Glenn S(4), Montgomery CG(4), Hirschfield GM(9), Xie G(10),
Coltescu C(11), Amos C(12), Li H(6), Ice JA(4), Nath SK(4), Mariette X(13),
Bowman S(14); UK Primary Sjögren's Syndrome Registry, Rischmueller M(15), Lester 
S(16), Brun JG(17), Gøransson LG(18), Harboe E(18), Omdal R(18),
Cunninghame-Graham DS(19), Vyse T(19), Miceli-Richard C(13), Brennan MT(20),
Lessard JA(21), Wahren-Herlenius M(22), Kvarnström M(22), Illei GG(23), Witte
T(24), Jonsson R(25), Eriksson P(26), Nordmark G(27), Ng WF(28); UK Primary
Sjögren's Syndrome Registry, Anaya JM(29), Rhodus NL(30), Segal BM(31), Merrill
JT(4), James JA(32), Guthridge JM(4), Scofield RH(33), Alarcon-Riquelme M(34),
Bae SC(35), Boackle SA(36), Criswell LA(37), Gilkeson G(38), Kamen DL(38), Jacob 
CO(39), Kimberly R(40), Brown E(40), Edberg J(40), Alarcón GS(40), Reveille
JD(41), Vilá LM(42), Petri M(43), Ramsey-Goldman R(44), Freedman BI(45), Niewold 
T(46), Stevens AM(47), Tsao BP(48), Ying J(49), Mayes MD(49), Gorlova OY(49),
Wakeland W(50), Radstake T(51), Martin E(52), Martin J(52), Siminovitch K(53),
Moser Sivils KL(4), Gaffney PM(4), Langefeld CD(7), Harley JB(54), Kaufman
KM(54).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology and US
Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA
leah.kottyan@cchmc.org. (2)Division of Rheumatology, Center for Autoimmune
Genomics and Etiology and leah.kottyan@cchmc.org. (3)Division of Rheumatology,
Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology and. (4)Arthritis and Clinical
Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,
OK, USA. (5)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (6)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology
Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA
Department of Pathology and. (7)Department of Biostatistical Sciences and Center 
for Public Health Genomics and. (8)Division of Rheumatology, Center for
Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology and US Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (9)NIHR Biomedical
Research Unit, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. (10)Mount Sinai Hospital
Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada. (11)Liver Centre,
Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. (12)Department of Community and
Family Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine, Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH, USA. 
(13)Department of Rheumatology, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Sud, INSERM U1012, 
Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France. (14)Rheumatology Department, University Hospital
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. (15)The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide,
Australia. (16)The Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Adelaide, Australia The University
of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. (17)Institute of Internal Medicine, University 
of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Department of Rheumatology, Haukeland University
Hospital, Bergen, Norway. (18)Clinical Immunology Unit, Department of Internal
Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway. (19)Department of
Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, London, UK. (20)Department
of Oral Medicine, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, NC, USA. (21)Valley Bone
and Joint Clinic, Grand Forks, ND, USA. (22)Department of Medicine, Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. (23)National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial
Research, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. (24)Hannover Medical School, Hanover, Germany. 
(25)Department of Rheumatology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway
Broegelmann Research Laboratory, The Gade Institute, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway. (26)Department of Rheumatology, Clinical and Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Health Sciences, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(27)Department of Medical Sciences, Rheumatology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden. (28)Institute of Cellular Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK. (29)Center for Autoimmune Diseases Research (CREA), Universidad del
Rosario, Bogotá, Colombia. (30)Department of Oral Surgery, University of
Minnesota School of Dentistry, Minneapolis, MN, USA. (31)Division of
Rheumatology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(32)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (33)Arthritis and Clinical
Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City,
OK, USA Division of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA
Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma
City, OK, USA. (34)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma
Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA de Genómica e Investigación
Oncológica (GENYO), Pfizer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucia, Granada,
Spain. (35)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic 
Diseases, Seoul, South Korea. (36)Division of Rheumatology, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, CO, USA. (37)Division of Rheumatology,
Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center for Arthritis, University of California 
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (38)Division of Rheumatology and
Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.
(39)Divison of Gastrointestinal and Liver Diseases, Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (40)Department of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. (41)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical
Immunogenetics, The Univeristy of Texas Health Science Center at Houston,
Houston, TX, USA. (42)University of Puerto Rico Medical Sciences Campus, San
Juan, Puerto Rico, USA. (43)Division of Rheumatology, Johns Hopkins, Baltimore,
MD, USA. (44)Division of Rheumatology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(45)Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, USA. (46)Division of
Rheumatology and Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (47)University of
Washington and Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, USA. (48)David Geffen
School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (49)MD
Anderson Cancer Center, University of Texas, Houston, TX, USA. (50)University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, TX, USA. (51)Department of
Rheumatology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (52)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López Neyra Avda,
Granada, Spain and. (53)Mount Sinai Hospital Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute,
Toronto, ON, Canada Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada. (54)Division of Rheumatology, Center for Autoimmune Genomics and Etiology
and US Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Exploiting genotyping, DNA sequencing, imputation and trans-ancestral mapping, we
used Bayesian and frequentist approaches to model the IRF5-TNPO3 locus
association, now implicated in two immunotherapies and seven autoimmune diseases.
Specifically, in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), we resolved separate
associations in the IRF5 promoter (all ancestries) and with an extended European 
haplotype. We captured 3230 IRF5-TNPO3 high-quality, common variants across 5
ethnicities in 8395 SLE cases and 7367 controls. The genetic effect from the IRF5
promoter can be explained by any one of four variants in 5.7 kb (P-valuemeta = 6 
× 10(-49); OR = 1.38-1.97). The second genetic effect spanned an 85.5-kb,
24-variant haplotype that included the genes IRF5 and TNPO3 (P-valuesEU =
10(-27)-10(-32), OR = 1.7-1.81). Many variants at the IRF5 locus with previously 
assigned biological function are not members of either final credible set of
potential causal variants identified herein. In addition to the known
biologically functional variants, we demonstrated that the risk allele of
rs4728142, a variant in the promoter among the lowest frequentist probability and
highest Bayesian posterior probability, was correlated with IRF5 expression and
differentially binds the transcription factor ZBTB3. Our analytical strategy
provides a novel framework for future studies aimed at dissecting etiological
genetic effects. Finally, both SLE elements of the statistical model appear to
operate in Sjögren's syndrome and systemic sclerosis whereas only the IRF5-TNPO3 
gene-spanning haplotype is associated with primary biliary cirrhosis,
demonstrating the nuance of similarity and difference in autoimmune disease risk 
mechanisms at IRF5-TNPO3.

Published by Oxford University Press 2014. This work is written by (a) US
Government employee(s) and is in the public domain in the US.

PMCID: PMC4275071
PMID: 25205108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Cell Rep. 2014 Sep 11;8(5):1308-17. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.034. Epub 2014 
Aug 21.

IRF5:RelA interaction targets inflammatory genes in macrophages.

Saliba DG(1), Heger A(2), Eames HL(1), Oikonomopoulos S(3), Teixeira A(3), Blazek
K(1), Androulidaki A(4), Wong D(3), Goh FG(1), Weiss M(1), Byrne A(1), Pasparakis
M(4), Ragoussis J(3), Udalova IA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive,
Oxford OX37FY, UK. (2)CGAT, MRC Functional Genomics Unit, University of Oxford,
South Parks Road, Oxford OX13PT, UK. (3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. (4)Institute for
Genetics, University of Cologne, Joseph-Stelzmann-Strasse 26, Cologne 50931,
Germany. (5)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX37FY, UK. Electronic address: irina.udalova@kennedy.ox.ac.uk.

Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 (IRF5) plays a major role in setting up an
inflammatory macrophage phenotype, but the molecular basis of its transcriptional
activity is not fully understood. In this study, we conduct a comprehensive
genome-wide analysis of IRF5 recruitment in macrophages stimulated with bacterial
lipopolysaccharide and discover that IRF5 binds to regulatory elements of highly 
transcribed genes. Analysis of protein:DNA microarrays demonstrates that IRF5
recognizes the canonical IRF-binding (interferon-stimulated response element
[ISRE]) motif in vitro. However, IRF5 binding in vivo appears to rely on its
interactions with other proteins. IRF5 binds to a noncanonical composite
PU.1:ISRE motif, and its recruitment is aided by RelA. Global gene expression
analysis in macrophages deficient in IRF5 and RelA highlights the direct role of 
the RelA:IRF5 cistrome in regulation of a subset of key inflammatory genes. We
map the RelA:IRF5 interaction domain and suggest that interfering with it would
offer selective targeting of macrophage inflammatory activities.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4471814
PMID: 25159141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Elife. 2014 Aug 22;3:e04177. doi: 10.7554/eLife.04177.

Recognition of tumor cells by Dectin-1 orchestrates innate immune cells for
anti-tumor responses.

Chiba S(1), Ikushima H(1), Ueki H(1), Yanai H(1), Kimura Y(1), Hangai S(1),
Nishio J(1), Negishi H(1), Tamura T(2), Saijo S(3), Iwakura Y(4), Taniguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Industrial Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Immunology, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. (3)Department of
Molecular Immunology, Medical Mycology Research Center, Chiba University, Chiba, 
Japan. (4)Center for Animal Disease Models, Research Institute for Biomedical
Sciences, Tokyo University of Science, Noda, Japan.

Comment in
    Elife. 2014;3:e04476.

The eradication of tumor cells requires communication to and signaling by cells
of the immune system. Natural killer (NK) cells are essential tumor-killing
effector cells of the innate immune system; however, little is known about
whether or how other immune cells recognize tumor cells to assist NK cells. Here,
we show that the innate immune receptor Dectin-1 expressed on dendritic cells and
macrophages is critical to NK-mediated killing of tumor cells that express
N-glycan structures at high levels. Receptor recognition of these tumor cells
causes the activation of the IRF5 transcription factor and downstream gene
induction for the full-blown tumoricidal activity of NK cells. Consistent with
this, we show exacerbated in vivo tumor growth in mice genetically deficient in
either Dectin-1 or IRF5. The critical contribution of Dectin-1 in the recognition
of and signaling by tumor cells may offer new insight into the anti-tumor immune 
system with therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC4161974
PMID: 25149452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Clin Exp Immunol. 2014 Dec;178(3):428-37. doi: 10.1111/cei.12429.

Interferon regulatory factor 3 as key element of the interferon signature in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells from systemic lupus erythematosus patients: novel
genetic associations in the Mexican mestizo population.

Santana-de Anda K(1), Gómez-Martín D, Monsivais-Urenda AE, Salgado-Bustamante M, 
González-Amaro R, Alcocer-Varela J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Rheumatology, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias
Médicas y Nutrición, Salvador Zubirán, Mexico City, México.

Many genetic studies have found an association between interferon regulatory
factors (IRF) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE); however, specific dendritic cell (DC) alterations have not
been assessed. The aim of the present study was to address the expression of IRF3
and IRF5 on different DC subsets from SLE patients, as well as their association 
with interferon (IFN)-a production and novel SNPs. For the genetic association
analyses, 156 SLE patients and 272 healthy controls from the Mexican mestizo
population were included. From these, 36 patients and 36 controls were included
for functional analysis. Two IRF3 SNPs<U+2009>-<U+2009>rs2304206 and rs2304204 - were
determined. We found an increased percentage of circulating pDC in SLE patients
in comparison to controls (8.04 ± 1.48 versus 3.35 ± 0.8, P = 0.032). We also
observed enhanced expression of IRF3 (64 ± 6.36 versus 36.1 ± 5.57, P = 0.004)
and IRF5 (40 ± 5.25 versus 22.5 ± 2.6%, P = 0.010) restricted to this circulating
pDC subset from SLE patients versus healthy controls. This finding was associated
with higher IFN-a serum levels in SLE (160.2 ± 21 versus 106.1 ± 14 pg/ml, P =
0.036). Moreover, the IRF3 rs2304206 polymorphism was associated with increased
susceptibility to SLE [odds ratio (OR), 95% confidence interval (CI)<U+2009>= 2.401
(1.187-4.858), P = 0.021] as well as enhanced levels of serum type I IFN in SLE
patients who were positive for dsDNA autoantibodies. The IRF3 rs2304204 GG and AG
genotypes conferred decreased risk for SLE. Our findings suggest that the
predominant IRF3 expression on circulating pDC is a key element for the increased
IFN-a activation based on the interplay between the rs2304206 gene variant and
the presence of dsDNA autoantibodies in Mexican mestizo SLE patients.

© 2014 British Society for Immunology.

PMCID: PMC4238870
PMID: 25130328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 1;9(8):e103609. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103609. eCollection
2014.

TRIpartite motif 21 (TRIM21) differentially regulates the stability of interferon
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) isoforms.

Lazzari E(1), Korczeniewska J(2), Ní Gabhann J(1), Smith S(1), Barnes BJ(2),
Jefferies CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Research Institute, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, Newark, New Jersey, United
States of America, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, New Jersey Medical
School- Cancer Center, Newark, New Jersey, United States of America.

IRF5 is a member of the Interferon Regulatory Factor (IRF) family of
transcription factors activated downstream of the Toll-Like receptors (TLRs).
Polymorphisms in IRF5 have been shown to be associated with the autoimmune
disease Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) and other autoimmune conditions,
suggesting a central role for IRF5 in the regulation of the immune response. Four
different IRF5 isoforms originate due to alternative splicing and to the presence
or absence of a 30 nucleotide insertion in IRF5 exon 6. Since the polymorphic
region disturbs a PEST domain, a region associated with protein degradation, we
hypothesized that the isoforms bearing the insertion might have increased
stability, thus explaining the association of individual IRF5 isoforms with SLE. 
As the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIpartite Motif 21 (TRIM21) has been shown to
regulate the stability and hence activity of members of the IRF family, we
investigated whether IRF5 is subjected to regulation by TRIM21 and whether
dysregulation of this mechanism could explain the association of IRF5 with SLE.
Our results show that IRF5 is degraded following TLR7 activation and that TRIM21 
is involved in this process. Comparison of the individual IRF5 variants
demonstrates that isoforms generated by alternative splicing are resistant to
TRIM21-mediated degradation following TLR7 stimulation, thus providing a
functional link between isoforms expression and stability/activity which
contributes to explain the association of IRF5 with SLE.

PMCID: PMC4118895
PMID: 25084355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 30;9(7):e103478. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103478.
eCollection 2014.

Interferon regulatory factor-5 deficiency ameliorates disease severity in the
MRL/lpr mouse model of lupus in the absence of a mutation in DOCK2.

Yasuda K(1), Watkins AA(1), Kochar GS(1), Wilson GE(1), Laskow B(1), Richez C(1),
Bonegio RG(1), Rifkin IR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) polymorphisms are strongly associated with 
an increased risk of developing the autoimmune disease systemic lupus
erythematosus. In mouse lupus models, IRF5-deficiency was shown to reduce disease
severity consistent with an important role for IRF5 in disease pathogenesis.
However these mouse studies were confounded by the recent demonstration that the 
IRF5 knockout mouse line contained a loss-of-function mutation in the dedicator
of cytokinesis 2 (DOCK2) gene. As DOCK2 regulates lymphocyte trafficking and
Toll-like receptor signaling, this raised the possibility that some of the
protective effects attributed to IRF5 deficiency in the mouse lupus models may
instead have been due to DOCK2 deficiency. We have therefore here evaluated the
effect of IRF5-deficiency in the MRL/lpr mouse lupus model in the absence of the 
DOCK2 mutation. We find that IRF5-deficient (IRF5-/-) MRL/lpr mice develop much
less severe disease than their IRF5-sufficient (IRF5+/+) littermates. Despite
markedly lower serum levels of anti-nuclear autoantibodies and reduced total
splenocyte and CD4+ T cell numbers, IRF5-/- MRL/lpr mice have similar numbers of 
all splenic B cell subsets compared to IRF5+/+ MRL/lpr mice, suggesting that IRF5
is not involved in B cell development up to the mature B cell stage. However,
IRF5-/- MRL/lpr mice have greatly reduced numbers of spleen plasmablasts and bone
marrow plasma cells. Serum levels of B lymphocyte stimulator (BLyS) were markedly
elevated in the MRL/lpr mice but no effect of IRF5 on serum BLyS levels was seen.
Overall our data demonstrate that IRF5 contributes to disease pathogenesis in the
MRL/lpr lupus model and that this is due, at least in part, to the role of IRF5
in plasma cell formation. Our data also suggest that combined therapy targeting
both IRF5 and BLyS might be a particularly effective therapeutic approach in
lupus.

PMCID: PMC4116215
PMID: 25076492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Oncoimmunology. 2014 May 15;3:e28862. eCollection 2014.

Role of cancer stem cell-associated inflammation in creating pro-inflammatory
tumorigenic microenvironments.

Jinushi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Infection-Associated Cancer; Institute for Genetic
Medicine; Hokkaido University; Sapporo, Japan.

We identify novel mechanisms whereby chemoresistance enables cancer stem cells to
create pro-inflammatory tumor microenvironments. Chemoresistant cancer stem cells
promote M2 macrophage differentiation through interferon-regulatory factor-5
(IRF5)- and macrophage-colony stimulating factor (M-CSF)-dependent mechanisms and
produce various other cell-signaling factors that together fuel
inflammation-driven carcinogenesis. These findings clarify a molecular pathway
linking cancer "stemness" and pro-tumor inflammation in an immunosuppressive
niche.

PMCID: PMC4091611
PMID: 25057449  [PubMed]


92. Thromb Res. 2014 Sep;134(3):686-92. doi: 10.1016/j.thromres.2014.06.025. Epub
2014 Jul 6.

Blood genomic profiling in extracranial- and intracranial atherosclerosis in
ischemic stroke patients.

Lee HB(1), Kim Y(1), Yoo H(2), Lee JM(2), Kim YK(3), Kim NK(3), Kim JK(2), Oh
SH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, Seongnam,
Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pharmacy, College of Pharmacy, CHA
University, Seongnam, Republic of Korea. (3)The Institute for Clinical Research, 
CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, Seongnam, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Neurology, CHA Bundang Medical Center, CHA University, Seongnam,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: ohsh72@chamc.co.kr.

OBJECTIVE: Extracranial- and intracranial atherosclerosis (ECAS and ICAS) have
been suggested to have different pathogeneses. Blood genomic profiling may
identify their unique molecular signatures.
METHODS: Whole gene microarray of peripheral blood was performed in 24 patients
with acute ischemic stroke (ECAS, n=12; ICAS, n=12) and 12 healthy controls.
Differential gene expression and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) were
conducted. Plasma resistin levels were compared across independent samples of
stroke patients with ECAS (n=39), ICAS (n=20), and small vessel disease (SVD,
n=57).
RESULTS: Microarray revealed that 144 and 24 transcripts were altered in ECAS and
ICAS, respectively, compared to controls. All the transcripts that were
differentially expressed in ICAS were also differentially expressed in ECAS. A
total of 120 transcripts were differentially expressed only in ECAS. Gene sets
related to immune response and protein metabolism were altered in both ECAS and
ICAS, but the magnitude of gene alteration was higher in ECAS than in ICAS.
Several genes of interest including RETN, IRF5, CD163, and CHST13 were more
highly expressed in ECAS than in ICAS. Circulating resistin levels were elevated 
in independent samples of ECAS, but not in those of ICAS, compared to those of
SVDs.
CONCLUSIONS: ECAS showed prominent genomic alteration related to immune response 
compared to ICAS. Although there was no ECAS-specific gene to be identified on
microarray, the level of resistin expression was high on peripheral blood in
ECAS, suggesting that resistin is associated with the pathogenesis of ECAS.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25042724  [PubMed - in process]


93. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Jun 16;13(2):4473-85. doi: 10.4238/2014.June.16.6.

Association between IRF5 polymorphisms and autoimmune diseases: a meta-analysis.

Tang L(1), Chen B(2), Ma B(3), Nie S(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medical Sciences, Changsha Medical University, Changsha,
China. (2)School of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, The Chinese
University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong, China. (3)Yunnan Walvax Biotechnology
Co., Ltd., Kunming, Yunnan, China. (4)School of Forensic Medicine, Kunming
Medical University, Kunming, Yunnan, China nieshengjie@126.com.

In this study, we investigated the association between 5 interferon regulatory
factor-5 (IRF5) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and autoimmune diseases
using the Medline citation index. Twenty-eight studies with 74 comparisons,
including 16 rheumatoid arthritis (RA), 43 systemic lupus erythematous (SLE), 2
juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), 6 multiple sclerosis (MS), and 5 systemic
sclerosis (SSc) studies, were examined in the meta-analysis. The SNP rs2004640
was significantly associated with SLE, MS, and SSc, but not with JIA [odds ratio 
(OR)=1.06, 95% confidence interval (CI)=0.90-1.24, P=0.48] or RA (OR=1.03,
95%CI=0.95-1.11, P=0.44). A significant association was observed between
rs2280714 and SLE, MS, and SSc, but not RA (OR=1.01, 95%CI=0.94-1.09, P=0.80).
Rs10954213 was associated with the pathogenesis of SLE, RA, MS, and SSc.
rs2070197 and the exon 6 insertion were significantly associated with SLE.
Haplotypes containing rs2004640T and rs2280714T were significantly associated
with an increased risk of SLE, but not with RA. This meta-analysis certified that
IRF5 polymorphisms confer susceptibility to SLE, MS, and SSc. To further confirm 
the correlations between polymorphisms of IRF5 and autoimmune disease
susceptibility, studies involving a larger number of patients worldwide are
necessary.

PMID: 25036352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Virol. 2014 Oct;88(19):11007-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01545-14. Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Interferon regulatory factor 5-dependent immune responses in the draining lymph
node protect against West Nile virus infection.

Thackray LB(1), Shrestha B(1), Richner JM(1), Miner JJ(1), Pinto AK(1), Lazear
HM(1), Gale M Jr(2), Diamond MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
Missouri, USA. (2)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Molecular
Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri,
USA Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA The Center for Human Immunology and
Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
Missouri, USA diamond@borcim.wustl.edu.

Upon activation of Toll-like and RIG-I-like receptor signaling pathways, the
transcription factor IRF5 translocates to the nucleus and induces antiviral
immune programs. The recent discovery of a homozygous mutation in the
immunoregulatory gene guanine exchange factor dedicator of cytokinesis 2
(Dock2mu/mu) in several Irf5-/- mouse colonies has complicated interpretation of 
immune functions previously ascribed to IRF5. To define the antiviral functions
of IRF5 in vivo, we infected backcrossed Irf5-/-×Dock2wt/wt mice (here called
Irf5-/- mice) and independently generated CMV-Cre Irf5fl/fl mice with West Nile
virus (WNV), a pathogenic neurotropic flavivirus. Compared to congenic wild-type 
animals, Irf5-/- and CMV-Cre Irf5fl/fl mice were more vulnerable to WNV
infection, and this phenotype was associated with increased infection in
peripheral organs, which resulted in higher virus titers in the central nervous
system. The loss of IRF5, however, was associated with only small differences in 
the type I interferon response systemically and in the draining lymph node during
WNV infection. Instead, lower levels of several other proinflammatory cytokines
and chemokines, as well as fewer and less activated immune cells, were detected
in the draining lymph node 2 days after WNV infection. WNV-specific antibody
responses in Irf5-/- mice also were blunted in the context of live or inactivated
virus infection and this was associated with fewer antigen-specific memory B
cells and long-lived plasma cells. Our results with Irf5-/- mice establish a key 
role for IRF5 in shaping the early innate immune response in the draining lymph
node, which impacts the spread of virus infection, optimal B cell immunity, and
disease pathogenesis.IMPORTANCE: Although the roles of IRF3 and IRF7 in
orchestrating innate and adaptive immunity after viral infection are established,
the function of the related transcription factor IRF5 remains less certain. Prior
studies in Irf5-/- mice reported conflicting results as to the contribution of
IRF5 in regulating type I interferon and adaptive immune responses. The lack of
clarity may stem from a recently discovered homozygous loss-of-function mutation 
of the immunoregulatory gene Dock2 in several colonies of Irf5-/- mice. Here,
using a mouse model with a deficiency in IRF5 and wild-type Dock2 alleles, we
investigated how IRF5 modulates West Nile virus (WNV) pathogenesis and host
immune responses. Our in vivo studies indicate that IRF5 has a key role in
shaping the early proinflammatory cytokine response in the draining lymph node,
which impacts immunity and control of WNV infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178807
PMID: 25031348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Arthritis Res Ther. 2014 Jul 10;16(4):R146. doi: 10.1186/ar4608.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 genetic variants are associated with
cardiovascular disease in patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

García-Bermúdez M, López-Mejías R, Genre F, Castañeda S, Llorca J,
González-Juanatey C, Corrales A, Ubilla B, Miranda-Filloy JA, Pina T,
Gómez-Vaquero C, Rodríguez-Rodríguez L, Fernández-Gutiérrez B, Balsa A,
Pascual-Salcedo D, López-Longo FJ, Carreira P, Blanco R, Martín J, González-Gay
MA.

INTRODUCTION: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a complex polygenic inflammatory
disease associated with accelerated atherosclerosis and increased cardiovascular 
(CV) disease risk. Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is a regulator of type I
interferon induction. Recently, researchers have described an association between
multiple single-nucleotide polymorphisms of the IRF5 gene and some rheumatic
disorders. In this study, we aimed to evaluate whether three different haplotype 
blocks within the IRF5 locus which have been shown to alter the protein function 
are involved in the risk of CV events occurring in Spanish RA patients.
METHODS: Three IRF5 polymorphisms (rs2004640, rs2070197 and rs10954213)
representative of each haplotype group were genotyped by performing TaqMan assays
using a 7900HT Fast Real-Time PCR System with tissue from a total of 2,137
Spanish patients diagnosed with RA. Among them, 390 (18.2%) had experienced CV
events. The relationship of IRF5 genotypes and haplotypes to CV events was tested
using Cox regression.
RESULTS: Male sex, age at RA diagnosis and most traditional risk factors
(hypertension, dyslipidemia and smoking habit) were associated with increased
risk for CV events in the RA population. Interestingly, a protective effect of
both IRF5 rs2004640 GG and IRF5 rs10954213 GG genotypes against the risk for CV
events after adjusting the results for sex, age at RA diagnosis and traditional
CV disease risk factors was observed (hazard ratio (HR) = 0.6, 95% confidence
interval (CI) = 0.38 to 0.92, P = 0.02; and HR = 0.58, 95% CI = 0.36 to 0.95, P =
0.03, respectively). Moreover, we detected a protective effect of the GTG
haplotype against the risk for CV events after adjusting the results for
potential confounding factors (HR = 0.72, 95% CI = 0.56 to 0.93, P = 0.012).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal that IRF5 gene variants are associated with risk 
of CV events in patients with RA.

PMCID: PMC4227041
PMID: 25011482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Jun 25;15(7):11275-93. doi: 10.3390/ijms150711275.

Human mesenchymal stem cells modulate inflammatory cytokines after spinal cord
injury in rat.

Urdzíková LM(1), Ruicka J(2), LaBagnara M(3), Kárová K(4), Kubinová (5),
Jiráková K(6), Murali R(7), Syková E(8), Jhanwar-Uniyal M(9), Jendelová P(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Vídenská 1083, Prague 14220, Czech Republic. urdzikl@saske.sk. (2)Institute of
Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Vídenská 1083, 
Prague 14220, Czech Republic. j.ruzicka@biomed.cas.cz. (3)Department of
Neurosurgery, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.
m.labagnara@gmail.com. (4)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences
of the Czech Republic, Vídenská 1083, Prague 14220, Czech Republic.
karova@biomed.cas.cz. (5)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences 
of the Czech Republic, Vídenská 1083, Prague 14220, Czech Republic.
sarka.k@biomed.cas.cz. (6)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences
of the Czech Republic, Vídenská 1083, Prague 14220, Czech Republic.
jirakova@biomed.cas.cz. (7)Department of Neurosurgery, New York Medical College, 
Valhalla, NY 10595, USA. Raj_Murali@NYMC.edu. (8)Institute of Experimental
Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Vídenská 1083, Prague 14220,
Czech Republic. sykova@biomed.cas.cz. (9)Department of Neurosurgery, New York
Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA. meena_jhanwar@NYMC.edu. (10)Institute
of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Vídenská
1083, Prague 14220, Czech Republic. jendel@biomed.cas.cz.

Transplantation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) improves functional recovery in
experimental models of spinal cord injury (SCI); however, the mechanisms
underlying this effect are not completely understood. We investigated the effect 
of intrathecal implantation of human MSC on functional recovery, astrogliosis and
levels of inflammatory cytokines in rats using balloon-induced spinal cord
compression lesions. Transplanted cells did not survive at the lesion site of the
spinal cord; however, functional recovery was enhanced in the MSC-treated group
as was confirmed by the Basso, Beattie, and Bresnahan (BBB) and the flat beam
test. Morphometric analysis showed a significantly higher amount of remaining
white matter in the cranial part of the lesioned spinal cords.
Immunohistochemical analysis of the lesions indicated the rearrangement of the
glial scar in MSC-treated animals. Real-time PCR analysis revealed an increased
expression of Irf5, Mrc1, Fgf2, Gap43 and Gfap. Transplantation of MSCs into a
lesioned spinal cord reduced TNFa, IL-4, IL-1ß, IL-2, IL-6 and IL-12 and
increased the levels of MIP-1a and RANTES when compared to saline-treated
controls. Intrathecal implantation of MSCs reduces the inflammatory reaction and 
apoptosis, improves functional recovery and modulates glial scar formation after 
SCI, regardless of cell survival. Therefore, repeated applications may prolong
the beneficial effects induced by MSC application.

PMCID: PMC4139782
PMID: 24968269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1169:143-58. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-0882-0_14.

Evaluating the role of nucleic acid antigens in murine models of systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Watkins AA(1), Bonegio RG, Rifkin IR.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA, USA.

Impaired apoptotic cell clearance is thought to contribute to the pathogenesis of
systemic autoimmune disease, in particular systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Endogenous RNA- and DNA-containing autoantigens released from dying cells can
engage Toll-like receptors (TLR) 7/8 and TLR9, respectively in a number of immune
cell types, thereby promoting innate and adaptive immune responses. Mouse models 
of lupus reliably phenocopy many of the characteristic features of SLE in humans 
and these models have proved invaluable in defining disease mechanisms. TLR7
signaling is essential for the development of autoantibodies to RNA and
RNA-associated proteins like Sm and RNP, while TLR9 signaling is important for
the development of antibodies to DNA and chromatin. TLR7 deficiency ameliorates
end-organ disease, but, surprisingly, TLR9 deficiency exacerbates disease,
possibly as a result of TLR7 overactivity in TLR9-deficient mice. Deficiency of
interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) inhibits autoantibody production and
ameliorates disease likely due to its role in both TLR7 and TLR9 signaling. In
this report we describe methods to analyze two commonly used mouse models of SLE 
in which TLRs and/or IRF5 have been shown to play a role in disease pathogenesis.

PMID: 24957237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Acta Neurol Scand. 2014 Oct;130(4):268-75. doi: 10.1111/ane.12269. Epub 2014 Jun 
18.

Prediction of response to interferon therapy in multiple sclerosis.

Sellebjerg F(1), Søndergaard HB, Koch-Henriksen N, Sørensen PS, Oturai AB.

Author information: 
(1)Danish Multiple Sclerosis Center, Department of Neurology, Copenhagen
University Hospital Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the genes encoding
interferon response factor (IRF)-5, IRF-8 and glypican-5 (GPC5) have been
associated with disease activity in multiple sclerosis (MS) patients treated with
interferon (IFN)-ß. We analysed whether SNPs in the IRF5, IRF8 and GPC5 genes are
associated with clinical disease activity in MS patients beginning de novo
treatment with IFN-ß.
METHODS: The SNPs rs2004640, rs3807306 and rs4728142 in IRF5, rs13333054 and
rs17445836 in IRF8 and rs10492503 in GPC5 were genotyped in 575 patients with
relapsing-remitting MS followed prospectively after the initiation of their first
treatment with IFN-ß.
RESULTS: 62% of patients experienced relapses during the first 2 years of
treatment, and 32% had disability progression during the first 5 years of
treatment. Patients with a pretreatment annualized relapse rate >1 had an
increased risk of relapse (hazard ratio 1.53, 95% confidence interval 1.24-1.90) 
and progression (hazard ratio 1.48, 95% confidence interval 1.10-1.99) on
treatment and patients with breakthrough relapses in the form of relapses during 
the first 2 years of treatment had an increased risk of progression during the
first 5 years of treatment (hazard ratio 2.04, 95% confidence interval
1.47-2.85).The gene variants in IRF5, IRF8 and GPC5 were not associated with risk
of relapse or disease progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Pretreatment relapse rate and clinical disease activity during the
first 2 years of treatment may be associated with disease progression in MS
patients treated with IFN-ß. Genetic analysis of the studied gene variants do not
provide additional information.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24943672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Clin Immunol. 2014 Aug;153(2):343-52. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2014.06.001. Epub 2014 
Jun 10.

IRF5-mediated signaling and implications for SLE.

Lazzari E(1), Jefferies CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Research Institute, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. Electronic
address: elisalazzari@rcsi.ie. (2)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Research
Institute, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin
2, Ireland. Electronic address: cjefferies@rcsi.ie.

Transcription of the type I IFN genes is regulated by members of the Interferon
Regulatory Factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, composed in humans of 9 
distinct proteins. In addition to IRF3 and IRF7, the transcription factor IRF5
has been shown to be involved in type I IFN production and interestingly,
polymorphisms of the IRF5 gene in humans can result in risk or protective
haplotypes with regard to SLE susceptibility. In addition to regulation of type I
IFN expression, IRF5 is involved in other signaling pathways, including IgG
switching in B cells, macrophage polarization and apoptosis, and its role in SLE 
pathogenesis may therefore not be limited to dysregulated control of IFN
expression. In this review we will comprehensively discuss the role of IRF5 in
immune-mediated responses and its potential multifaceted role in conferring SLE
susceptibility.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24928322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mucosal Immunol. 2015 Jan;8(1):68-79. doi: 10.1038/mi.2014.43. Epub 2014 May 28.

Protease-activated receptor 1 suppresses Helicobacter pylori gastritis via the
inhibition of macrophage cytokine secretion and interferon regulatory factor 5.

Chionh YT(1), Ng GZ(1), Ong L(2), Arulmuruganar A(2), Stent A(3), Saeed MA(1),
Wee JL(3), Sutton P(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre for Animal Biotechnology, School of Veterinary Science, University
of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia [2] Mucosal Immunology, Murdoch
Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia. (2)Mucosal Immunology, Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal
Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (3)Centre for Animal
Biotechnology, School of Veterinary Science, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.

Chronic gastritis from Helicobacter pylori infection is a major factor in the
development of gastric adenocarcinoma. Factors that regulate gastritis severity
are important in determining which individuals are susceptible to H.
pylori-associated disease. Although protease-activated receptor 1 (PAR1) has been
identified as one such host factor, its mechanism of action is unknown. Using
chimeric mice, we demonstrated that PAR1-mediated protection against H. pylori
gastritis requires bone marrow-derived cells. Analyses of the gastric mucosa
revealed that PAR1 suppresses cellular infiltration and both T helper type 1
(Th1) and T helper type 17 (Th17) responses to infection. Moreover, PAR1
expression was associated with reduced vaccine-mediated protection against H.
pylori. Analyses of H. pylori-stimulated macrophages revealed that PAR1
activation suppressed secretion of interleukin (IL)-12 and IL-23, key drivers of 
Th1 and Th17 immunity, respectively. Furthermore, PAR1 suppressed interferon
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), an important transcription factor for IL-12 and
IL-23, both in the infected mucosa and following bacterial stimulation. PAR1
suppression of IRF5 and IL-12/23 secretion by macrophages provides a novel
mechanism by which the host suppresses the mucosal Th1 and Th17 response to H.
pylori infection. Dysregulation of this process is likely an important factor in 
the susceptibility of some individuals to H. pylori-associated disease.

PMID: 24866378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2014 Jul 15;160(1-2):81-9. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2014.03.017. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Comparison of gene expression of immune mediators in lung and pulmonary lymph
node granulomas from cattle experimentally infected with Mycobacterium bovis.

Shu D(1), Heiser A(2), Wedlock DN(2), Luo D(3), de Lisle GW(4), Buddle BM(2).

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Hopkirk Research Institute, Private Bag 11008, Palmerston North
4442, New Zealand. Electronic address: dairu.shu@agresearch.co.nz. (2)AgResearch,
Hopkirk Research Institute, Private Bag 11008, Palmerston North 4442, New
Zealand. (3)AgResearch, Grasslands Research Centre, Palmerston North 4442, New
Zealand. (4)AgResearch, National Centre for Biosecurity and Infectious Diseases, 
PO Box 40063, Upper Hutt, New Zealand.

The cellular infiltrates and macrophage activation pathways may differ in
granulomas found in the lungs and pulmonary lymph nodes of cattle infected with
Mycobacterium bovis. The aim of this study was to compare the histopathology and 
gene expression profiles of cytokines and immune mediators for cattle which had
these lesions in both sites. Ten Friesian-cross, 15-16 month old cattle were
challenged intratracheally with 5 × 10(3)CFU of virulent M. bovis and killed and 
necropsied at 28 weeks after infection. Seven animals were found to have gross TB
granulomas in both their lungs and pulmonary lymph nodes (PLN) and these lesions 
were fully encapsulated with central necrosis and mineralisation. Neutrophil
infiltration was clearly involved in granuloma in lung whereas neutrophils were
limited in lesions of PLN. Comparisons were made of immune mediators from these
two sites from the same animals as well as those between lesioned PLN tissues and
non-lesioned prescapular lymph nodes (PSLN). Gene expressions of the immune
mediators were normalised using a housekeeping gene (U1), a monocyte/macrophage
marker (CD14) and a common leucocyte marker (CD45). mRNA expression of IFN-<U+03B3>,
IL-17A, IRF5(1) and arginase 1 (Arg1) was significantly up-regulated in lung
compared to that for PLN (p<0.05), while mRNA expression of IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-12p40,
TNF-a and iNOs for PLN was significantly higher than that for PSLN (p<0.05). In
addition, IL-10 mRNA expression was significantly higher for lung compared to PLN
when normalised for CD45 (p<0.05). The results suggested that the stronger
proinflammatory immune response in the lesioned lung may be a consequence of
enhanced expression of IRF5 promoting IFN-<U+03B3> and IL-17 production. In contrast,
Arg1 expression in the lungs could facilitate the infection through competing
with iNOs for l-arginine, preventing generation of nitric oxide for clearance of 
M. bovis infection.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24852075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Nat Commun. 2014 May 13;5:3771. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4771.

Transcription factor IRF5 drives P2X4R+-reactive microglia gating neuropathic
pain.

Masuda T(1), Iwamoto S(2), Yoshinaga R(2), Tozaki-Saitoh H(1), Nishiyama A(3),
Mak TW(4), Tamura T(3), Tsuda M(2), Inoue K(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular and System Pharmacology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka
812-8582, Japan [2] Core Research for Evolution Science and Technology, Japan
Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular 
and System Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. (3)Department of
Immunology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, 3-9 Fukuura,
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan. (4)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre,
University Health Network, 620 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G
2C1.

In response to neuronal injury or disease, microglia adopt distinct reactive
phenotypes via the expression of different sets of genes. Spinal microglia
expressing the purinergic P2X4 receptor (P2X4R) after peripheral nerve injury
(PNI) are implicated in neuropathic pain. Here we show that interferon regulatory
factor-5 (IRF5), which is induced in spinal microglia after PNI, is responsible
for direct transcriptional control of P2X4R. Upon stimulation of microglia by
fibronectin, IRF5 induced de novo expression of P2X4R by directly binding to the 
promoter region of the P2rx4 gene. Mice lacking Irf5 did not upregulate spinal
P2X4R after PNI, and also exhibited substantial resistance to pain
hypersensitivity. Furthermore, we found that expression of IRF5 in microglia is
regulated by IRF8. Thus, an IRF8-IRF5 transcriptional axis may contribute to
shifting spinal microglia toward a P2X4R-expressing reactive state after PNI.
These results may provide a new target for treating neuropathic pain.

PMCID: PMC4024744
PMID: 24818655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 30;9(4):e94426. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094426. eCollection
2014.

Genetic polymorphism of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) correlates with
allograft acute rejection of liver transplantation.

Yu X(1), Wei B(2), Dai Y(1), Zhang M(2), Wu J(2), Xu X(2), Jiang G(2), Zheng
S(2), Zhou L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Combined Multi-Organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public Health,
the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang, China. (2)Division of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic Surgery, Department 
of Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

BACKGROUND: Although liver transplantation is one of the most efficient curative 
therapies of end stage liver diseases, recipients may suffer liver graft loss
opst-operation. IRF-5, a member of Interferon Regulatory Factors, functions as a 
key regulator in TLR4 cascade, and is capable of inducing inflammatory cytokines.
Although TLR4 has been proved to contribute to acute allograft rejection,
including after liver transplantation, the correlation between IRF5 gene and
acute rejection has not been elucidated yet.
METHODS: The study enrolled a total of 289 recipients, including 39 females and
250 males, and 39 recipients developed acute allograft rejection within 6 months 
post-transplantation. The allograft rejections were diagnosed by liver biopsies. 
Genome DNA of recipients was extracted from pre-operative peripheral blood.
Genotyping of IRF-5, including rs3757385, rs752637 and rs11761199, was performed,
followed by SNP frequency and Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium analysis.
RESULTS: The genetic polymorphism of rs3757385 was found associated with acute
rejection. G/G homozygous individuals were at higher risk of acute rejection,
with a P value of 0.042 (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.34 (1.07-5.10)).
CONCLUSIONS: IRF5, which transcriptionally activates inflammatory cytokines, is
genetically associated with acute rejection and might function as a risk factor
for acute rejection of liver transplantations.

PMCID: PMC4005731
PMID: 24788560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:529167. doi: 10.1155/2014/529167. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Insight into gene polymorphisms involved in toll-like receptor/interferon
signalling pathways for systemic lupus erythematosus in South East Asia.

Chai HC(1), Chua KH(2), Lim SK(3), Phipps ME(4).

Author information: 
(1)Jeffrey Cheah School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Sunway Campus, 46150 Selangor, Malaysia ; Department of Biomedical Science,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
(2)Department of Biomedical Science, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (3)Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Malaya, 50603 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. (4)Jeffrey Cheah School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University, Sunway Campus, 46150 Selangor,
Malaysia.

Polymorphisms in genes involved in toll-like receptor/interferon signalling
pathways have been reported previously to be associated with SLE in many
populations. This study aimed to investigate the role of seven single nucleotide 
polymorphisms within TNFAIP3, STAT4, and IRF5, which are involved in upstream and
downstream pathways of type I interferon production, in SLE in the South East
Asian populations. Genotyping of 360 Malaysian SLE patients and 430 normal
healthy individuals revealed that minor alleles of STAT4 rs7574865 and rs10168266
were associated with elevated risk of SLE in the Chinese and Malay patients,
respectively (P = 0.028, odds ratio (OR) = 1.42; P = 0.035, OR = 1.80,
respectively). Polymorphisms in TNFAIP3 and IRF5 did not show significant
associations with SLE in any of the ethnicities. Combined analysis of the Malays,
Chinese, and Indians for each SNP indicated that STAT4 rs10168266 was
significantly associated with the Malaysian SLE as a whole (P = 0.014; OR =
1.435). The meta-analysis of STAT4 rs10168266, which combined the data of other
studies and this study, further confirmed its importance as the risk factor for
SLE by having pooled OR of 1.559 and P value of <0.001.

PMCID: PMC3987947
PMID: 24741605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Zhonghua Xin Xue Guan Bing Za Zhi. 2014 Feb;42(2):132-5.

[Anti-inflammatory effects of apoprotein AI are mediated via modulating
macrophage polarity].

[Article in Chinese]

Li Q(1), Zhai Z(2), Ma W(2), Qian Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical College,
Guilin 541001, China. Email: drquanzhongli@163.com. (2)Department of Cardiology, 
Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical College, Guilin 541001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the anti-inflammatory mechanisms of high density
lipoprotein (HDL) by observing the effects of apoprotein (apo)AI, a major protein
component of HDL, on the inflammatory macrophage cell polarity.
METHODS: Cultured mice marrow-derived macrophages were stimulated with
lipopolysaccharide and interferon after 10 µg/ml of apoAI were added to the
macrophages for 24 hours. The expression of membrane molecules CD16/32, CD206
were detected by fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). ELISA was used to
detect the secretion of IL-10 and IL-12. Real-time quantitative PCR was used to
detect the mRNA expression of TLR4, MyD88 and IRF5.
RESULTS: Compared to macrophages stimulated by interferon and lipopolysaccharide 
but without pretreatment with apoAI, pre-incubation with apoAI significantly
downregulated the expression of CD16/32 (91.17% ± 1.99% vs.50.47% ± 1.02%, P <
0.05), IL-12 [(747.27 ± 3.74)pg/ml vs. (73.80 ± 4.56)pg/ml, P < 0.05],
upregulated the expression of CD206(0.33% ± 0.12% vs. 3.00% ± 0.36%, P < 0.05),
IL -10 expression [(23.56 ± 4.30) pg/ml vs.(32.91 ± 2.47) pg/ml, P < 0.05], and
reduced the mRNA expression of TLR4 (1.000 ± 0.025 vs.0.708 ± 0.003, P < 0.05) , 
MyD88 (1.591 ± 0.005 vs. 1.341 ± 0.005, P < 0.05) , IRF5 (0.954 ± 0.005 vs. 0.463
± 0.003, P < 0.05) .
CONCLUSION: ApoAI enhances the switch of inflammatory macrophages to
anti-inflammatory macrophages possibly through inhibiting TLR4-MyD88-IRF5
pathway.

PMID: 24735624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Apr 8;111(14):5295-300. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1321427111. Epub 2014 Mar 21.

T cells down-regulate macrophage TNF production by IRAK1-mediated IL-10
expression and control innate hyperinflammation.

Inoue M(1), Arikawa T, Chen YH, Moriwaki Y, Price M, Brown M, Perfect JR,
Shinohara ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious
Diseases, and Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Duke University 
School of Medicine, Durham, NC 27710.

Endotoxemia is caused by excessive inflammation, but the immune system has
various mechanisms to avoid collateral organ damage in endotoxemia. A handful of 
reports have shown that innate immune responses are suppressed by the adaptive
immune system. However, the molecular mechanism by which adaptive immune cells
suppress innate inflammatory responses is not clear. Here, we report that T cells
are shown to interact with macrophages at the early stage of enodotoxemia and to 
prolong survival of mice through controlling TNF and IL-10 levels by macrophage
CD40 stimulation. The cross-talk between CD40 and toll-like receptor (TLR4)
signaling first mediates IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1) nuclear
translocation and its binding to the IL-10 gene promoter in macrophages, without 
interfering with the NF<U+03BA>B pathway. IL-10 is then detected by macrophages in an
autocrine fashion to destabilize Tnfa mRNA. To induce IRAK1-mediated IL-10
expression, signals from both CD40 and TLR4 are essential. CD40 signaling induces
IRAK1 sumoylation in the presence of TNF receptor-associated factor 2 (TRAF2) and
intracellular isoform of osteopontin (iOPN) whereas TLR4 signaling provides IFN
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) as a chaperone for sumoylated IRAK1 nuclear
translocation. Interaction of T cells with macrophages was observed in the spleen
in vivo after endotoxemia induction with LPS injection. Our study demonstrates a 
mechanistic basis for the immunosuppressive role of macrophage CD40 in LPS
endotoxemia.

PMCID: PMC3986140
PMID: 24706909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Lupus. 2014 Aug;23(9):876-80. doi: 10.1177/0961203314530019. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

Genetic variation and coronary atherosclerosis in patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Chung CP(1), Solus JF(2), Oeser A(2), Li C(3), Raggi P(4), Smith JR(2), Stein
CM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA
c.chung@vanderbilt.edu. (2)Departments of Medicine, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA. (4)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton,
AB, Canada.

Coronary artery disease is the major cause of mortality in patients with systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Increased cardiovascular risk in SLE is not explained 
by traditional risk factors. We examined the hypothesis that genetic variation
contributes to the presence of coronary atherosclerosis in patients with SLE. The
genotypes of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in 152 candidate genes linked 
with autoimmune or cardiovascular risk were determined in 125 patients with SLE. 
Coronary artery calcium (CAC), a measure of coronary atherosclerosis, was
detected in 32 patients (26%) by electron-beam computed tomography. Polymorphism 
in 20 of the candidate genes (ADAM33, ADIPOQ, CCL5, CCR7, CDKN2B, CSF1, IL4,
IL12A, IL23R, INS, IRF5, MIF, MS4A1, PTGS1, PTPN22, RETN, SELE, TNFSF4,
TNFRSF11B, and VCAM1) were nominally associated with the presence of CAC
(p-values<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001-0.047 after adjustment for age, sex and race). Some of these
are known susceptibility genes for SLE and others have been implicated in
cardiovascular disease in other populations. No association withstood false
discovery rate adjustment. Replication studies in additional cohorts of patients 
with SLE may be informative.

© The Author(s) 2014 Reprints and permissions:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav.

PMCID: PMC4185017
PMID: 24699314  [PubMed - in process]


108. Ann Hum Biol. 2014 Nov-Dec;41(6):531-9. doi: 10.3109/03014460.2014.899623. Epub
2014 Apr 3.

Association of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) markers with an increased
risk of lupus and overlapping autoimmunity in a Kuwaiti population.

AlFadhli S(1), Jahabani I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences, Faculty of Allied Health Sciences, 
Kuwait University , Kuwait.

BACKGROUND: Variations in IRF5 have been associated with an increased risk of
developing lupus (SLE).
AIM: To explore the association of IRF5 markers (rs2004640, rs10954213) with
susceptibility to SLE and to the development of more than one autoimmune disease 
(OP) and to analyse the influence of rs2004640 on IRF5 isoform expression.
METHODS: A total of 300 age/gender/ethnicity-matched Kuwaitis were screened using
the TaqMan®SNP Genotyping Assay. Data analysis was conducted in three groups:
patients with high/low anti-dsDNA antibody titre, lupus nephritis/non-nephritis
and disease onset age =28 years/>28 years. cDNA samples with defined rs2004640
genotypes were amplified using specific primers and transcripts associated with
each of the exon1 variants were detected on polyacrylamide-gel.
RESULTS: A significant association was observed between the IRF5 markers
(rs2004640, rs10954213) and susceptibility to SLE (p < 0.0001) and OP (p <
0.025). Stratified analysis showed a significant association of the rs2004640
T-allele with a high titre of anti-dsDNA antibody (p = 0.0035, OR = 1.92) and a
low disease onset age =28 years (p = 0.0026, OR = 1.94). Additionally, the
influential role of the rs2004640 T allele on IRF5 expression was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to investigate the association of IRF5
markers with OP and the very first to explore the association of these markers
with SLE in Arabs. The novelty of this study is the association of the rs2004640 
T-allele with increased anti-dsDNA antibody production and SLE in a younger age
group.

PMID: 24697591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Tissue Antigens. 2014 Jun;83(6):401-8. doi: 10.1111/tan.12349. Epub 2014 Apr 3.

Gene-gene interactions of IRF5, STAT4, IKZF1 and ETS1 in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Dang J(1), Shan S, Li J, Zhao H, Xin Q, Liu Y, Bian X, Liu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Experimental Teratology of the Ministry of Education and
Department of Medical Genetics, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan,
China; Department of Medical Genetics and Cell Biology, Ningxia Medical
University, Yinchuan, China.

Interferon (IFN) activation signaling and T helper 17 (Th17)-cell/B-cell
regulation play a critical role in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). Several studies have provided convincing evidence that
polymorphisms in IRF5, STAT4, IKZF1 and ETS1 from these pathways may be involved 
in SLE by affecting gene expression or epistasis. We analyzed the genetic
interaction in known SLE susceptibility loci from the four genes in northern Han 
Chinese. A total of 946 northern Han Chinese participated in this study (370
unrelated SLE patients and 576 healthy controls). Subjects underwent genotyping
for the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs2004640 in IRF5, rs7574865 in
STAT4, rs4917014 in IKZF1 and rs1128334 in ETS1 by use of a TaqMan SNP genotyping
assay and direct sequencing. Gene-gene interaction analysis involved direct
counting, multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) and linear regression
analysis. SLE patients and controls differed in allele frequencies of rs7574865, 
rs1128334 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) and rs4917014 (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Direct counting revealed that the
frequency of risk homozygote combinations was higher for SLE patients than
controls (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). Furthermore, 2-, 3- and 4-way gene-gene epistasis in SLE was
confirmed by parametric methods and MDR analysis. Gene expression analysis
partially supported the findings. Our study confirmed the association of the IFN 
pathway or Th17/B-cells and the pathogenesis of SLE, and gene-gene interaction in
this pathway may increase the risk of SLE.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24697319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Curr Genomics. 2014 Feb;15(1):52-65. doi: 10.2174/138920291501140306113715.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: Old and New Susceptibility Genes versus Clinical
Manifestations.

J de AS(1), C A(2), P SG(2), S C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology Keizo Asami (LIKA), Federal University of
Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Immunopathology Keizo
Asami (LIKA), Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil ;
Department of Genetics, Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco,
Brazil.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is one of the most relevant world-wide
autoimmune disorders. The formation of autoantibodies and the deposition of
antibody-containing immune complexes in blood vessels throughout the body is the 
main pathogenic mechanism of SLE leading to heterogeneous clinical manifestations
and target tissue damage. The complexity of etiology and pathogenesis in SLE,
enclosing genetic and environmental factors, apparently is one of the greatest
challenges for both researchers and clinicians. Strong indications for a genetic 
background in SLE come from studies in families as well as in monozygotic and
dizygotic twins, discovering several SLE-associated loci and genes (e.g. IRF5,
PTPN22, CTLA4, STAT4 and BANK1). As SLE has a complex genetic background, none of
these genes is likely to be entirely responsible for triggering autoimmune
response in SLE even if they disclosure a potentially novel molecular mechanisms 
in the pathogenesis' disease. The clinical manifestations and disease severity
varies greatly among patients, thus several studies try to associate clinical
heterogeneity and prognosis with specific genetic polymorphisms in SLE associated
genes. The continue effort to describe new predisposing or modulating genes in
SLE is justified by the limited knowledge about the pathogenesis, assorted
clinical manifestation and the possible prevention strategies. In this review we 
describe newly discovered, as well as the most studied genes associated to SLE
susceptibility, and relate them to clinical manifestations of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3958959
PMID: 24653663  [PubMed]


111. Cancer Res. 2014 May 15;74(10):2698-709. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-13-2169. Epub
2014 Mar 17.

Cancer stem-like cells derived from chemoresistant tumors have a unique capacity 
to prime tumorigenic myeloid cells.

Yamashina T(1), Baghdadi M(1), Yoneda A(1), Kinoshita I(1), Suzu S(1),
Dosaka-Akita H(1), Jinushi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Research Center for Infection-Associated Cancer,
Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido University; Department of Medical
Oncology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo; and Center
for AIDS research, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan. (2)Authors'
Affiliations: Research Center for Infection-Associated Cancer, Institute for
Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido University; Department of Medical Oncology, Hokkaido
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo; and Center for AIDS research,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan Jinushi@igm.hokudai.ac.jp.

Resistance to anticancer therapeutics greatly affects the phenotypic and
functional properties of tumor cells, but how chemoresistance contributes to the 
tumorigenic activities of cancer stem-like cells remains unclear. In this study, 
we found that a characteristic of cancer stem-like cells from chemoresistant
tumors (CSC-R) is the ability to produce a variety of proinflammatory cytokines
and to generate M2-like immunoregulatory myeloid cells from CD14(+) monocytes.
Furthermore, we identified the IFN-regulated transcription factor IRF5 as a
CSC-R-specific factor critical for promoting M-CSF production and generating
tumorigenic myeloid cells. Importantly, myeloid cells primed with IRF5(+) CSC-R
facilitate the tumorigenic and stem cell activities of bulk tumors. Importantly, 
the activation of IRF5/M-CSF pathways in tumor cells were correlated with the
number of tumor-associated CSF1 receptor(+) M2 macrophages in patients with
non-small lung cancer. Collectively, our findings show how chemoresistance
affects the properties of CSCs in their niche microenvironments.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24638980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Feb 20;10(2):e1003951. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003951.
eCollection 2014.

Induction of type I interferon signaling determines the relative pathogenicity of
Staphylococcus aureus strains.

Parker D(1), Planet PJ(2), Soong G(1), Narechania A(3), Prince A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York, New York, United
States of America. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University, New York,
New York, United States of America ; Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, 
American Museum of Natural History, New York, New York, United States of America.
(3)Sackler Institute for Comparative Genomics, American Museum of Natural
History, New York, New York, United States of America.

The tremendous success of S. aureus as a human pathogen has been explained
primarily by its array of virulence factors that enable the organism to evade
host immunity. Perhaps equally important, but less well understood, is the
importance of the intensity of the host response in determining the extent of
pathology induced by S. aureus infection, particularly in the pathogenesis of
pneumonia. We compared the pathogenesis of infection caused by two
phylogenetically and epidemiologically distinct strains of S. aureus whose
behavior in humans has been well characterized. Induction of the type I IFN
cascade by strain 502A, due to a NOD2-IRF5 pathway, was the major factor in
causing severe pneumonia and death in a murine model of pneumonia and was
associated with autolysis and release of peptidogylcan. In contrast to USA300,
502A was readily eliminated from epithelial surfaces in vitro. Nonetheless, 502A 
caused significantly increased tissue damage due to the organisms that were able 
to invade systemically and trigger type I IFN responses, and this was ameliorated
in Ifnar<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice. The success of USA300 to cause invasive infection appears to
depend upon its resistance to eradication from epithelial surfaces, but not
production of specific toxins. Our studies illustrate the important and highly
variable role of type I IFN signaling within a species and suggest that targeted 
immunomodulation of specific innate immune signaling cascades may be useful to
prevent the excessive morbidity associated with S. aureus pneumonia.

PMCID: PMC3930619
PMID: 24586160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2014 Feb;75(1):19-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2013.12.002.
Epub 2014 Feb 26.

Lack of association of IRF5 gene polymorphisms with autoimmune thyroid disease: a
case-control study. IRF5 gene and AITD.

Muhali FS(1), Zhou-jiao Z(1), Wang Y(1), Wang Q(1), Shi XH(2), Jiang WJ(2), Xiao 
L(2), Li DF(2), He ST(2), Xu J(2), Zhang JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical School
of Xi'an Jiaotong University, No. 277 West Yanta Road, 710061 Xi'an, China;
Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, 201508 Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan
Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508 Longhang Road, 201508 Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, Jinshan Hospital of Fudan University, No. 1508
Longhang Road, 201508 Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
zhangjinan@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Several studies support a link between autoimmunity and interferon
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene polymorphisms. We have taken the opportunity to
examine association of the autoimmune disease risk gene, the interferon
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) to survey its susceptibility to autoimmune thyroid
disease. "A total of 667 patients with autoimmune thyroid diseases and 301
healthy controls were genotyped for rs10954213, rs2004640, rs3807306, rs752637
and rs7808907 of IRF5 gene polymorphisms". We further investigated the
association between BANK1 gene and IRF5 gene in AITD patients.
RESULTS: For IRF5 gene, both in allele and genotype frequencies from both GD and 
HT patients were not significantly different from those of controls. Association 
between rs7808907C allele and Graves' disease showed trend towards significance
(P=0.067). Haplotype results in IRF5 represented in the same block, without
significant association. No significant association was found between all IRF5
SNPs and ophthalmopathy in Graves' patients. Additive interaction analysis
revealed no interactions between IRF5 and BANK1 gene in AITD patients.
CONCLUSION: Our data fail to reveal IRF5 as a susceptibility gene to AITD and do 
not support additive effect of IRF5 to BANK1 gene.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Apr;37(2):256-67. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.02.002.
Epub 2014 Feb 19.

Genomic characterization of interferon regulatory factor 5 from rock bream
(Oplegnathus fasciatus) and its role in antiviral defense.

Wickramaarachchi WD(1), Wan Q(1), Lim BS(2), Jung HB(2), De Zoysa M(3), Park
MA(4), Lee J(5), Whang I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Marine Life Sciences, School of Marine Biomedical Sciences, Jeju
National University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 690-756, Republic of Korea.
(2)Marine and Environmental Institute, Jeju National University, Jeju Special
Self-Governing Province 690-814, Republic of Korea. (3)College of Veterinary
Medicine, Chungnam National University, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-764, Republic of 
Korea. (4)Pathology Division, National Fisheries and Research & Developmental
Institute, Busan 619-705, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Marine Life
Sciences, School of Marine Biomedical Sciences, Jeju National University, Jeju
Self-Governing Province 690-756, Republic of Korea; Marine and Environmental
Institute, Jeju National University, Jeju Special Self-Governing Province
690-814, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jehee@jejunu.ac.kr. (6)Department
of Marine Life Sciences, School of Marine Biomedical Sciences, Jeju National
University, Jeju Self-Governing Province 690-756, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: ilsonwhang@hanmail.net.

The interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is a key mediator of the Toll-like
receptor (TLR)7 and TLR8 signaling pathways. In this study, we describe the
identification of IRF5 (Rb-IRF5) from rock bream fish (Oplegnathus fasciatus) and
its characteristics features at the genomic and expression levels. The
full-length Rb-IRF5 sequence was identified from a cDNA library and its genomic
sequence was obtained by screening and sequencing of a bacterial artificial
chromosome (BAC) genomic DNA library of rock bream. The genomic sequence is
comprised of 8 exons interrupted by 7 introns. The complete coding sequence of
Rb-IRF5 is 1497 bp in length and encodes for 498 amino acids. The putative
Rb-IRF5 protein consists of 3 important conserved domains: a DNA-binding domain
(DBD) at the N-terminus, an IRF-associated domain (IAD), and a virus-activated
domain (VAD) at the C-terminus. Based on pairwise sequence analysis, the highest 
sequence similarity/identity for Rb-IRF5 was observed with the IRF5 gene from
turbot fish (>87%) and Japanese flounder (83%). Several important putative
transcription factor-binding sites shared by the IRF gene family, including the
NF-<U+03BA>B, Ap-1, IRF-1, and ICSBP/ISRE sites, were found in the 5' flanking region of
Rb-IRF5. The predicted tertiary structure of the dimerized IAD and VAD of the
Rb-IRF5 protein resembled that of its orthologs from humans. In healthy rock
bream, the highest constitutive expression of Rb-IRF5 was detected in the liver. 
After iridovirus and polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C)) challenge,
Rb-IRF5 expression was significantly induced in the head kidney. Furthermore,
rock bream recombinant type I interferon (Rb-IFN1) was also found to be an
efficient inducer of Rb-IRF5 in a head kidney primary cell culture model. Upon
IRF5 transfection, rock bream Mx (Rb-Mx), interferon I (Rb-IFN1) and
tumor-necrosis factor a (Rb-TNFa) genes get significantly upregulated in rock
bream heart cells. The findings of the present study explain the involvement of
Rb-IRF5 in the induction of interferons and pro-inflammatory cytokines and
thereby provide a model for how IRF5 modulates immune responses against viral
infections in rock bream.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24560681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 28;289(13):9146-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.534321. Epub 2014
Feb 14.

HIV-2 Vpx protein interacts with interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and
inhibits its function.

Cheng X(1), Ratner L.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Oncology, Department of Medicine, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family members have been implicated as
critical transcription factors that function in immune responses, hematopoietic
differentiation, and cell growth regulation. Activation of IRF5 results in the
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFa, IL6, and IL12, as well as 
type I interferons. In this study, we demonstrate that HIV-2 Vpx interacts with
IRF5, and Vpx inhibits IRF5-mediated transactivation. Expression of Vpx in THP-1 
cells reduced mRNA levels and protein production of Toll-like receptor-dependent 
IL6, IL12p40, and TNFa induced by lipopolysaccharide, R848, and ODN2216.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that Vpx expression results in
decreased promoter binding activity of IRF5. This study provides new insights
into mechanisms employed by HIV-2 to counteract innate immune defenses against
viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3979364
PMID: 24532789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mediators Inflamm. 2013;2013:245804. doi: 10.1155/2013/245804. Epub 2013 Dec 23.

IRF5 is a specific marker of inflammatory macrophages in vivo.

Weiss M(1), Blazek K(1), Byrne AJ(2), Perocheau DP(1), Udalova IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive,
Headington, Oxford OX3 7FY, UK. (2)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University 
of Oxford, Roosevelt Drive, Headington, Oxford OX3 7FY, UK ; Leukocyte Biology
Section, National Heart and Lung Institute, Sir Alexander Fleming Building,
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, South Kensington, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

Macrophages are an integral part of the innate immune system and key players in
pathogen clearance and tissue remodelling. Both functions are accomplished by a
pivotal network of different macrophage subtypes, including proinflammatory M1
and anti-inflammatory M2 macrophages. Previously, our laboratory identified the
transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) as the master
regulator of the M1 macrophage polarisation. IRF5 was found to be highly
expressed in human M1 compared to M2 macrophages. Furthermore, IRF5 dictates the 
expression of proinflammatory genes such as IL12b and IL23a whilst repressing
anti-inflammatory genes like IL10. Here we show that murine bone marrow derived
macrophages differentiated in vitro with GM-CSF are also characterised by high
levels of IRF5 mRNA and protein and express proinflammatory cytokines upon LPS
stimulation. These macrophages display characteristic expression of M1-marker MHC
II but lack the M2-marker CD206. Significantly, we develop intracellular staining
of IRF5- expressing macrophages and utilise it to recapitulate the in vitro
results in an in vivo model of antigen-induced arthritis, emphasising their
physiological relevance. Thus, we establish the species-invariant role of IRF5 in
controlling the inflammatory macrophage phenotype both in vitro and in in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3885211
PMID: 24453413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Carcinogenesis. 2014 May;35(5):1132-43. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu013. Epub 2014 Jan
20.

IRF5 is a target of BCR-ABL kinase activity and reduces CML cell proliferation.

Massimino M(1), Consoli ML, Mesuraca M, Stagno F, Tirrò E, Stella S, Pennisi MS, 
Romano C, Buffa P, Bond HM, Morrone G, Sciacca L, Di Raimondo F, Manzella L,
Vigneri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Bio-Medicine, University of Catania,
85-95124 Catania, Italy.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) modulates the expression of genes
controlling cell growth and apoptosis. Previous findings have suggested a lack of
IRF5 transcripts in both acute and chronic leukemias. However, to date, IRF5
expression and function have not been investigated in chronic myeloid leukemia
(CML). We report that IRF5 is expressed in CML cells, where it interacts with the
BCR-ABL kinase that modulates its expression and induces its tyrosine
phosphorylation. Tyrosine-phosphorylated IRF5 displayed reduced transcriptional
activity that was partially restored by imatinib mesylate (IM). Interestingly, a 
mutant devoid of a BCR-ABL consensus site (IRF5(Y104F)) still presented
significant tyrosine phosphorylation. This finding suggests that the oncoprotein 
phosphorylates additional tyrosine residues or induces downstream signaling
pathways leading to further IRF5 phosphorylation. We also found that ectopic
expression of IRF5 decreases the proliferation of CML cell lines by slowing their
S-G2 transition, increasing the inhibition of BCR-ABL signaling and enhancing the
lethality effect observed after treatment with IM, a-2-interferon and a
DNA-damaging agent. Furthermore, IRF5 overexpression successfully reduced the
clonogenic ability of CML CD34-positive progenitors before and after exposure to 
the above-indicated cytotoxic stimuli. Our data identify IRF5 as a downstream
target of the BCR-ABL kinase, suggesting that its biological inactivation
contributes to leukemic transformation.

PMID: 24445143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 27;8(12):e84450. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084450.
eCollection 2013.

Association of STAT4 polymorphism with severe renal insufficiency in lupus
nephritis.

Bolin K(1), Sandling JK(2), Zickert A(3), Jönsen A(4), Sjöwall C(5), Svenungsson 
E(3), Bengtsson AA(4), Eloranta ML(1), Rönnblom L(6), Syvänen AC(2), Gunnarsson
I(3), Nordmark G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. (2)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences and
Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden. (3)Rheumatology
Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital and Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (4)Section of Rheumatology, Department Clinical
Sciences, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. (5)Rheumatology/AIR, Department of
Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Linköping University, Linköping, Sweden.
(6)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden ; Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Lupus nephritis is a cause of significant morbidity in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) and its genetic background has not been completely clarified.
The aim of this investigation was to analyze single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) for association with lupus nephritis, its severe form proliferative
nephritis and renal outcome, in two Swedish cohorts. Cohort I (n = 567 SLE cases,
n = 512 controls) was previously genotyped for 5676 SNPs and cohort II (n = 145
SLE cases, n = 619 controls) was genotyped for SNPs in STAT4, IRF5, TNIP1 and
BLK. Case-control and case-only association analyses for patients with lupus
nephritis, proliferative nephritis and severe renal insufficiency were performed.
In the case-control analysis of cohort I, four highly linked SNPs in STAT4 were
associated with lupus nephritis with genome wide significance with p = 3.7 ×
10(-9), OR 2.20 for the best SNP rs11889341. Strong signals of association
between IRF5 and an HLA-DR3 SNP marker were also detected in the lupus nephritis 
case versus healthy control analysis (p <0.0001). An additional six genes showed 
an association with lupus nephritis with p <0.001 (PMS2, TNIP1, CARD11, ITGAM,
BLK and IRAK1). In the case-only meta-analysis of the two cohorts, the STAT4 SNP 
rs7582694 was associated with severe renal insufficiency with p = 1.6 × 10(-3)
and OR 2.22. We conclude that genetic variations in STAT4 predispose to lupus
nephritis and a worse outcome with severe renal insufficiency.

PMCID: PMC3873995
PMID: 24386384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Apr 22;63(15):1556-66. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.023.
Epub 2013 Dec 18.

In vivo silencing of the transcription factor IRF5 reprograms the macrophage
phenotype and improves infarct healing.

Courties G(1), Heidt T(1), Sebas M(1), Iwamoto Y(1), Jeon D(1), Truelove J(1),
Tricot B(1), Wojtkiewicz G(1), Dutta P(1), Sager HB(1), Borodovsky A(2),
Novobrantseva T(2), Klebanov B(2), Fitzgerald K(2), Anderson DG(3), Libby P(4),
Swirski FK(1), Weissleder R(5), Nahrendorf M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Alnylam Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge,
Massachusetts. (3)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research,
Department of Chemical Engineering, Division of Health Science Technology, and
Institute for Medical Engineering and Science, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts. (4)Cardiovascular Division, Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Center for
Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. (6)Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General
Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address:
mnahrendorf@mgh.harvard.edu.

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Apr 22;63(15):1567-8.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to test whether silencing of the
transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) in cardiac macrophages
improves infarct healing and attenuates post-myocardial infarction (MI)
remodeling.
BACKGROUND: In healing wounds, the M1 toward M2 macrophage phenotype transition
supports resolution of inflammation and tissue repair. Persistence of
inflammatory M1 macrophages may derail healing and compromise organ functions.
The transcription factor IRF5 up-regulates genes associated with M1 macrophages.
METHODS: Here we used nanoparticle-delivered small interfering ribonucleic acid
(siRNA) to silence IRF5 in macrophages residing in MIs and in surgically-induced 
skin wounds in mice.
RESULTS: Infarct macrophages expressed high levels of IRF5 during the early
inflammatory wound-healing stages (day 4 after coronary ligation), whereas
expression of the transcription factor decreased during the resolution of
inflammation (day 8). Following in vitro screening, we identified an siRNA
sequence that, when delivered by nanoparticles to wound macrophages, efficiently 
suppressed expression of IRF5 in vivo. Reduction of IRF5 expression, a factor
that regulates macrophage polarization, reduced expression of inflammatory M1
macrophage markers, supported resolution of inflammation, accelerated cutaneous
and infarct healing, and attenuated development of post-MI heart failure after
coronary ligation as measured by protease targeted fluorescence molecular
tomography-computed tomography imaging and cardiac magnetic resonance imaging (p 
< 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: This work identified a new therapeutic avenue to augment resolution 
of inflammation in healing infarcts by macrophage phenotype manipulation. This
therapeutic concept may be used to attenuate post-MI remodeling and heart
failure.

Copyright © 2014 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3992176
PMID: 24361318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Apr 22;63(15):1567-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.024.
Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Could silencing IRF5 improve healing of a myocardial infarct through the
reprogramming of the macrophage population?

Hall JL(1), Wei LN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute and Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, Minnesota. Electronic address: jlhall@umn.edu. (2)Lillehei Heart
Institute and Department of Pharmacology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota.

Comment on
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014 Apr 22;63(15):1556-66.

PMID: 24361313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2014 May;34(5):354-65. doi: 10.1089/jir.2012.0105.
Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Molecular effects of autoimmune-risk promoter polymorphisms on expression, exon
choice, and translational efficiency of interferon regulatory factor 5.

Clark DN(1), Lambert JP, Till RE, Argueta LB, Greenhalgh KE, Henrie B, Bills T,
Hawkley TF, Roznik MG, Sloan JM, Mayhew V, Woodland L, Nelson EP, Tsai MH, Poole 
BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University ,
Provo, Utah.

The rs2004640 single nucleotide polymorphism and the CGGGG copy-number variant
(rs77571059) are promoter polymorphisms within interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF5). They have been implicated as susceptibility factors for several
autoimmune diseases. IRF5 uses alternative promoter splicing, where any of 4
first exons begin the mRNA. The CGGGG indel is in exon 1A's promoter; the
rs2004640 allele creates a splicing recognition site, enabling usage of exon 1B. 
This study aimed at characterizing alterations in IRF5 mRNA due to these
polymorphisms. Cells with risk polymorphisms exhibited ~2-fold higher levels of
IRF5 mRNA and protein, but demonstrated no change in mRNA stability. Quantitative
PCR demonstrated decreased usage of exons 1C and 1D in cell lines with the risk
polymorphisms. RNA folding analysis revealed a hairpin in exon 1B; mutational
analysis showed that the hairpin shape decreased translation 5-fold. Although
translation of mRNA that uses exon 1B is low due to a hairpin, increased IRF5
mRNA levels in individuals with the rs2004640 risk allele lead to higher overall 
protein expression. In addition, several new splice variants of IRF5 were
sequenced. IRF5's promoter polymorphisms alter first exon usage and increase
transcription levels. High levels of IRF5 may bias the immune system toward
autoimmunity.

PMID: 24350899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Front Immunol. 2013 Nov 7;4:360. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00360. eCollection 2013.

Four Promoters of IRF5 Respond Distinctly to Stimuli and are Affected by
Autoimmune-Risk Polymorphisms.

Clark DN(1), Read RD, Mayhew V, Petersen SC, Argueta LB, Stutz LA, Till RE,
Bergsten SM, Robinson BS, Baumann DG, Heap JC, Poole BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Biology, Brigham Young University ,
Provo, UT , USA.

INTRODUCTION: Autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus,
rheumatoid arthritis, and multiple sclerosis affect millions of people worldwide.
Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) contains polymorphisms associated with
these autoimmune diseases. Two of these functional polymorphisms are found
upstream of the IRF5 gene. rs2004640, which is a single nucleotide polymorphism
and the CGGGG insertion/deletion (indel) were studied. IRF5 uses four different
promoters for its four first exons: 1A, 1B, 1C, and 1D. Each promoter was
analyzed, including functional differences due to the autoimmune-risk
polymorphisms.
RESULTS: IRF5 promoters were analyzed using ChIP-Seq data (ENCODE database) and
the FactorBook database to define transcription factor binding sites. To verify
promoter activity, the promoters were cloned into luciferase plasmids. Each
construct exhibited luciferase activity. Exons 1A and 1D contain putative PU.1
and NFkB binding sites. Imiquimod, a Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) ligand, was used
to activate these transcription factors. IRF5 levels were doubled after imiquimod
treatment (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), with specific increases in the 1A promoter (2.2-fold,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03) and 1D promoter (2.8-fold, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.03). A putative binding site for p53, 
which affects apoptosis, was found in the promoter for exon 1B. However,
site-directed mutagenesis of the p53 site showed no effect in a reporter assay.
CONCLUSION: The IRF5 exon 1B promoter has been characterized, and the responses
of each IRF5 promoter to TLR7 stimulation have been determined. Changes in
promoter activity and gene expression are likely due to specific and distinct
transcription factors that bind to each promoter. Since high expression of IRF5
contributes to the development of autoimmune disease, understanding the source of
increased IRF5 levels is key to understanding autoimmune etiology.

PMCID: PMC3819785
PMID: 24223576  [PubMed]


123. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 7;8(10):e76777. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076777. eCollection
2013.

Two functional variants of IRF5 influence the development of macular edema in
patients with non-anterior uveitis.

Márquez A(1), Cénit MC, Cordero-Coma M, Ortego-Centeno N, Adán A, Fonollosa A,
Díaz Valle D, Pato E, Blanco R, Cañal J, Díaz-Llopis M, de Ramón E, Del Rio MJ,
García Serrano JL, Artaraz J, Martín-Villa JM, Llorenç V, Gorroño-Echebarría MB, 
Martín J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, IPBLN, CSIC, Granada,
Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Interferon (IFN) signaling plays a crucial role in autoimmunity.
Genetic variation in interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), a major regulator of 
the type I interferon induction, has been associated with risk of developing
several autoimmune diseases. In the current study we aimed to evaluate whether
three sets of correlated IRF5 genetic variants, independently associated with SLE
and with different functional roles, are involved in uveitis susceptibility and
its clinical subphenotypes.
METHODS: Three IRF5 polymorphisms, rs2004640, rs2070197 and rs10954213,
representative of each group, were genotyped using TaqMan® allelic discrimination
assays in a total of 263 non-anterior uveitis patients and 724 healthy controls
of Spanish origin.
RESULTS: A clear association between two of the three analyzed genetic variants, 
rs2004640 and rs10954213, and the absence of macular edema was observed in the
case/control analysis (P FDR =5.07E-03, OR=1.48, CI 95%=1.14-1.92 and P FDR
=3.37E-03, OR=1.54, CI 95%=1.19-2.01, respectively). Consistently, the
subphenotype analysis accordingly with the presence/absence of this clinical
condition also reached statistical significance (rs2004640: P=0.037, OR=0.69, CI 
95%=0.48-0.98; rs10954213: P=0.030, OR=0.67, CI 95%=0.47-0.96), thus suggesting
that both IRF5 genetic variants are specifically associated with the lack of
macular edema in uveitis patients.
CONCLUSION: Our results clearly showed for the first time that two functional
genetic variants of IRF5 may play a role in the development of macular edema in
non-anterior uveitis patients. Identifying genetic markers for macular edema
could lead to the possibility of developing novel treatments or preventive
therapies.

PMCID: PMC3792064
PMID: 24116155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1284-92. doi: 10.1038/ng.2792. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Variants at multiple loci implicated in both innate and adaptive immune responses
are associated with Sjögren's syndrome.

Lessard CJ(1), Li H, Adrianto I, Ice JA, Rasmussen A, Grundahl KM, Kelly JA,
Dozmorov MG, Miceli-Richard C, Bowman S, Lester S, Eriksson P, Eloranta ML, Brun 
JG, Gøransson LG, Harboe E, Guthridge JM, Kaufman KM, Kvarnström M, Jazebi H,
Cunninghame Graham DS, Grandits ME, Nazmul-Hossain AN, Patel K, Adler AJ,
Maier-Moore JS, Farris AD, Brennan MT, Lessard JA, Chodosh J, Gopalakrishnan R,
Hefner KS, Houston GD, Huang AJ, Hughes PJ, Lewis DM, Radfar L, Rohrer MD, Stone 
DU, Wren JD, Vyse TJ, Gaffney PM, James JA, Omdal R, Wahren-Herlenius M, Illei
GG, Witte T, Jonsson R, Rischmueller M, Rönnblom L, Nordmark G, Ng WF; UK Primary
Sjögren's Syndrome Registry, Mariette X, Anaya JM, Rhodus NL, Segal BM, Scofield 
RH, Montgomery CG, Harley JB, Sivils KL.

Author information: 
(1)1] Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical
Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. [2] Department of Pathology,
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

Sjögren's syndrome is a common autoimmune disease (affecting ~0.7% of European
Americans) that typically presents as keratoconjunctivitis sicca and xerostomia. 
Here we report results of a large-scale association study of Sjögren's syndrome. 
In addition to strong association within the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region
at 6p21 (Pmeta = 7.65 × 10(-114)), we establish associations with IRF5-TNPO3
(Pmeta = 2.73 × 10(-19)), STAT4 (Pmeta = 6.80 × 10(-15)), IL12A (Pmeta = 1.17 ×
10(-10)), FAM167A-BLK (Pmeta = 4.97 × 10(-10)), DDX6-CXCR5 (Pmeta = 1.10 ×
10(-8)) and TNIP1 (Pmeta = 3.30 × 10(-8)). We also observed suggestive
associations (Pmeta < 5 × 10(-5)) with variants in 29 other regions, including
TNFAIP3, PTTG1, PRDM1, DGKQ, FCGR2A, IRAK1BP1, ITSN2 and PHIP, among others.
These results highlight the importance of genes that are involved in both innate 
and adaptive immunity in Sjögren's syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3867192
PMID: 24097067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 30;8(8):e72551. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072551. eCollection
2013.

Analysis of gender differences in genetic risk: association of TNFAIP3
polymorphism with male childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus in the
Japanese population.

Kadota K(1), Mori M, Yanagimachi M, Miyamae T, Hara T, Kanetaka T, Nozawa T,
Kikuchi M, Hara R, Imagawa T, Kaneko T, Yokota S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic multisystem
autoimmune disorder influenced by genetic background and environmental factors.
Our aim here was to replicate findings of associations between 7 of the
implicated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in IRF5, BLK, STAT4, TNFAIP3,
SPP1, TNIP1 and ETS1 genes with susceptibility to childhood-onset SLE in the
Japanese population. In particular, we focused on gender differences in allelic
frequencies.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The 7 SNPs were genotyped using TaqMan assays in 
75 patients with childhood-onset SLE and in 190 healthy controls. The
relationship between the cumulative number of risk alleles and SLE manifestations
was explored in childhood-onset SLE. Logistic regression was used to test the
effect of each polymorphism on susceptibility to SLE, and Wilcoxon rank sum
testing was used for comparison of total risk alleles. Data on rs7574865 in the
STAT4 gene and rs9138 in SPP1 were replicated for associations with SLE when
comparing cases and controls (corrected P values ranging from 0.0043 to 0.027).
The rs2230926 allele of TNFAIP3 was associated with susceptibility to SLE in
males, but after Bonferroni correction there were no significant associations
with any of the other four SNPs in IRF5, BLK, TNIP1 and ETS1 genes. The
cumulative number of risk alleles was significantly increased in childhood-onset 
SLE relative to healthy controls (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0000041). Male SLE patients had a
slightly but significantly higher frequency of the TNFAIP3 (rs2230926G) risk
allele than female patients (odds ratio [OR]<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.05, 95% confidence interval
[95%CI]<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.46-11.2 P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Associations of polymorphisms in STAT4 and SPP1 with childhood-onset
SLE were confirmed in a Japanese population. Although these are preliminary
results for a limited number of cases, TNFAIP3 rs2230926G may be an important
predictor of disease onset in males. We also replicated findings that the
cumulative number of risk alleles was significantly increased in childhood-onset 
SLE.

PMCID: PMC3758304
PMID: 24023622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Lupus. 2013 Nov;22(13):1336-40. doi: 10.1177/0961203313504479. Epub 2013 Sep 6.

A redundant epistatic interaction between IRF5 and STAT4 of the type I interferon
pathway in susceptibility to lupus and rheumatoid arthritis.

Kim K(1), Cho SK, Han TU, Kim JH, Kang SJ, Kang C, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Two transcription factors in the type I interferon pathway, IRF5 and
STAT4, have been genetically associated with susceptibility to both systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA). This study aimed to
determine whether these two genes interact with each other to affect the disease 
susceptibilities.
METHODS: The genetic interactions between IRF5 and STAT4 polymorphisms in SLE and
RA susceptibility were examined using the epistasis options in PLINK software.
This study analyzes the genetic data from 2558 unrelated Korean participants
including 589 SLE patients, 987 RA patients, and 982 controls.
RESULTS: All 12 polymorphisms were individually associated with SLE
susceptibility (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.49<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8) to 0.00360). Among the three SLE-associated
polymorphisms of IRF5, rs77571059, alternatively called CGGGG(3-4) indel,
exhibited the lowest p value (4.60<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)) and accounted for the observed
associations of the other two single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Among the
nine SLE-associated SNPs of STAT4, rs16833215 exhibited the lowest p value
(2.49<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)) and accounted for all the other associations. These two
polymorphisms, rs77571059 of IRF5 and rs16833215 of STAT4, interacted with each
other for SLE susceptibility in a redundant manner (ORinteraction<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.77, P
epistasis<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.040). Furthermore, these two polymorphisms, which had been
individually associated with RA susceptibility, also interacted for RA
susceptibility in the same manner (ORinteraction<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.75, P epistasis<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014).
CONCLUSIONS: A redundant interaction between IRF5 and STAT4 polymorphisms was
found in susceptibility to the type I interferon pathway-associated rheumatic
autoimmune diseases, SLE and RA, calling for further studies on confirmation of
these findings.

PMID: 24014567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2013 Oct;24(5):371-80. doi: 10.1097/MOL.0b013e328363d298.

Myeloid cells in atherosclerosis: a delicate balance of anti-inflammatory and
proinflammatory mechanisms.

Koltsova EK(1), Hedrick CC, Ley K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Inflammation Biology, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and
Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. ekoltsova@gmail.com

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Atherosclerosis is chronic disease, whose progression is
orchestrated by the balance between proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory
mechanisms. Various myeloid cells, including monocytes, macrophages, dendritic
cells and neutrophils can be found in normal and atherosclerotic aortas, in which
they regulate inflammation and progression of atherosclerosis. The lineage
relationship between blood monocyte subsets and the various phenotypes and
functions of myeloid cells in diseased aortas is under active investigation.
RECENT FINDINGS: Various subsets of myeloid cells play diverse roles in
atherosclerosis. This review discusses new findings in phenotypic and functional 
characterization of different subsets of macrophages, in part determined by the
transcription factors IRF5 and Trib1, and dendritic cells, characterized by the
transcription factor Zbtb46, in atherosclerosis.
SUMMARY: Improved understanding proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory mechanisms 
of macrophages and dendritic cell functions is needed for better preventive and
therapeutic measures in atherosclerosis.

PMID: 24005215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 21;8(8):e71815. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071815. eCollection
2013.

Cyclosporin a inhibits rotavirus replication and restores interferon-beta
signaling pathway in vitro and in vivo.

Shen Z(1), He H, Wu Y, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, PLA, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, PR
China.

Rotavirus (RV) is the most common cause of severe diarrhea among infants and
young children. Currently, there is no specific drug available against rotavirus,
largely due to the lack of an ideal target molecule which has hampered drug
development. Our previous studies have revealed that cyclosporin A (CsA) might be
potentially useful as an anti-RV drug. We therefore used both cellular and mouse 
models to study the immunological safety and effectiveness of CsA as an anti-RV
drug. We found that CsA treatment of HT-29 cells before, during, and after viral 
infection efficiently inhibited Wa strain RV replication and restored IFN-ß
expression in a HT-29 cell line model. Exploring the underlying mechanisms showed
that CsA promoted Interferon Regulatory Factor-5 (IRF-5) expression (a key
positive regulator of the type I IFN signaling pathway), but not IRF-1, IRF-3, or
IRF-7. Additionally, CsA inhibited SOCS-1 expression (the key negative regulator 
of IFN-a/ß), but not SOCS-2 or SOCS-3. The antiviral effect of CsA was confirmed 
in an RV-infected neonatal mouse model by evaluation of antigen clearance and
assessment of changes in intestinal tissue pathology. Also, no differences in T
cell frequency or proliferation between the CsA- and vehicle-treated groups were 
observed. Thus, both our in vitro and in vivo findings suggest that CsA, through 
modulating the expression of key regulators in IFN signaling pathway, promote
type I IFN-based intracellular innate immunity in RV host cells. These findings
suggest that CsA may be a useful candidate to develop a new anti-RV strategy,
although further evaluation and characterization of CsA on RV-induced diarrhea
are warranted.

PMCID: PMC3749198
PMID: 23990993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Genes Immun. 2013 Dec;14(8):527-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2013.45. Epub 2013 Aug 29.

Association of IRF5 polymorphism with MPO-ANCA-positive vasculitis in a Japanese 
population.

Kawasaki A(1), Inoue N, Ajimi C, Sada KE, Kobayashi S, Yamada H, Furukawa H,
Sumida T, Tohma S, Miyasaka N, Matsuo S, Ozaki S, Hashimoto H, Makino H, Harigai 
M, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan [2] School of Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) are shared susceptibility genes for various autoimmune
diseases. In this study, we investigated whether these genes also contribute to
susceptibility to anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated
vasculitis (AAV) in a Japanese population. A case-control study was carried out
on IRF5 rs10954213 and STAT4 rs7574865 in 232 Japanese myeloperoxidase
(MPO)-ANCA-positive AAV patients, including 177 microscopic polyangiitis and 710 
healthy controls. IRF5 rs10954213G was significantly increased in
MPO-ANCA-positive AAV (additive model, P=0.023, odds ratio=1.27, 95% confidence
interval=1.03-1.57). The risk allele was previously shown to be associated with
lower mRNA level of IRF5. On the other hand, significant association of STAT4
rs7574865T with AAV was not detected. These observations suggested that IRF5 may 
contribute to susceptibility to MPO-ANCA-positive AAV in a Japanese population.

PMID: 23985571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Gastroenterology. 2013 Dec;145(6):1414-23.e1. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.08.037. 
Epub 2013 Aug 21.

Hepatitis C virus replication in mouse cells is restricted by IFN-dependent and
-independent mechanisms.

Nandakumar R(1), Finsterbusch K, Lipps C, Neumann B, Grashoff M, Nair S,
Hochnadel I, Lienenklaus S, Wappler I, Steinmann E, Hauser H, Pietschmann T,
Kröger A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Innate Immunity and Infection, Helmholtz Centre for Infection
Research, Braunschweig, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Current treatment strategies for hepatitis C virus (HCV)
infection include pegylated interferon (IFN)-alfa and ribavirin. Approximately
50% of patients control HCV infection after treatment, but the broad range of
patients' outcomes and responses to treatment, among all genotypes, indicates a
role for host factors. Although the IFN system is important in limiting HCV
replication, the virus has evolved mechanisms to circumvent the IFN response.
However, direct, IFN-independent antiviral processes also might help control HCV 
replication. We examined the role of IFN-independent responses against HCV
replication.
METHODS: We analyzed replication of the subgenomic JFH1 replicon in embryonic
fibroblasts and primary hepatocytes from mice with disruptions in genes encoding 
factors in the IFN-dependent and alternative antiviral pathways (signal
transducers and activators of transcription 1 [STAT1], protein kinase R,
interferon regulatory factors (IRF) IRF-1, IRF-3, IRF-5, IRF-7, mitochondrial
antiviral signaling molecule [MAVS], and IFN receptor [IFNAR]). We also assessed 
the effects of expression of these factors by mouse primary hepatocytes on HCV
replication.
RESULTS: In addition to IRF-3- and IFN-mediated antiviral responses,
IFN-independent, but IRF-1- and IRF-5-dependent mechanisms, restrict HCV
replication in mouse embryonic fibroblasts. In primary hepatocytes these
IFN-independent require MAVS and IRF-1.
CONCLUSIONS: HCV replication is limited by interferon-mediated pathways as well
pathways that are independent of type I IFNs. IRF1 and IRF5 control
IFN-independent signaling events that lead to antiviral responses. We observed
antiviral roles of IRF1 and IRF5 that were IFN-independent and cell-type
specific. These mechanisms are important in controlling viruses that interfere
with the IFN signaling because cells retain the ability to induce functional but 
local antiviral states through expression of interferon-stimulated genes.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23973921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2013 Oct;48(10):1145-51. doi:
10.3109/00365521.2013.828775. Epub 2013 Aug 26.

IRF5, but not TLR4, DEFB1, or VDR, is associated with the risk of ulcerative
colitis in a Han Chinese population.

Li P(1), Lv H, Yang H, Qian JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Peking 
Union Medical College, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences , Beijing , China.

OBJECTIVE. IRF5, TLR4, DEFB1, and VDR genetic variations have been associated
with ulcerative colitis (UC) in several European patient cohorts. As distinct
genetic backgrounds may play a role in different ethnicities, we evaluated the
effects of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these genes and their
interactions in UC patients of Han Chinese descent. MATERIAL AND METHODS. DNA
samples from 300 UC patients and 302 healthy control subjects from Peking Union
Medical College Hospital were genotyped for 14 tag SNPs, which were selected
based on haplotype analysis of IRF5, TLR4, DEFB1, and VDR. Multidimensionality
reductions were used to explore gene-gene interactions. RESULTS. The only
observed association with UC was for IRF5. On an allelic level, SNP rs3807306 was
associated with UC risk (p = 6.7 × 10(-3)). On a genotypic level, the CC genotype
of SNP rs3807306 (p = 0.03) was associated with protection from UC, and the AA
genotype of SNP rs4728142 (p = 7.6 × 10(-3)) was associated with a risk of UC. In
the haplotype analysis, GGATT was highly correlated with UC risk (p-Value = 2.0 ×
10(-4)). No significant multilocus interactions were detected among these four
genes. CONCLUSIONS. Our study confirmed the association of IRF5 with UC in Han
Chinese patients. Han Chinese UC patients share part of their genetic
susceptibility with Caucasian patients.

PMID: 23971939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Arthritis Res Ther. 2013 Aug 13;15(4):R82. doi: 10.1186/ar4262.

Identification of three new cis-regulatory IRF5 polymorphisms: in vitro studies.

Alonso-Perez E, Fernandez-Poceiro R, Lalonde E, Kwan T, Calaza M, Gomez-Reino JJ,
Majewski J, Gonzalez A.

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene are
associated with susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid
arthritis and other diseases through independent risk and protective haplotypes. 
Several functional polymorphisms are already known, but they do not account for
the protective haplotypes that are tagged by the minor allele of rs729302.
METHODS: Polymorphisms in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with rs729302 or
particularly associated with IRF5 expression were selected for functional
screening, which involved electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSAs) and
reporter gene assays.
RESULTS: A total of 54 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the 5' region of IRF5
were genotyped. Twenty-four of them were selected for functional screening
because of their high LD with rs729302 or protective haplotypes. In addition, two
polymorphisms were selected for their prominent association with IRF5 expression.
Seven of these twenty-six polymorphisms showed reproducible allele differences in
EMSA. The seven were subsequently analyzed in gene reporter assays, and three of 
them showed significant differences between their two alleles: rs729302,
rs13245639 and rs11269962. Haplotypes including the cis-regulatory polymorphisms 
correlated very well with IRF5 mRNA expression in an analysis based on previous
data.
CONCLUSION: We have found that three polymorphisms in LD with the protective
haplotypes of IRF5 have differential allele effects in EMSA and in reporter gene 
assays. Identification of these cis-regulatory polymorphisms will allow more
accurate analysis of transcriptional regulation of IRF5 expression, more powerful
genetic association studies and deeper insight into the role of IRF5 in disease
susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3978921
PMID: 23941291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Oncogene. 2014 Jun 19;33(25):3288-97. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.295. Epub 2013 Aug 5.

Deletion of Irf5 protects hematopoietic stem cells from DNA damage-induced
apoptosis and suppresses <U+03B3>-irradiation-induced thymic lymphomagenesis.

Bi X(1), Feng D(1), Korczeniewska J(1), Alper N(2), Hu G(2), Barnes BJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical
School, UMDNJ, Newark, NJ, USA [2] New Jersey Medical School-University Hospital 
Cancer Center, UMDNJ, Newark, NJ, USA. (2)New Jersey Medical School-University
Hospital Cancer Center, UMDNJ, Newark, NJ, USA.

Repeated low-dose <U+03B3>-irradiation (IR) induces thymic lymphoma in mice because of
oncogenic mutations propagating from a primitive hematopoietic stem/progenitor
cell (HSC) in the bone marrow. It is well known that IR-induced thymic
lymphomagenesis is markedly enhanced by p53 deficiency, yet data also indicate
that p53-dependent apoptosis can actively drive tumor formation in this model.
The latter was recently expounded on by findings from Puma-deficient mice,
indicating that loss of this proapoptotic p53 target gene results in protection
from IR-induced lymphomagenesis rather than enhanced susceptibility to. Similar
to Puma, the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (Irf5) has been 
reported as a p53 target gene and is required for DNA damage-induced apoptosis.
To date, no studies have been performed to elucidate the in vivo role of IRF5 in 
tumorigenesis. Given its essential role in DNA damage-induced apoptosis, we
explored the tumor suppressor function of IRF5 in IR-induced thymic
lymphomagenesis. Somewhat surprisingly, we found that thymic lymphoma development
was significantly suppressed in Irf5(-/-) mice as compared with wild-type
littermates. Suppression was due, in part, to reduced thymocyte and HSC
apoptosis, resulting in reduced compensatory proliferation, and reduced
replication stress-associated DNA damage. The observed effects were independent
of p53 or Puma as these proteins were upregulated in Irf5(-/-) mice in response
to IR. This study demonstrates an important new role for IRF5 in maintaining HSC 
homeostasis after IR and supports the non-redundant functions of IRF5, p53 and
PUMA in DNA damage-induced lymphomagenesis. We propose that IRF5 may be an
attractive target for developing therapeutic agents to ameliorate
radiation-induced bone marrow injury.

PMID: 23912454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2013 Jul 24;15:e6. doi: 10.1017/erm.2013.7.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 and autoimmune lupus.

Xu WD(1), Pan HF, Xu Y, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui, 230032, PR China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a severe multi-system autoimmune disease,
whereas interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 5 belongs to the family of
transcription factors that modulate immune system activities. Recently, many
lines of investigations suggested that IRF5 gene polymorphisms are closely
associated with the disease onset of SLE. Indeed, expressed in B cells, dendritic
cells (DCs), monocytes and macrophages, IRF5 could significantly affect these
immune cells participating in the pathogenesis of SLE, and numerous studies
implied that this transcription factor is mechanistically linked to the disease
progression. Here, we comprehensively review the updated evidence indicating the 
roles of IRF5 in autoimmune lupus. Hopefully, the information obtained will lead 
to a better understanding of the pathogenesis and development of novel
therapeutic strategies for the systemic autoimmune disease.

PMID: 23883595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2013 Sep 6;288(36):25792-803. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479584. Epub
2013 Jul 22.

Immobilized heavy chain-hyaluronic acid polarizes lipopolysaccharide-activated
macrophages toward M2 phenotype.

He H(1), Zhang S, Tighe S, Son J, Tseng SC.

Author information: 
(1)TissueTech, Inc., Miami, Florida 33173, USA.

Despite the known anti-inflammatory effect of amniotic membrane, its action
mechanism remains largely unknown. HC-HA complex (HC-HA) purified from human
amniotic membrane consists of high molecular weight hyaluronic acid (HA)
covalently linked to the heavy chain (HC) 1 of inter-a-trypsin inhibitor. In this
study, we show that soluble HC-HA also contained pentraxin 3 and induced the
apoptosis of both formyl-Met-Leu-Phe or LPS-activated neutrophils and
LPS-activated macrophages while not affecting the resting cells. This enhanced
apoptosis was caused by the inhibition of cell adhesion, spreading, and
proliferation caused by HC-HA binding of LPS-activated macrophages and preventing
adhesion to the plastic surface. Preferentially, soluble HC-HA promoted
phagocytosis of apoptotic neutrophils in resting macrophages, whereas immobilized
HC-HA promoted phagocytosis in LPS-activated macrophages. Upon concomitant LPS
stimulation, immobilized HC-HA but not HA polarized macrophages toward the M2
phenotype by down-regulating IRF5 protein and preventing its nuclear localization
and by down-regulating IL-12, TNF-a, and NO synthase 2. Additionally, IL-10,
TGF-ß1, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>, LIGHT (TNF superfamily 14),
and sphingosine kinase-1 were up-regulated, and such M2 polarization was
dependent on TLR ligation. Collectively, these data suggest that HC-HA is a
unique matrix component different from HA and uses multiple mechanisms to
suppress M1 while promoting M2 phenotype. This anti-inflammatory action of HC-HA 
is highly desirable to promote wound healing in diseases heightened by
unsuccessful transition from M1 to M2 phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC3764786
PMID: 23878196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Gene. 2013 Sep 25;527(2):435-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.06.074. Epub 2013 Jul
13.

Polymorphisms in STK17A gene are associated with systemic lupus erythematosus and
its clinical manifestations.

da Silva Fonseca AM(1), de Azevedo Silva J, Pancotto JA, Donadi EA, Segat L,
Crovella S, Sandrin-Garcia P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunopathology Keizo Asami (LIKA), Federal University of
Pernambuco, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disorder with several
clinical manifestations. SLE etiology has a strong genetic component, which plays
a key role in disease's predisposition, as well as participation of environmental
factors, such and UV light exposure. In this regard, we investigated whether
polymorphisms in STK17A, a DNA repair related gene, encoding for
serine/threonine-protein kinase 17A, are associated with SLE susceptibility. A
total of 143 SLE patients and 177 healthy controls from Southern Brazil were
genotyped for five STK17A TagSNPs. Our results indicated association of rs7805969
SNP (A and G/A genotype, OR=1.40 and OR=1.73, respectively) with SLE
predisposition and the following clinical manifestations: arthritis, cutaneous
and immunological alterations. When analyzing haplotypes distribution, we found
association between TGGTC, TAGTC and AAGAT haplotypes and risk to develop SLE.
When considering clinical manifestations, the haplotypes TGGTT and TAGTC were
associated with protection against cutaneous alterations and the haplotype TAGTC 
to hematological alterations. We also observed association between SLE clinical
manifestations and ethnicity, with the European-derived patients being more
susceptible to cutaneous and hematological alterations.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23860322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jul;43(7):1693-7. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343739.

IRF5, IRF8, and IRF7 in human pDCs - the good, the bad, and the insignificant?

Pelka K(1), Latz E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Innate Immunity, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jul;43(7):1896-906.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRFs) are transcription factors with
versatile functions in the regulation of innate and adaptive immune responses. In
the current issue of the European Journal of Immunology, Steinhagen et al. [Eur. 
J. Immunol. 2013. 43: 1896-1906] investigate the regulation of IFN-ß and IL-6
induction in human plasmacytoid DCs stimulated with CpG DNA. Using RNA
interference studies, the authors identify critical roles for IRF5 and IRF8 as
positive and negative regulators, respectively. In contrast, knockdown of IRF7
had no significant effect on IFN-ß or IL-6 gene induction. In this Commentary,
these findings are discussed in the context of the published literature and
recent data regarding IRF5 and IRF8 as susceptibility genes for autoimmunity.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23828296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(17):9813-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01146-13. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Rotavirus NSP1 mediates degradation of interferon regulatory factors through
targeting of the dimerization domain.

Arnold MM(1), Barro M, Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Rotavirus Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP1 can inhibit expression of interferon (IFN)
and IFN-stimulated gene products by inducing proteasome-mediated degradation of
IFN-regulatory factors (IRFs), including IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7. All IRF proteins
share an N-terminal DNA-binding domain (DBD), and IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 contain a 
similar C-proximal IRF association domain (IAD) that mediates IRF dimerization.
An autoinhibitory domain (ID) at the extreme C terminus interacts with the IAD,
burying residues necessary for IRF dimerization. Phosphorylation of
serine/threonine residues in the ID induces charge repulsions that unmask the
IAD, enabling IRF dimerization and subsequent nuclear translocation. To define
the region of IRF proteins targeted for degradation by NSP1, we generated IRF3
and IRF7 truncation mutants and transiently expressed each with simian SA11-4F
NSP1. These assays indicated that the IAD represented a necessary and sufficient 
target for degradation. Because NSP1 did not mediate degradation of truncated
forms of the IAD, NSP1 likely requires a structurally intact IAD for recognition 
and targeting of IRF proteins. IRF9, which contains an IAD-like region that
directs interactions with signal inducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins, was also targeted for degradation by NSP1, while IRF1, which lacks an
IAD, was not. Analysis of mutant forms of IRF3 unable to undergo dimerization or 
that were constitutively dimeric showed that both were targeted for degradation
by NSP1. These results indicate that SA11-4F NSP1 can induce degradation of
inactive and activated forms of IAD-containing IRF proteins (IRF3 to IRF9),
allowing a multipronged attack on IFN-based pathways that promote antiviral
innate and adaptive immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3754143
PMID: 23824805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Oct;65(10):2594-605. doi: 10.1002/art.38057.

Death receptor 5-targeted depletion of interleukin-23-producing macrophages,
Th17, and Th1/17 associated with defective tyrosine phosphatase in mice and
patients with rheumatoid arthritis.

Li J(1), Yang P, Wu Q, Li H, Ding Y, Hsu HC, Spalding DM, Mountz JD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Alabama at, Birmingham.

OBJECTIVE: Bidirectional interactions between granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor-positive (GM-CSF+) T cells and interferon regulatory
factor 5-positive (IRF-5+) macrophages play a major role in autoimmunity. In the 
absence of SH2 domain-containing phosphatase 1 (SHP-1), GM-CSF-stimulated cells
are resistant to death receptor (DR)-mediated apoptosis. The objective of this
study was to determine whether TRA-8, an anti-DR5 agonistic antibody, can
eliminate inflammatory macrophages and CD4 T cells in the SHP-1-deficient
condition.
METHODS: Ubiquitous Cre (Ubc.Cre) human/mouse-chimeric DR5-transgenic mice were
crossed with viable SHP-1-defective motheaten (mev/mev) mice. TRA-8 was
administered weekly for up to 4 weeks. The clinical scores, histopathologic
severity, and macrophage and CD4 T cell phenotypes were evaluated. The role of
TRA-8 in depleting inflammatory macrophages and CD4 T cells was also evaluated,
using synovial fluid obtained from patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
RESULTS: The levels of inflammatory macrophages (interleukin-23-positive [IL-23+]
IRF-5+) and CD4 T cells (IL-17+ GM-CSF+) were elevated in mev/mev mice. In
DR5-transgenic mev/mev mice, DR5 expression was up-regulated in these 2 cell
populations. TRA-8 treatment depleted these cell populations and resulted in a
significant reduction in inflammation and in the titers of autoantibodies. In
synovial cells from patients with RA, the expression of IRF5 and DR5 was
negatively correlated with the expression of PTPN6. TRA-8, but not TRAIL,
suppressed RA inflammatory macrophages and Th17 cells under conditions in which
the expression of SHP-1 is low.
CONCLUSION: In contrast to TRAIL, which lacks the capability to counteract the
survival signal in the absence of SHP-1, TRA-8 eliminated both IRF-5+ IL-23+ M1
macrophages and pathogenic GM-CSF+ IL-17+ CD4 T cells in a SHP-1-independent
manner. The results of the current study suggest that TRA-8 can deplete
inflammatory cell populations that result from a hyperactive GM-CSF/IRF-5 axis.

Published 2013. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3993980
PMID: 23818173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Rheumatol Int. 2013 Nov;33(11):2757-61. doi: 10.1007/s00296-013-2806-0. Epub 2013
Jun 26.

Association of the IRF5 rs2004640 polymorphism with rheumatoid arthritis: a
meta-analysis.

Jia X(1), Hu M, Lin Q, Ren H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Harbin Medical University, 157 Baojian Road, Harbin,
150081, China, jiaxiuzhi@126.com.

Several molecular epidemiological studies have been conducted in recent years to 
evaluate a possible association between the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5)
rs2004640 polymorphism and rheumatoid arthritis risk in diverse populations.
However, the results remain conflicting rather than conclusive. Our aim was to
assess associations of IRF5 gene polymorphisms with rheumatoid arthritis risk.
Meta-analysis was performed on six published case-control studies (from eight
countries) that included 4,818 cases of rheumatoid arthritis and 4,316 controls. 
The rs2004640-T allele was associated with a significantly increased risk of
rheumatoid arthritis when the dominant genetic model was applied (T/T + T/G
versus G/G: P = 0.003, OR = 1.14, 95% CI 1.05-1.25). Upon stratified analysis by 
ethnicity, the rs2004640 polymorphism was associated with an increased rheumatoid
arthritis risk in Caucasians when the homozygotic contrast model was employed(T/T
versus G/G: P = 0.03, OR = 1.25, 95% CI 1.02-1.53) and this was also the case
when the dominant genetic model was used (T/T + T/G versus G/G: P = 0.04, OR =
1.20, 95% CI 1.01-1.42), whereas, in Asian populations, only the dominant genetic
model was associated with an increased rheumatoid arthritis risk (T/T + T/G
versus G/G: P = 0.02, OR = 1.14, 95% CI 1.02-1.26). The results suggest that the 
IRF5 rs2004640 polymorphism is associated with rheumatoid arthritis especially
when the dominant genetic model is applied.

PMID: 23801380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Immunity. 2013 Jun 27;38(6):1176-86. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.05.010. Epub 2013
Jun 13.

Interferon-ß production via Dectin-1-Syk-IRF5 signaling in dendritic cells is
crucial for immunity to C. albicans.

del Fresno C(1), Soulat D, Roth S, Blazek K, Udalova I, Sancho D, Ruland J,
Ardavín C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología y Oncología, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología/CSIC, C/ Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Type I interferon (IFN) is crucial during infection through its antiviral
properties and by coordinating the immunocompetent cells involved in antiviral or
antibacterial immunity. Type I IFN (IFN-a and IFN-ß) is produced after virus or
bacteria recognition by cytosolic receptors or membrane-bound TLR receptors
following the activation of the transcription factors IRF3 or IRF7. IFN-ß
production after fungal infection was recently reported, although the underlying 
mechanism remains controversial. Here we describe that IFN-ß production by
dendritic cells (DCs) induced by Candida albicans is largely dependent on
Dectin-1- and Dectin-2-mediated signaling. Dectin-1-induced IFN-ß production
required the tyrosine kinase Syk and the transcription factor IRF5. Type I IFN
receptor-deficient mice had a lower survival after C. albicans infection,
paralleled by defective renal neutrophil infiltration. IFN-ß production by renal 
infiltrating leukocytes was severely reduced in C. albicans-infected mice with
Syk-deficient DCs. These data indicate that Dectin-induced IFN-ß production by
renal DCs is crucial for defense against C. albicans infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23770228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Aug 1;19(15):4249-61. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3666.
Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Cyclophosphamide induces a type I interferon-associated sterile inflammatory
response signature in cancer patients' blood cells: implications for cancer
chemoimmunotherapy.

Moschella F(1), Torelli GF, Valentini M, Urbani F, Buccione C, Petrucci MT,
Natalino F, Belardelli F, Foà R, Proietti E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore
di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, Rome 00161, Italy. federica.moschella@iss.it

PURPOSE: Certain chemotherapeutics, particularly cyclophosphamide, can enhance
the antitumor efficacy of immunotherapy. A better understanding of the cellular
and molecular basis of cyclophosphamide-mediated immunomodulation is needed to
improve the efficacy of chemoimmunotherapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Transcript profiling and flow cytometry were used to explore
cyclophosphamide-induced immunoadjuvanticity in patients with hematologic
malignancies.
RESULTS: A single high-dose treatment rapidly (1-2 days) induced peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PBMC) transcriptional modulation, leading to reduction of
cell-cycle and biosynthetic/metabolic processes and augmentation of DNA damage
and cell death pathways (p53 signaling pathway), death-related scavenger
receptors, antigen processing/presentation mediators, T-cell activation markers
and, noticeably, a type I IFN (IFN-I) signature (OAS1, CXCL10, BAFF, IFITM2,
IFI6, IRF5, IRF7, STAT2, UBE2L6, UNC93B1, ISG20L1, TYK2). Moreover, IFN-I-induced
proinflammatory mediators (CXCL10, CCL2, IL-8, and BAFF) were increased in
patients' plasma. Accordingly, cyclophosphamide induced the expansion/activation 
of CD14(+)CD16(+) monocytes, of HLA-DR(+), IL-8RA(+), and MARCO(+)
monocytes/dendritic cells, and of CD69(+), OX40(+), and IL-8RA(+) lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, these data identify the cyclophosphamide-induced
immunomodulatory factors in humans and indicate that preconditioning chemotherapy
may stimulate immunity as a consequence of danger perception associated with
blood cell death, through p53 and IFN-I-related mechanisms.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23759676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Oct;41(2):230-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.05.019. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Expressions of transcription factors in goldfish (Carassius auratus L.)
macrophages and their progenitors.

Katzenback BA(1), Foroutanpay BV, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The development of macrophages is a highly regulated process requiring
coordination amongst transcription factors. The presence/absence, relative
levels, antagonism, or synergy of all transcription factors involved is critical 
to directing lineage cell fate and differentiation. While relative levels of many
key myeloid transcription factors have been determined in mammalian macrophage
differentiation, a similar set of studies have yet to be conducted in a teleost
system. In this study, we report on the mRNA levels of transcription factors
(cebpa, cjun, cmyb, egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1) 
in sorted goldfish progenitor cells, monocytes, and macrophages from primary
kidney macrophage cultures. The mRNA levels of runx1 and pu.1 were significantly 
higher, gata3 and pax5 mRNA levels were lower, in monocytes compared to
progenitors, and the mRNA levels of cjun, egr1, gata2, gata3, mafb and pax5 were 
significantly decreased in macrophages compared to progenitor cells. The relative
mRNA levels of the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors, 
irf1, irf2, irf5, irf7, irf8 and irf9 in sorted progenitors, monocytes and
macrophages were also measured. In contrast to other irf family transcription
factors examined, irf8 mRNA levels were increased in monocytes compared to
progenitors by greater than three-fold, suggesting that irf8 is important for
monopoiesis. Lastly, we show the differential regulation of myeloid transcription
factor mRNA levels in sorted progenitor cells from 1, 2, or 3-day old cultures in
response to the recombinant goldfish growth factors, rgCSF-1 and rgKITLA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23748037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Ann Rheum Dis. 2014 Jun;73(6):1240-5. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-202675. Epub 
2013 Jun 5.

Ethnic specificity of lupus-associated loci identified in a genome-wide
association study in Korean women.

Lee HS(1), Kim T, Bang SY, Na YJ, Kim I, Kim K, Kim JH, Chung YJ, Shin HD, Kang
YM, Shim SC, Suh CH, Park YB, Kim JS, Kang C, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, , Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: To identify novel genetic candidates for systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) in the Korean population, and to validate the risk loci for SLE identified 
in previous genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
METHODS: We performed a GWAS in 400 Korean female SLE patients and 445 controls. 
Selected single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were then replicated in an
independent cohort of 385 SLE patients and 583 controls (replication cohort 1),
and in a further 811 SLE patients and 1502 controls (replication cohort 2).
RESULTS: In the GWAS phase, rs9275428 located near HLA-DQB1 showed the strongest 
association with SLE (OR 0.50, false discovery rate (FDR) p=3.07×10(-6)).
Although no loci reached genome-wide significance outside major
histocompatibility complex (MHC), C8orf13-BLK, STAT4, CSMD1, DIAPH3, GLDC and
TNFSF4 showed FDR p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Our results suggest that STAT4, BLK, IRF5,
PTTG1-miR-146a, UBE2L3 and TNFAIP3 are shared susceptibility loci among
Caucasians and Asians, while ETS1, IKZF1, SLC15A4 are likely to be Asian-specific
loci. In a combined analysis of 1596 SLE patients and 2540 controls for selected 
22 candidate SNP, STAT4 and BLK as positive controls showed a strong association 
with SLE (FDR p=9.85×10(-13) and 2.28×10(-8), respectively). Of these, 16
candidates (PEX5L, TRAJ50, MYO18B, SOS1, ARHGAP26, SMURF1, CADPS, HAND1, FAM78B, 
DIAPH3, TBL1XR1, CSMD1, ZBTB20, C3orf21, HIPK1 and AP001042.1) showed only
nominal significance (7.05×10(-4)=FDR p=4.38×10(-2)).
CONCLUSIONS: There are similarities and differences in genetic susceptibility for
SLE between Caucasian and Asian ethnic groups. Although 16 putative novel loci
for SLE have been suggested in the Korean population, further research on a
larger sample is required to discriminate truth from error.

PMID: 23740238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Neuroimmunol. 2013 Aug 15;261(1-2):92-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2013.04.022.
Epub 2013 May 28.

The influence of non-HLA gene polymorphisms and interactions on disease risk in a
Western Australian multiple sclerosis cohort.

Qiu W(1), Pham K, James I, Nolan D, Castley A, Christiansen FT, Czarniak P, Luo
Y, Wu J, Garlepp M, Wilton S, Carroll WM, Mastaglia FL, Kermode AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

Non-Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) genes have concomitant, although modest,
effects on multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility; however findings have varied
in different populations. Here we present the results of an association study of 
16 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 10 non-HLA genes (IL7R, IL2RA,
CLEC-16A, TYK2, CD58, IRF5, STAT3, CTLA-4, APOE, ICAM-1) in a Western Australian 
cohort of 350 MS patients and 498 population control subjects. Our results
indicate that in this population, SNPs in IL7R, TYK2, IRF5 and APOE have
modifying effects on MS susceptibility. We also found evidence of interactive
protective effects between polymorphisms in the IL7R/CD58, CLEC-16A/CTLA-4, and
TYK2/IRF5 genes, which in some instances are restricted within HLA- or
gender-defined groups.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23726763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Zhonghua Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Jan;48(1):22-5.

[Analysis of association between the IRF5 gene single nucleotide polymorphism and
allergic rhinitis].

[Article in Chinese]

Feng HJ(1), Li WX, Bai SJ, Wang DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, People's Hospital of Shanghai Putuo
District, Shanghai 200060, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the possible association between interferon regulatory factor
5 (IRF5) gene polymorphism and allergic rhinitis (AR).
METHODS: Six independent single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP, rs729302,
rs4728142, rs3807306, rs2070197, rs11770589, rs2280714) were analyzed. The
genotype and allele frequencies were detected in 110 AR patients and 101 healthy 
controls in Singapore Chinese population by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and
restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP).
RESULTS: Rs729302 was rejected as it was not polymorphic. For others SNP, no
statistically significant difference was detected in genotype between AR and
healthy control group (<U+03C7>(2) value were 0.21, 5.02, 0.01, 2.91, 0.37, all P >
0.05). No statistically significant difference was detected in allele frequencies
between AR and healthy control group (<U+03C7>(2) value were 0.00, 2.78, 0.01, 2.31,
0.00, all P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: No association is observed between IRF5 and AR in Singapore Chinese
population.

PMID: 23656811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jul;43(7):1896-906. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242792. Epub 2013 May
28.

IRF-5 and NF-<U+03BA>B p50 co-regulate IFN-ß and IL-6 expression in TLR9-stimulated
human plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Steinhagen F(1), McFarland AP, Rodriguez LG, Tewary P, Jarret A, Savan R, Klinman
DM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Inflammation Program, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer
Research, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Comment in
    Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jul;43(7):1693-7.

Synthetic oligonucleotides (ODN) expressing CpG motifs mimic the ability of
bacterial DNA to trigger the innate immune system via TLR9. Plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs) make a critical contribution to the ensuing immune
response. This work examines the induction of antiviral (IFN-ß) and
pro-inflammatory (IL-6) cytokines by CpG-stimulated human pDCs and the human
CAL-1 pDC cell line. Results show that interferon regulatory factor-5 (IRF-5) and
NF-<U+03BA>B p50 are key co-regulators of IFN-ß and IL-6 expression following
TLR9-mediated activation of human pDCs. The nuclear accumulation of IRF-1 was
also observed, but this was a late event that was dependant on type 1 IFN and
unrelated to the initiation of gene expression. IRF-8 was identified as a novel
negative regulator of gene activation in CpG-stimulated pDCs. As variants of
IRF-5 and IRF-8 were recently found to correlate with susceptibility to certain
autoimmune diseases, these findings are relevant to our understanding of the
pharmacologic effects of "K" ODN and the role of TLR9 ligation under physiologic,
pathologic, and therapeutic conditions.

Published 2013. This is a US Government work and is in the public domain in the
USA. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23616277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Gastroenterology. 2013 Jun;144(7):1357-74. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.03.053.
Epub 2013 Apr 10.

The genetics of complex cholestatic disorders.

Hirschfield GM(1), Chapman RW, Karlsen TH, Lammert F, Lazaridis KN, Mason AL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Liver Research, National Institute for Health Research Biomedical
Research Unit, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, England.

Cholestatic liver diseases are caused by a range of hepatobiliary insults and
involve complex interactions among environmental and genetic factors. Little is
known about the pathogenic mechanisms of specific cholestatic diseases, which has
limited our ability to manage patients with these disorders. However, recent
genome-wide studies have provided insight into the pathogenesis of gallstones,
primary biliary cirrhosis, and primary sclerosing cholangitis. A lithogenic
variant in the gene that encodes the hepatobiliary transporter ABCG8 has been
identified as a risk factor for gallstone disease; this variant has been
associated with altered cholesterol excretion and metabolism. Other variants of
genes encoding transporters that affect the composition of bile have been
associated with cholestasis, namely ABCB11, which encodes the bile salt export
pump, and ABCB4, which encodes hepatocanalicular phosphatidylcholine floppase. In
contrast, studies have associated primary biliary cirrhosis and primary
sclerosing cholangitis with genes encoding major histocompatibility complex
proteins and identified loci associated with microbial sensing and immune
regulatory pathways outside this region, such as genes encoding IL12, STAT4,
IRF5, IL2 and its receptor (IL2R), CD28, and CD80. These discoveries have raised 
interest in the development of reagents that target these gene products. We
review recent findings from genetic studies of patients with cholestatic liver
disease. Future characterization of genetic variants in animal models,
stratification of risk alleles by clinical course, and identification of
interacting environmental factors will increase our understanding of these
complex cholestatic diseases.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3705954
PMID: 23583734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. BMC Genomics. 2013 Apr 3;14:220. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-220.

Pig immune response to general stimulus and to porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome virus infection: a meta-analysis approach.

Badaoui B(1), Tuggle CK, Hu Z, Reecy JM, Ait-Ali T, Anselmo A, Botti S.

Author information: 
(1)Parco Tecnologico Padano - CERSA, Via Einstein, Lodi, 26900, Italy.
bouabid.badaoui@tecnoparco.org

BACKGROUND: The availability of gene expression data that corresponds to pig
immune response challenges provides compelling material for the understanding of 
the host immune system. Meta-analysis offers the opportunity to confirm and
expand our knowledge by combining and studying at one time a vast set of
independent studies creating large datasets with increased statistical power. In 
this study, we performed two meta-analyses of porcine transcriptomic data: i)
scrutinized the global immune response to different challenges, and ii)
determined the specific response to Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome
Virus (PRRSV) infection. To gain an in-depth knowledge of the pig response to
PRRSV infection, we used an original approach comparing and eliminating the
common genes from both meta-analyses in order to identify genes and pathways
specifically involved in the PRRSV immune response. The software Pointillist was 
used to cope with the highly disparate data, circumventing the biases generated
by the specific responses linked to single studies. Next, we used the Ingenuity
Pathways Analysis (IPA) software to survey the canonical pathways, biological
functions and transcription factors found to be significantly involved in the pig
immune response. We used 779 chips corresponding to 29 datasets for the pig
global immune response and 279 chips obtained from 6 datasets for the pig
response to PRRSV infection, respectively.
RESULTS: The pig global immune response analysis showed interconnected canonical 
pathways involved in the regulation of translation and mitochondrial energy
metabolism. Biological functions revealed in this meta-analysis were centred
around translation regulation, which included protein synthesis, RNA-post
transcriptional gene expression and cellular growth and proliferation.
Furthermore, the oxidative phosphorylation and mitochondria dysfunctions,
associated with stress signalling, were highly regulated. Transcription factors
such as MYCN, MYC and NFE2L2 were found in this analysis to be potentially
involved in the regulation of the immune response. The host specific response to 
PRRSV infection engendered the activation of well-defined canonical pathways in
response to pathogen challenge such as TREM1, toll-like receptor and
hyper-cytokinemia/ hyper-chemokinemia signalling. Furthermore, this analysis
brought forth the central role of the crosstalk between innate and adaptive
immune response and the regulation of anti-inflammatory response. The most
significant transcription factor potentially involved in this analysis was HMGB1,
which is required for the innate recognition of viral nucleic acids. Other
transcription factors like interferon regulatory factors IRF1, IRF3, IRF5 and
IRF8 were also involved in the pig specific response to PRRSV infection.
CONCLUSIONS: This work reveals key genes, canonical pathways and biological
functions involved in the pig global immune response to diverse challenges,
including PRRSV infection. The powerful statistical approach led us to
consolidate previous findings as well as to gain new insights into the pig immune
response either to common stimuli or specifically to PRRSV infection.

PMCID: PMC3623894
PMID: 23552196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mediators Inflamm. 2013;2013:632049. doi: 10.1155/2013/632049. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

Characterization of macrophage phenotypes in three murine models of
house-dust-mite-induced asthma.

Draijer C(1), Robbe P, Boorsma CE, Hylkema MN, Melgert BN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacokinetics, Toxicology and Targeting, Groningen Research
Institute for Pharmacy, University of Groningen, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV 
Groningen, The Netherlands. c.draijer@rug.nl

In asthma, an important role for innate immunity is increasingly being
recognized. Key innate immune cells in the lungs are macrophages. Depending on
the signals they receive, macrophages can at least have an M1, M2, or M2-like
phenotype. It is unknown how these macrophage phenotypes behave with regard to
(the severity of) asthma. We have quantified the phenotypes in three models of
house dust mite (HDM-)induced asthma (14, 21, and 24 days). M1, M2, and M2-like
phenotypes were identified by interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), YM1, and
IL-10, respectively. We found higher percentages of eosinophils in HDM-exposed
mice compared to control but no differences between HDM models. T cell numbers
were higher after HDM exposure and were the highest in the 24-day HDM protocol.
Higher numbers of M2 macrophages after HDM correlated with higher eosinophil
numbers. In mice with less severe asthma, M1 macrophage numbers were higher and
correlated negatively with M2 macrophages numbers. Lower numbers of M2-like
macrophages were found after HDM exposure and these correlated negatively with M2
macrophages. The balance between macrophage phenotypes changes as the severity of
allergic airway inflammation increases. Influencing this imbalanced relationship 
could be a novel approach to treat asthma.

PMCID: PMC3600196
PMID: 23533309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Arthritis Rheum. 2013 Jun;65(6):1457-67. doi: 10.1002/art.37923.

Rheumatoid arthritis in Latin Americans enriched for Amerindian ancestry is
associated with loci in chromosomes 1, 12, and 13, and the HLA class II region.

López Herráez D(1), Martínez-Bueno M, Riba L, García de la Torre I, Sacnún M,
Goñi M, Berbotto GA, Paira S, Musuruana JL, Graf CE, Alvarellos AJ, Messina OD,
Babini AM, Strusberg I, Marcos JC, Scherbarth H, Spindler AJ, Quinteros A, Toloza
SM, Moreno JL, Catoggio LJ, Tate G, Eimon A, Citera G, Catalán Pellet A,
Nasswetter GG, Cardiel MH, Miranda P, Ballesteros F, Esquivel-Valerio JA,
Maradiaga-Ceceña MA, Acevedo-Vásquez EM, García García C, Pons-Estel BA,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Pfizer-Universidad de Granada-Junta de Andalucía de Genómica e
Investigaciones Oncológicas, Granada, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To identify susceptibility loci for rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in Latin
American individuals with admixed European and Amerindian genetic ancestry.
METHODS: Genotyping was performed in 1,475 patients with RA and 1,213 control
subjects, using a customized BeadArray containing 196,524 markers covering loci
previously associated with various autoimmune diseases. Principal components
analysis (EigenSoft package) and Structure software were used to identify
outliers and define the population substructure. REAP software was used to define
cryptic relatedness and duplicates, and genetic association analyses were
conducted using Plink statistical software.
RESULTS: A strong genetic association between RA and the major histocompatibility
complex region was observed, localized within BTNL2/DRA-DQB1- DQA2 (P = 7.6 ×
10(-10) ), with 3 independent effects. We identified an association in the
PLCH2-HES5-TNFRSF14-MMEL1 region of chromosome 1 (P = 9.77 × 10(-6) ), which was 
previously reported in Europeans, Asians, and Native Canadians. We identified one
novel putative association in ENOX1 on chromosome 13 (P = 3.24 × 10(-7) ).
Previously reported associations were observed in the current study, including
PTPN22, SPRED2, STAT4, IRF5, CCL21, and IL2RA, although the significance was
relatively moderate. Adjustment for Amerindian ancestry improved the association 
of a novel locus in chromosome 12 at C12orf30 (NAA25) (P = 3.9 × 10(-6) ).
Associations with the HLA region, SPRED2, and PTPN22 improved in individuals
positive for anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies.
CONCLUSION: Our data define, for the first time, the contribution of Amerindian
ancestry to the genetic architecture of RA in an admixed Latin American
population by confirming the role of the HLA region and supporting the
association with a locus in chromosome 1. In addition, we provide data for novel 
putative loci in chromosomes 12 and 13.

Copyright © 2013 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 23460240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):327-36. doi: 10.1038/ni.2548. Epub 2013 Mar 3.

Intracellular antibody-bound pathogens stimulate immune signaling via the Fc
receptor TRIM21.

McEwan WA(1), Tam JC, Watkinson RE, Bidgood SR, Mallery DL, James LC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry, Medical Research Council
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. wmcewan@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):309-11.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Apr;13(4):222-3.

During pathogen infection, antibodies can be carried into the infected cell,
where they are detected by the ubiquitously expressed cytosolic antibody receptor
TRIM21. Here we found that recognition of intracellular antibodies by TRIM21
activated immune signaling. TRIM21 catalyzed the formation of Lys63 (K63)-linked 
ubiquitin chains and stimulated the transcription factor pathways of NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1,
IRF3, IRF5 and IRF7. Activation resulted in the production of proinflammatory
cytokines, modulation of natural killer stress ligands and induction of an
antiviral state. Intracellular antibody signaling was abrogated by genetic
deletion of TRIM21 and was restored by ectopic expression of TRIM21. The sensing 
of antibodies by TRIM21 was stimulated after infection by DNA or RNA nonenveloped
viruses or intracellular bacteria. Thus, the antibody-TRIM21 detection system
provides potent, comprehensive activation of the innate immune system
independently of known pattern-recognition receptors.

PMCID: PMC3672961
PMID: 23455675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2013 Feb;33(1):15-21. doi:
10.1007/s11596-013-1064-4. Epub 2013 Feb 8.

Association of rs10954213 polymorphisms and haplotype diversity in interferon
regulatory factor 5 with systemic lupus erythematosus: a meta-analysis.

Liu HF(1), An XJ, Yang Y, Yang L, Li Y, Huang CZ, Tao J, Tu YT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China.
huifengliuwh@gmail.com

The rs10954213 polymorphism and the haplotype diversity in interferon regulatory 
factor 5 (IRF5) play a special role in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) but
with inconclusive results. We conducted a meta-analysis integrating case-control 
and haplotype variant studies in multiple ethnic populations to clearly discern
the effect of these two variants on SLE. Eleven studies on the relation between
rs10954213 polymorpisms in IRF5 and SLE were included and we selected a random
effect model to calculate the pooled odds ratios (ORs) and the corresponding 95% 
confidence interval (95% CI). A total of 6982 cases and 8077 controls were
involved in the meta-analysis. The pooled results indicated that A allele was
significantly associated with increased risk of SLE as compared with the IRF5
rs10954213 G allele (A vs. G, P<0.00001) in all subjects. The same pattern of the
results was also obtained in the European, African American, and Latin American. 
Asian population had a much lower prevalence of the A allele (49.1%) than any
other population studied, and Europeans had the highest frequency of the IRF5
rs10954213 A allele (62.1%). The significant association of increased SLE risk
and TCA haplotype was indicated in the contrast of TCA vs. TTA as the pooled OR
was 2.14 (P=0.002). The same result was also found in the contrast of TCA vs. TTG
as the pooled OR was 1.45 (P=0.004). This meta-analysis suggests that the A
allele of rs10954213 and TCA haplotype (rs2004640-rs2070197-rs10954213) in IRF5
is associated with the increased risk of SLE in different ethnic groups, and its 
prevalence is ethnicity dependent.

PMID: 23392701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54419. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054419. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

The systemic lupus erythematosus IRF5 risk haplotype is associated with systemic 
sclerosis.

Carmona FD(1), Martin JE, Beretta L, Simeón CP, Carreira PE, Callejas JL,
Fernández-Castro M, Sáez-Comet L, Beltrán E, Camps MT, Egurbide MV; Spanish
Scleroderma Group, Airó P, Scorza R, Lunardi C, Hunzelmann N, Riemekasten G,
Witte T, Kreuter A, Distler JH, Madhok R, Shiels P, van Laar JM, Fonseca C,
Denton C, Herrick A, Worthington J, Schuerwegh AJ, Vonk MC, Voskuyl AE, Radstake 
TR, Martín J.

Collaborators: Ortego-Centeno N, Ríos R, Navarrete N, Portales RG,
Fernández-Nebro A, González-Escribano MF, Sánchez-Román J, García-Hernández FJ,
Castillo MJ, Aguirre MÁ, Gómez-Gracia I, Fernández-Gutiérrez B,
Rodríguez-Rodríguez L, Vicente E, Andreu JL, de la Peña PG, López-Longo FJ,
Martínez L, Fonollosa V, Espinosa G, Castellví I, Tolosa C, Pros A, Carballeira
MR, Narváez FJ, González-Gay MÁ, Díaz B, Trapiella L, Gallego M, Freire Mdel C,
Vaqueiro I, Díaz F, Hernández V, Román-Ivorra JA, García FJ, Oreiro N.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain.
dcarmona@ipb.csic.es

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a fibrotic autoimmune disease in which the genetic
component plays an important role. One of the strongest SSc association signals
outside the human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region corresponds to interferon (IFN) 
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), a major regulator of the type I IFN pathway. In this 
study we aimed to evaluate whether three different haplotypic blocks within this 
locus, which have been shown to alter the protein function influencing systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) susceptibility, are involved in SSc susceptibility and 
clinical phenotypes. For that purpose, we genotyped one representative
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) of each block (rs10488631, rs2004640, and
rs4728142) in a total of 3,361 SSc patients and 4,012 unaffected controls of
Caucasian origin from Spain, Germany, The Netherlands, Italy and United Kingdom. 
A meta-analysis of the allele frequencies was performed to analyse the overall
effect of these IRF5 genetic variants on SSc. Allelic combination and dependency 
tests were also carried out. The three SNPs showed strong associations with the
global disease (rs4728142: P <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.34×10(-8), OR <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.22, CI 95% <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.14-1.30;
rs2004640: P <U+200A>=<U+200A>4.60×10(-7), OR <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.84, CI 95% <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.78-0.90; rs10488631: P
<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.53×10(-20), OR <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.63, CI 95% <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.47-1.81). However, the association of
rs2004640 with SSc was not independent of rs4728142 (conditioned P <U+200A>=<U+200A>0.598). The
haplotype containing the risk alleles (rs4728142*A-rs2004640*T-rs10488631*C: P
<U+200A>=<U+200A>9.04×10(-22), OR <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.75, CI 95% <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.56-1.97) better explained the observed
association (likelihood P-value <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.48×10(-4)), suggesting an additive effect of
the three haplotypic blocks. No statistical significance was observed in the
comparisons amongst SSc patients with and without the main clinical
characteristics. Our data clearly indicate that the SLE risk haplotype also
influences SSc predisposition, and that this association is not
sub-phenotype-specific.

PMCID: PMC3553151
PMID: 23372721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54487. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054487. Epub 2013 Jan 18.

RNA-Seq for enrichment and analysis of IRF5 transcript expression in SLE.

Stone RC(1), Du P, Feng D, Dhawan K, Rönnblom L, Eloranta ML, Donnelly R, Barnes 
BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School, and
New Jersey Medical School-University Hospital Cancer Center, UMDNJ, Newark, New
Jersey, USA.

Polymorphisms in the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene have been
consistently replicated and shown to confer risk for or protection from the
development of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). IRF5 expression is
significantly upregulated in SLE patients and upregulation associates with
IRF5-SLE risk haplotypes. IRF5 alternative splicing has also been shown to be
elevated in SLE patients. Given that human IRF5 exists as multiple alternatively 
spliced transcripts with distinct function(s), it is important to determine
whether the IRF5 transcript profile expressed in healthy donor immune cells is
different from that expressed in SLE patients. Moreover, it is not currently
known whether an IRF5-SLE risk haplotype defines the profile of IRF5 transcripts 
expressed. Using standard molecular cloning techniques, we identified and
isolated 14 new differentially spliced IRF5 transcript variants from purified
monocytes of healthy donors and SLE patients to generate an IRF5 variant
transcriptome. Next-generation sequencing was then used to perform in-depth and
quantitative analysis of full-length IRF5 transcript expression in primary immune
cells of SLE patients and healthy donors by next-generation sequencing. Evidence 
for additional alternatively spliced transcripts was obtained from de novo
junction discovery. Data from these studies support the overall complexity of
IRF5 alternative splicing in SLE. Results from next-generation sequencing
correlated with cloning and gave similar abundance rankings in SLE patients thus 
supporting the use of this new technology for in-depth single gene transcript
profiling. Results from this study provide the first proof that 1) SLE patients
express an IRF5 transcript signature that is distinct from healthy donors, 2) an 
IRF5-SLE risk haplotype defines the top four most abundant IRF5 transcripts
expressed in SLE patients, and 3) an IRF5 transcript signature enables clustering
of SLE patients with the H2 risk haplotype.

PMCID: PMC3548774
PMID: 23349905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53037. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053037. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Functional relevance for associations between genetic variants and systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Deng FY(1), Lei SF, Zhang YH, Zhang ZL, Guo YF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genetic Epidemiology and Genomics, Soochow University, Suzhou,
Jiangsu, PR China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a serious prototype autoimmune disease
characterized by chronic inflammation, auto-antibody production and multi-organ
damage. Recent association studies have identified a long list of loci that were 
associated with SLE with relatively high statistical power. However, most of them
only established the statistical associations of genetic markers and SLE at the
DNA level without supporting evidence of functional relevance. Here, using
publically available datasets, we performed integrative analyses (gene
relationship across implicated loci analysis, differential gene expression
analysis and functional annotation clustering analysis) and combined with
expression quantitative trait loci (eQTLs) results to dissect functional
mechanisms underlying the associations for SLE. We found that 14 SNPs, which were
significantly associated with SLE in previous studies, have cis-regulation
effects on four eQTL genes (HLA-DQA1, HLA-DQB1, HLA-DQB2, and IRF5) that were
also differentially expressed in SLE-related cell groups. The functional
evidence, taken together, suggested the functional mechanisms underlying the
associations of 14 SNPs and SLE. The study may serve as an example of mining
publically available datasets and results in validation of significant
disease-association results. Utilization of public data resources for integrative
analyses may provide novel insights into the molecular genetic mechanisms
underlying human diseases.

PMCID: PMC3544818
PMID: 23341919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Eur Cytokine Netw. 2012 Oct-Dec;23(4):166-72. doi: 10.1684/ecn.2012.0316.

Methylation profile of the promoter region of IRF5 in primary Sjögren's syndrome.

Gestermann N(1), Koutero M, Belkhir R, Tost J, Mariette X, Miceli-Richard C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale INSERM U1012.

The transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), in the type I
interferon pathway is involved in the genetic susceptibility to various
autoimmune diseases. A 5-bp insertion/deletion (CGGGG indel) polymorphism in the 
promoter region of IRF5 associated with primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) could be
epigenetically deregulated in this condition. Therefore, we investigated DNA
methylation patterns of the promoter region of IRF5 to determine whether its
epigenetic deregulation could explain the increased expression of IRF5 mRNA in
pSS patients, along with the risk of pSS induced by the genetic polymorphism. DNA
extracted from total peripheral blood mononuclear cells, isolated CD4(+) T cells,
B lymphocytes and monocytes from 19 pSS patients and 24 healthy controls
underwent methylation analysis by pyrosequencing. Salivary gland epithelial cells
(SGECs) were cultured from minor salivary glands. Regions of interest in the
CGGGG repeat and ATG initiation codon region were amplified by PCR and analysed
by pyrosequencing. The effect of the demethylating agent 5-AzaC on IRF5 mRNA
expression in controls was quantified by RT-PCR. Among the healthy controls, the 
mean methylation of the nine CpG pairs of the CGGGG repeat region and the 18 CpG 
pairs of the ATG region was < 15% in CD4(+) T cells, B lymphocytes, monocytes and
SGECs. Patients and controls did not differ in methylation profiles as regards
CD4(+) T cells and B lymphocytes. IRF5 mRNA expression did not differ with or
without 5-AzaC in controls. The absence of aberrant DNA methylation profiles for 
the putative regulatory regions of IRF5 in CD4(+) T cells, B lymphocytes, and
monocytes from patients with pSS, does not support the hypothesis that epigenetic
deregulation in combination with the genetic polymorphism explains the increase
in IRF5 mRNA levels in pSS patients.

PMID: 23302156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Jan;9(1):e1003118. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003118. Epub 2013
Jan 3.

IRF-3, IRF-5, and IRF-7 coordinately regulate the type I IFN response in myeloid 
dendritic cells downstream of MAVS signaling.

Lazear HM(1), Lancaster A, Wilkins C, Suthar MS, Huang A, Vick SC, Clepper L,
Thackray L, Brassil MM, Virgin HW, Nikolich-Zugich J, Moses AV, Gale M Jr, Früh
K, Diamond MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2013 May;9(5).
:10.1371/annotation/4de7ddfd-52df-4f87-8ca4-d48afe646ca8.

Although the transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 are considered master
regulators of type I interferon (IFN) induction and IFN stimulated gene (ISG)
expression, Irf3(-/-)×Irf7(-/-) double knockout (DKO) myeloid dendritic cells
(mDC) produce relatively normal levels of IFN-ß after viral infection. We
generated Irf3(-/-)×Irf5(-/-)×Irf7(-/-) triple knockout (TKO) mice to test
whether IRF-5 was the source of the residual induction of IFN-ß and ISGs in mDCs.
In pathogenesis studies with two unrelated positive-sense RNA viruses (West Nile 
virus (WNV) and murine norovirus), TKO mice succumbed at rates greater than DKO
mice and equal to or approaching those of mice lacking the type I IFN receptor
(Ifnar(-/-)). In ex vivo studies, after WNV infection or exposure to Toll-like
receptor agonists, TKO mDCs failed to produce IFN-ß or express ISGs. In contrast,
this response was sustained in TKO macrophages following WNV infection. To define
IRF-regulated gene signatures, we performed microarray analysis on WNV-infected
mDC from wild type (WT), DKO, TKO, or Ifnar(-/-) mice, as well as from mice
lacking the RIG-I like receptor adaptor protein MAVS. Whereas the gene induction 
pattern in DKO mDC was similar to WT cells, remarkably, almost no ISG induction
was detected in TKO or Mavs(-/-) mDC. The relative equivalence of TKO and
Mavs(-/-) responses suggested that MAVS dominantly regulates ISG induction in
mDC. Moreover, we showed that MAVS-dependent induction of ISGs can occur through 
an IRF-5-dependent yet IRF-3 and IRF-7-independent pathway. Our results establish
IRF-3, -5, and -7 as the key transcription factors responsible for mediating the 
type I IFN and ISG response in mDC during WNV infection and suggest a novel
signaling link between MAVS and IRF-5.

PMCID: PMC3536698
PMID: 23300459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Int Immunol. 2013 May;25(5):295-306. doi: 10.1093/intimm/dxs114. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Phenotype and function of B cells and dendritic cells from interferon regulatory 
factor 5-deficient mice with and without a mutation in DOCK2.

Yasuda K(1), Nündel K, Watkins AA, Dhawan T, Bonegio RG, Ubellacker JM,
Marshak-Rothstein A, Rifkin IR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Renal Section, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA. kyasuda@bu.edu

Interferon regulatory factor 5-deficient (IRF5 (-/-) ) mice have been used for
many studies of IRF5 biology. A recent report identifies a mutation in dedicator 
of cytokinesis 2 (DOCK2) as being responsible for the abnormal B-cell development
phenotype observed in the IRF5 (-/-) line. Both dedicator of cytokinesis 2
(DOCK2) and IRF5 play important roles in immune cell function, raising the issue 
of whether immune effects previously associated with IRF5 are due to IRF5 or
DOCK2. Here, we defined the insertion end-point of the DOCK2 mutation and
designed a novel PCR to detect the mutation in genomic DNA. We confirmed the
association of the DOCK2 mutation and the abnormal B-cell phenotype in our IRF5
(-/-) line and also established another IRF5 (-/-) line without the DOCK2
mutation. These two lines were used to compare the role of IRF5 in dendritic
cells (DCs) and B cells in the presence or absence of the DOCK2 mutation. IRF5
deficiency reduces IFN-a, IFN-ß and IL-6 production by Toll-like receptor 9
(TLR9)- and TLR7-stimulated DCs and reduces TLR7- and TLR9-induced IL-6
production by B cells to a similar extent in the two lines. Importantly however, 
IRF5 (-/-) mice with the DOCK2 mutation have higher serum levels of IgG1 and
lower levels of IgG2b, IgG2a/c and IgG3 than IRF5 (-/-) mice without the DOCK2
mutation, suggesting that the DOCK2 mutation confers additional Th2-type effects.
Overall, these studies help clarify the function of IRF5 in B cells and DCs in
the absence of the DOCK2 mutation. In addition, the PCR described will be useful 
for other investigators using the IRF5 (-/-) mouse line.

PMCID: PMC3631000
PMID: 23291967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 15;431(3):610-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.12.097. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

miR-9 modulates the expression of interferon-regulated genes and MHC class I
molecules in human nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Gao F(1), Zhao ZL, Zhao WT, Fan QR, Wang SC, Li J, Zhang YQ, Shi JW, Lin XL, Yang
S, Xie RY, Liu W, Zhang TT, Sun YL, Xu K, Yao KT, Xiao D.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, PR
China.

The functions of miR-9 in some cancers are recently implicated in regulating
proliferation, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), invasion and metastasis, 
apoptosis, and tumor angiogenesis, etc. miR-9 is commonly down-regulated in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC), but the exact roles of miR-9 dysregulation in the
pathogenesis of NPC remains unclear. Therefore, we firstly used miR-9-expressing 
CNE2 cells to determine the effects of miR-9 overexpression on global gene
expression profile by microarray analysis. Microarray-based gene expression data 
unexpectedly demonstrated a significant number of up- or down-regulated immune-
and inflammation-related genes, including many well-known interferon
(IFN)-induced genes (e.g., IFI44L, PSMB8, IRF5, PSMB10, IFI27, PSB9_HUMAN, IFIT2,
TRAIL, IFIT1, PSB8_HUMAN, IRF1, B2M and GBP1), major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I molecules (e.g., HLA-B, HLA-C, HLA-F and HLA-H) and interleukin
(IL)-related genes (e.g., IL20RB, GALT, IL7, IL1B, IL11, IL1F8, IL1A, IL6 and
IL7R), which was confirmed by qRT-PCR. Moreover, the overexpression of miR-9 with
the miRNA mimics significantly up- or down-regulated the expression of
above-mentioned IFN-inducible genes, MHC class I molecules and IL-related genes; 
on the contrary, miR-9 inhibition by anti-miR-9 inhibitor in CNE2 and 5-8F cells 
correspondingly decreased or increased the aforementioned immune- and
inflammation-related genes. Taken together, these findings demonstrate, for the
first time, that miR-9 can modulate the expression of IFN-induced genes and MHC
class I molecules in human cancer cells, suggesting a novel role of miR-9 in
linking inflammation and cancer, which remains to be fully characterized.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23291181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Clin Rev Allergy Immunol. 2013 Oct;45(2):170-9. doi: 10.1007/s12016-012-8346-7.

Genetics of rheumatoid arthritis - a comprehensive review.

Kurkó J(1), Besenyei T, Laki J, Glant TT, Mikecz K, Szekanecz Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Institute of Medicine, University of Debrecen
Medical and Health Science Center, Nagyerdei str 98, Debrecen, 4032, Hungary.

The "Bermuda triangle" of genetics, environment and autoimmunity is involved in
the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Various aspects of genetic
contribution to the etiology, pathogenesis and outcome of RA are discussed in
this review. The heritability of RA has been estimated to be about 60 %, while
the contribution of HLA to heritability has been estimated to be 11-37 %. Apart
from known shared epitope (SE) alleles, such as HLA-DRB1*01 and DRB1*04, other
HLA alleles, such as HLA-DRB1*13 and DRB1*15 have been linked to RA
susceptibility. A novel SE classification divides SE alleles into S1, S2, S3P and
S3D groups, where primarily S2 and S3P groups have been associated with
predisposition to seropositive RA. The most relevant non-HLA gene single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with RA include PTPN22, IL23R, TRAF1, 
CTLA4, IRF5, STAT4, CCR6, PADI4. Large genome-wide association studies (GWAS)
have identified more than 30 loci involved in RA pathogenesis. HLA and some
non-HLA genes may differentiate between anti-citrullinated protein antibody
(ACPA) seropositive and seronegative RA. Genetic susceptibility has also been
associated with environmental factors, primarily smoking. Some GWAS studies
carried out in rodent models of arthritis have confirmed the role of human genes.
For example, in the collagen-induced (CIA) and proteoglycan-induced arthritis
(PgIA) models, two important loci - Pgia26/Cia5 and Pgia2/Cia2/Cia3,
corresponding the human PTPN22/CD2 and TRAF1/C5 loci, respectively - have been
identified. Finally, pharmacogenomics identified SNPs or multiple genetic
signatures that may be associated with responses to traditional disease-modifying
drugs and biologics.

PMCID: PMC3655138
PMID: 23288628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mod Rheumatol. 2013 Nov;23(6):1158-65. doi: 10.1007/s10165-012-0814-7. Epub 2013 
Jan 4.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 polymorphisms in sarcoidosis.

Tanizawa K(1), Handa T, Nagai S, Sato H, Yamada R, Ito I, Kubo T, Ito Y, Watanabe
K, Aihara K, Ikezoe K, Mishima M, Izumi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 54 Shogoin Kawaharacho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan,
tanizawa@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene polymorphisms are
associated with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases. The aim of this study is
to determine the roles of IRF5 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
sarcoidosis.
METHODS: A total of 175 Japanese patients with biopsy-proven sarcoidosis and 150 
sex-matched controls were genotyped for four IRF5 SNPs: rs729302A/C,
rs2004640G/T, rs10954213A/G, and rs2280714G/A. The associations of these SNPs
with susceptibility to sarcoidosis were examined.
RESULTS: Carriage of rs10954213A and rs2280714A conferred significant risks for
sarcoidosis [carriage of rs10954213A: odds ratio (OR) = 1.96, 95% confidence
interval (CI) = 1.15-3.33, P = 0.01, corrected P = 0.04; carriage of rs2280714A: 
OR = 1.97, 95% CI = 1.22-3.16, P = 0.005, corrected P = 0.02]. The haplotype
carrying rs10954213A and rs2280714A (haplotype 2) was significantly associated
with susceptibility to sarcoidosis (OR = 2.00, 95% CI = 1.24-3.24, P = 0.004,
corrected P = 0.01). rs729302 and rs2004640 were not associated with
susceptibility to sarcoidosis, whereas carriage of rs2004640G was protective
against pulmonary hypertension (OR = 0.017, 95% CI = 0.002-0.15, P < 0.001,
corrected P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: A haplotype carrying two functional SNPs of IRF5, rs10954213A and
rs2280714A, was associated with the risk of sarcoidosis in the Japanese
population.

PMID: 23288367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Mar;33(6):1124-38. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00802-12. Epub 2012 Dec
28.

The COP9 signalosome interacts with and regulates interferon regulatory factor 5 
protein stability.

Korczeniewska J(1), Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School, New
Jersey Medical School-University Hospital CancerCenter, UMDNJ, Newark, New
Jersey, USA.

The transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) exerts crucial
functions in the regulation of host immunity against extracellular pathogens, DNA
damage-induced apoptosis, death receptor signaling, and macrophage polarization. 
Tight regulation of IRF5 is thus warranted for an efficient response toward
extracellular stressors and for limiting autoimmune and inflammatory responses.
Here we report that the COP9 signalosome (CSN), a general modulator of diverse
cellular and developmental processes, associates constitutively with IRF5 and
promotes its protein stability. The constitutive CSN/IRF5 interaction was
identified using proteomics and confirmed by endogenous immunoprecipitations. The
CSN/IRF5 interaction occurred on the carboxyl and amino termini of IRF5; a single
internal deletion from amino acids 455 to 466 (<U+0394>455-466) was found to
significantly reduce IRF5 protein stability. CSN subunit 3 (CSN3) was identified 
as a direct interacting partner of IRF5, and knockdown of this subunit with small
interfering RNAs resulted in enhanced degradation. Degradation was further
augmented by knockdown of CSN1 and CSN3 together. The ubiquitin E1 inhibitor
UBEI-41 or the proteasome inhibitor MG132 prevented IRF5 degradation, supporting 
the idea that its stability is regulated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system.
Importantly, activation of IRF5 by the death receptor ligand tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) resulted in enhanced degradation
via loss of the CSN/IRF5 interaction. This study defines CSN to be a new
interacting partner of IRF5 that controls its stability.

PMCID: PMC3592028
PMID: 23275442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052046. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

4F decreases IRF5 expression and activation in hearts of tight skin mice.

Xu H(1), Krolikowski JG, Jones DW, Ge ZD, Pagel PS, Pritchard KA Jr, Weihrauch D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Children's Research
Institute, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

The apoAI mimetic 4F was designed to inhibit atherosclerosis by improving HDL. We
reported that treating tight skin (Tsk(-/+)) mice, a model of systemic sclerosis 
(SSc), with 4F decreases inflammation and restores angiogenic potential in
Tsk(-/+) hearts. Interferon regulating factor 5 (IRF5) is important in
autoimmunity and apoptosis in immune cells. However, no studies were performed
investigating IRF5 in myocardium. We hypothesize that 4F differentially modulates
IRF5 expression and activation in Tsk(-/+) hearts. Posterior wall thickness was
significantly increased in Tsk(-/+) compared to C57Bl/6J (control) and Tsk(-/+)
mice with 4F treatment assessed by echoradiography highlighting reduction of
fibrosis in 4F treated Tsk(-/+) mice. IRF5 in heart lysates from control and
Tsk/+ with and without 4F treatment (sc, 1 mg/kg/d, 6-8 weeks) was determined.
Phosphoserine, ubiquitin, ubiquitin K(63) on IRF5 were determined on
immunoprecipitates of IRF5. Immunofluorescence and TUNEL assays in heart sections
were used to determine positive nuclei for IRF5 and apoptosis, respectively.
Fluorescence-labeled streptavidin (SA) was used to determine endothelial cell
uptake of biotinylated 4F. SA-agarose pulldown and immunoblotting for IRF5 were
used to determine 4F binding IRF5 in endothelial cell cytosolic fractions and to 
confirm biolayer interferometry studies. IRF5 levels in Tsk(-/+) hearts were
similar to control. 4F treatments decrease IRF5 in Tsk(-/+) hearts and decrease
phosphoserine and ubiquitin K(63) but increase total ubiquitin on IRF5 in
Tsk(-/+) compared with levels on IRF5 in control hearts. 4F binds IRF5 by
mechanisms favoring association over dissociation strong enough to pull down IRF5
from a mixture of endothelial cell cytosolic proteins. IRF5 positive nuclei and
apoptotic cells in Tsk(-/+) hearts were increased compared with controls. 4F
treatments decreased both measurements in Tsk(-/+) hearts. IRF5 activation in
Tsk(-/+) hearts is increased. 4F treatments decrease IRF5 expression and
activation in Tsk(-/+) hearts by a mechanism related to 4F's ability to bind
IRF5.

PMCID: PMC3522636
PMID: 23251680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:780436. doi: 10.1155/2012/780436. Epub 2012 Nov 1.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Cham CM(1), Ko K, Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Gwen Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, 
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is an autoimmune disease characterized by
multiple genetic risk factors, high levels of interferon alpha (IFN-a), and the
production of autoantibodies against components of the cell nucleus. Interferon
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is a transcription factor which induces the
transcription of IFN-a and other cytokines, and genetic variants of IRF5 have
been strongly linked to SLE pathogenesis. IRF5 functions downstream of Toll-like 
receptors and other microbial pattern-recognition receptors, and immune complexes
made up of SLE-associated autoantibodies seem to function as a chronic endogenous
stimulus to this pathway. In this paper, we discuss the physiologic role of IRF5 
in immune defense and the ways in which IRF5 variants may contribute to the
pathogenesis of human SLE. Recent data regarding the role of IRF5 in both
serologic autoimmunity and the overproduction of IFN-a in human SLE are
summarized. These data support a model in which SLE-risk variants of IRF5
participate in a "feed-forward" mechanism, predisposing to SLE-associated
autoantibody formation, and subsequently facilitating IFN-a production downstream
of Toll-like receptors stimulated by immune complexes composed of these
autoantibodies.

PMCID: PMC3509422
PMID: 23251221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51090. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051090. Epub 2012 Dec 7.

Gene-gene and gene-sex epistatic interactions of MiR146a, IRF5, IKZF1, ETS1 and
IL21 in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Leng RX(1), Wang W, Cen H, Zhou M, Feng CC, Zhu Y, Yang XK, Yang M, Zhai Y, Li
BZ, Wang XS, Li R, Chen GM, Chen H, Pan HF, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, Hefei, Anhui, People's Republic of China.

Several confirmed genetic susceptibility loci involved in the interferon
signaling and Th17/B cell response for SLE in Chinese Han populations have been
described. Available data also indicate that sex-specific genetic differences
contribute to SLE susceptibility. The aim of this study was to test for
gene-gene/gene-sex epistasis (interactions) in these known lupus susceptibility
loci. Six single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in MiR146a, IRF5, IKZF1, ETS1
and IL21 were genotyped by Sequenom MassArray system. A total of 1,825 subjects
(858 SLE patients and 967 controls) were included in the final analysis.
Epistasis was tested by additive model, multiplicative model and multifactor
dimensionality reduction (MDR) method. Additive interaction analysis revealed
interactions between IRF5 and IKZF1 (OR 2.26, 95% CI 1.48-3.44 [P<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.21×10(4)]).
A similar tendency was also observed between IL21 and ETS1 by parametric methods.
In addition, multiple high dimensional gene-gene or gene-sex interactions
(three-and four-way) were identified by MDR analysis. Our study identified novel 
gene-gene/gene-sex interactions in lupus. Furthermore, these findings highlight
sex, interferon pathway, and Th17/B cells as important contributors to the
pathogenesis of SLE.

PMCID: PMC3517573
PMID: 23236436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mult Scler. 2013 Jun;19(7):863-70. doi: 10.1177/1352458512463482. Epub 2012 Nov
22.

Multiple sclerosis risk genotypes correlate with an elevated cerebrospinal fluid 
level of the suggested prognostic marker CXCL13.

Lindén M(1), Khademi M, Lima Bomfim I, Piehl F, Jagodic M, Kockum I, Olsson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet Stockholm, Sweden. 
magdalena.linden@ki.se

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms of multiple sclerosis (MS) pathogenesis are still
largely unknown. The heterogeneity of disease manifestations make the prediction 
of prognosis and choice of appropriate treatment protocols challenging. Recently,
increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of the B-cell chemokine CXCL13 was
proposed as a possible marker for a more severe disease course and conversion
from clinically isolated syndrome (CIS) to relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS).
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether there are genetic susceptibility variants in MS
that correlate with the levels of CXCL13 present in the CSF of MS patients.
METHODS: We genotyped the human leukocyte antigens HLA-DRB1 and HLA-A, plus a
panel of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that have been associated with
susceptibility to MS and then correlated the genotypes with the levels of CXCL13,
as measured with ELISA in the CSF of a total of 663 patients with MS, CIS, other 
neurological diseases (OND) or OND with an inflammatory component (iOND).
RESULTS: Presence of the HLA-DRB1*15 and the MS risk genotypes for SNPs in the
RGS1, IRF5 and OLIG3/TNFAIP3 gene regions correlated significantly with increased
levels of CXCL13.
CONCLUSION: Our results pointed towards a genetic predisposition for increased
CXCL13 levels, which in MS patients correlates with the severity of the disease
course. These findings encourage further investigation and replication, in an
independent patient cohort.

PMID: 23175382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Acta Biomater. 2013 Mar;9(3):5621-9. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2012.11.016. Epub 2012
Nov 17.

Artificial extracellular matrices composed of collagen I and high-sulfated
hyaluronan promote phenotypic and functional modulation of human pro-inflammatory
M1 macrophages.

Franz S(1), Allenstein F, Kajahn J, Forstreuter I, Hintze V, Möller S, Simon JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Venerology und Allergology, Leipzig University,
04103 Leipzig, Germany. sandra.franz@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

The sequential phases of biomaterial integration and wound healing require
different macrophage functions mediated by distinct macrophage subsets. During
the initial phase of healing, pro-inflammatory M1 macrophages (MF1) are required 
to clear the wound from microbes and debris; however, their unopposed, persistent
activation often leads to disturbed integration of biomaterials and perturbed
wound healing. Here we investigated whether pro-inflammatory macrophage functions
are affected by immunomodulatory biomaterials based on artificial extracellular
matrices (aECM). To address this issue, we tested the capacity of two-dimensional
aECM consisting of collagen I and hyaluronan or sulfated derivatives of
hyaluronan to affect functions of in vitro polarized human pro-inflammatory MF1. 
The aECM containing high-sulfated hyaluronan substantially decreased inflammatory
macrophage functions, including pathogen uptake and release of the
pro-inflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor alpha and interleukin-12 due to 
impaired activation of nuclear factor "kappa-light-chain-enhancer" of activated
B-cells. Moreover, these macrophages secreted immunregulatory IL-10 and showed
reduced activity of the transcription factors signal transducer and activator of 
transcription 1 and interferon-regulating factor 5, both controlling macrophage
polarization to MF1 subsets. Our data reveal that the collagen I matrix
containing high-sulfated hyaluronan possesses immunomodulating properties and
dampens inflammatory macrophage activities by impeding signaling pathways crucial
for polarization of pro-inflammatory MF1. We therefore suggest this aECM as a
promising coating for biomaterials to modulate inflammatory macrophage functions 
during the healing response and recommend its further testing as a
three-dimensional construct and in in vivo models.

Copyright © 2012 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 23168224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Front Med. 2012 Dec;6(4):354-9. doi: 10.1007/s11684-012-0234-2. Epub 2012 Nov 15.

The genetics of Behçet's disease in a Chinese population.

Hou S(1), Kijlstra A, Yang P.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400016, China.

Behçet's disease is defined as a multisystemic inflammatory disease. Although the
precise pathogenesis and etiology is still a mystery, accumulating evidence shows
that genetic variants of immune-related genes have a profound influence on the
development of Behçet's disease. To explore the genetic factors for Behçet's
disease, our group investigated the association of Behçet's disease with multiple
immune response genes and has identified multiple Behçet's disease-related
immunoregulatory pathways in the Chinese Han population. A large number of gene
polymorphisms were studied including STAT4, IL23R, CD40, CCR1/CCR3, STAT3, OPN,
IL17, JAK2, MCP-1, CTLA4, PD-1, PD-L1, PD-L2, TGRBR3, CCR6, PTPN22, FCRL3, IRF5, 
SUMO4 and UBAC2. Significant associations were found between Behçet's disease and
STAT4, IL23R, CD40, CCR1/CCR3, STAT3, MCP-1, TGFBR3, FCRL3, SUMO4, UBAC2. These
genetic predisposition studies support an important role for both lymphocyte
differentiation as well as ubiquitination pathways. These findings are helpful in
elucidating the pathogenesis of Behçet's disease and hopefully will allow the
development of novel treatment regimes.

PMID: 23161479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Jan 4;430(1):95-100. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.11.006. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

Regulation of cooperative function of the Il12b enhancer and promoter by the
interferon regulatory factors 3 and 5.

Koshiba R(1), Yanai H, Matsuda A, Goto A, Nakajima A, Negishi H, Nishio J, Smale 
ST, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, The University of Tokyo, Komaba 4-6-1,
Meguro-Ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan.

The regulation of the Il12b gene, encoding the shared p40 subcomponent for IL-12 
and IL-23, is critical for innate immune responses and subsequent T cell
polarization. This gene is robustly induced upon Toll-like receptor (TLR)
stimulation, wherein an enhancer located 10kb upstream of the transcription start
site is required for promoter activity; however, the underlying mechanisms that
regulate this enhancer in cooperation with the promoter has remained elusive. We 
show here that the Il12b enhancer contains functional ISREs for recognition by
interferon regulatory factors (IRFs), and provide evidence that TLR-activated
IRF5 mediates cooperativity of the enhancer with the promoter which also contains
ISREs. By contrast, IRF3 activated by cytosolic RIG-I-like receptor (RLR)
signaling binds to these ISREs and causes gene suppression. Consistently, IRF5
binding is accompanied with chromatin remodeling of both regulatory regions and
the formation of a productive transcriptional complex containing other
transcription factors, whereas these events are inhibited by IRF3 binding. We
show that the ISREs embedded in the enhancer are indeed critical for its
activation by IRF5. We also adduce evidence that the 5' sequences of the enhancer
and promoter ISREs, all of which deviate from consensus ISREs, critically affect 
the function of IRF3. The dual commitment of these IRFs in the regulation of the 
Il12b enhancer and promoter is unique and may have implications for understanding
the evolution of this gene.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23154183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Feb;40(2):1791-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-2233-4. Epub 2012
Oct 18.

Associations between interferon regulatory factor 5 polymorphisms and rheumatoid 
arthritis: a meta-analysis.

Lee YH(1), Bae SC, Choi SJ, Ji JD, Song GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University
Anam Hospital, Korea University College of Medicine, 126-1, Anam-dong 5-ga,
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-705, South Korea. lyhcgh@korea.ac.kr

The aim of this study was to determine whether interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF5) polymorphisms confers susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in
populations with different ethnicities. We searched the literature using the
Pubmed and Embase databases and conducted meta-analyses on associations between
the four IRF5 polymorphisms (rs2004640, rs729302, rs752637, and rs2280714) and RA
susceptibility, using fixed and random effects models. A total of 12 comparison
studies were considered in this meta-analysis, which in total involved 7,916 RA
patients and 6,452 controls, and eight European, three Asian, and one Argentinean
population. Meta-analysis showed an association between the minor allele of
rs2004640 and RA in all subjects (odds ratio [OR] = 0.928, 95 % confidence
interval [CI] = 0.865-0.996, P = 0.037). After stratification by ethnicity,
analysis indicated that the minor allele was significantly associated with RA in 
Europeans (OR = 0.889, 95 % CI = 0.839-0.941, P = 5.03 × 10(-6)), but not in
Asians (OR = 1.057, 95 % CI = 0.978-1.144, P = 0.164). A direct comparison
between anti-citrullinated peptide antibody-positive and -negative patients
revealed no difference of the frequency of the rs2004640 minor allele
(OR = 1.047, 95 % CI = 0.813-1.348, P = 0.724). Meta-analysis identified a
significant association between RA and the minor allele of the rs729302
polymorphism in the overall population (OR = 0.896, 95 % CI = 0.826-0.972,
P = 0.009) and in Asians (OR = 0.862, 95 % CI = 0.795-0.935, P = 3.50 × 10(-5)), 
but not in Europeans (OR = 0.951, 95 % CI = 0.877-1.031, P = 0.225).
Meta-analysis showed an association between the minor allele of rs752637 and RA
in Europeans (OR = 0.858, 95 % CI = 0.789-0.932, P = 3.03 × 10(-5)), but not in
Asians (OR = 1.035, 95 % CI = 0.918-1.168, P = 0.572). No association was found
between the rs2280714 polymorphism and RA susceptibility. This meta-analysis
confirms that the IRF5 rs2004640, rs729302 and rs752637 polymorphisms are
associated with RA susceptibility in different ethnic groups, especially in
Europeans and Asians, but further study of this association is required in other 
ethnic groups.

PMID: 23073787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Dec;39(12):10627-35. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1952-x. Epub 2012
Oct 7.

Genome-wide pathway analysis of genome-wide association studies on systemic lupus
erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis.

Lee YH(1), Bae SC, Choi SJ, Ji JD, Song GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University
Anam Hospital, Korea University College of Medicine, 126-1, 5-ga, Anam-dong,
Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-705, Korea. lyhcgh@korea.ac.kr

The aim of this study was to explore candidate single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) and candidate mechanisms of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and
rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Two SLE genome-wide association studies (GWASs)
datasets were included in this study. Meta-analysis was conducted using 737,984
SNPs in 1,527 SLE cases and 3,421 controls of European ancestry, and 4,429 SNPs
that met a threshold of p < 0.01 in a Korean RA GWAS dataset was used.
ICSNPathway (identify candidate causal SNPs and pathways) analysis was applied to
the meta-analysis results of the SLE GWAS datasets, and a RA GWAS dataset. The
most significant result of SLE GWAS meta-analysis concerned rs2051549 in the
human leukocyte antigen (HLA) region (p = 3.36E-22). In the non-HLA region,
meta-analysis identified 6 SNPs associated with SLE with genome-wide significance
(STAT4, TNPO3, BLK, FAM167A, and IRF5). ICSNPathway identified five candidate
causal SNPs and 13 candidate causal pathways. This pathway-based analysis
provides three hypotheses of the biological mechanism involved. First, rs8084 and
rs7192 <U+2192> HLA-DRA <U+2192> bystander B cell activation. Second, rs1800629 <U+2192> TNF <U+2192>
cytokine network. Third, rs1150752 and rs185819 <U+2192> TNXB <U+2192> collagen metabolic
process. ICSNPathway analysis identified three candidate causal non-HLA SNPs and 
four candidate causal pathways involving the PADI4, MTR, PADI2, and TPH2 genes of
RA. We identified five candidate SNPs and thirteen pathways, involving bystander 
B cell activation, cytokine network, and collagen metabolic processing, which may
contribute to SLE susceptibility, and we revealed candidate causal non-HLA SNPs, 
genes, and pathways of RA.

PMID: 23053960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Clin Dev Immunol. 2012;2012:484919. doi: 10.1155/2012/484919. Epub 2012 Sep 25.

Genetics of myasthenia gravis: a case-control association study in the Hellenic
population.

Zagoriti Z(1), Georgitsi M, Giannakopoulou O, Ntellos F, Tzartos SJ, Patrinos GP,
Poulas K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, Department of Pharmacy, School
of Health Sciences, University of Patras, Rion, 26504 Patras, Greece.

Myasthenia gravis (MG) is an heterogeneous autoimmune disease characterized by
the production of autoantibodies against proteins of the postsynaptic membrane,
in the neuromuscular junction. The contribution of genetic factors to MG
susceptibility has been evaluated through family and twin studies however, the
precise genetic background of the disease remains elusive. We conducted a
case-control association study in 101 unrelated MG patients of Hellenic origin
and 101 healthy volunteers in order to assess the involvement of common genetic
variants in susceptibility to MG. We focused on three candidate genes which have 
been clearly associated with several autoimmune diseases, aiming to investigate
their potential implication in MG pathogenesis. These are interferon regulatory
factor 5 (IRF-5), TNFa-induced protein 3 (TNFAIP3), also known as A20, and
interleukin-10 (IL-10), key molecules in the regulation of immune function. A
statistical trend of association (P = 0.068) between IL-10 promoter single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and the subgroups of early and late-onset MG
patients was revealed. No statistically significant differences were observed in 
the rest of the variants examined. As far as we are aware, this is the first
worldwide attempt to address the possible association between IRF-5 and TNFAIP3
common genetic variants and the genetic basis of MG.

PMCID: PMC3463197
PMID: 23049601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044997. Epub 2012 Sep 13.

An integrated genomic and expression analysis of 7q deletion in splenic marginal 
zone lymphoma.

Watkins AJ(1), Hamoudi RA, Zeng N, Yan Q, Huang Y, Liu H, Zhang J, Braggio E,
Fonseca R, de Leval L, Isaacson PG, Wotherspoon A, McPhail ED, Dogan A, Du MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Histopathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) is an indolent B-cell lymphoproliferative
disorder characterised by 7q32 deletion, but the target genes of this deletion
remain unknown. In order to elucidate the genetic target of this deletion, we
performed an integrative analysis of the genetic, epigenetic, transcriptomic and 
miRNomic data. High resolution array comparative genomic hybridization of 56
cases of SMZL delineated a minimally deleted region (2.8 Mb) at 7q32, but showed 
no evidence of any cryptic homozygous deletion or recurrent breakpoint in this
region. Integrated transcriptomic analysis confirmed significant under-expression
of a number of genes in this region in cases of SMZL with deletion, several of
which showed hypermethylation. In addition, a cluster of 8 miRNA in this region
showed under-expression in cases with the deletion, and three (miR-182/96/183)
were also significantly under-expressed (P<0.05) in SMZL relative to other
lymphomas. Genomic sequencing of these miRNA and IRF5, a strong candidate gene,
did not show any evidence of somatic mutation in SMZL. These observations provide
valuable guidance for further characterisation of 7q deletion.

PMCID: PMC3441634
PMID: 23028731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Oct;64(10):3374-82. doi: 10.1002/art.34567.

European genetic ancestry is associated with a decreased risk of lupus nephritis.

Richman IB(1), Taylor KE, Chung SA, Trupin L, Petri M, Yelin E, Graham RR, Lee A,
Behrens TW, Gregersen PK, Seldin MF, Criswell LA.

Author information: 
(1)Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: African Americans, East Asians, and Hispanics with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) are more likely to develop renal disease than are SLE
patients of European descent. This study was undertaken to investigate whether
European genetic ancestry protects against the development of lupus nephritis,
with the aim of exploring the genetic and socioeconomic factors that might
explain this effect.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study of SLE patients from a multiethnic case
collection. Participants were genotyped for 126 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) informative for ancestry. A subset of participants was also genotyped for 
80 SNPs in 14 candidate genes for renal disease in SLE. Logistic regression was
used to test the association between European ancestry and renal disease.
Analyses were adjusted for continental ancestries, socioeconomic status (SES),
and candidate genes.
RESULTS: Participants (n = 1,906) had, on average, 62.4% European, 15.8% African,
11.5% East Asian, 6.5% Amerindian, and 3.8% South Asian ancestry. Among the
participants, 656 (34%) had renal disease. A 10% increase in the proportion of
European ancestry estimated in each participant was associated with a 15%
reduction in the odds of having renal disease, after adjustment for disease
duration and sex (odds ratio 0.85, 95% confidence interval 0.82-0.87; P = 1.9 ×
10(-30) ). Adjustment for other genetic ancestries, measures of SES, or SNPs in
the genes most associated with renal disease (IRF5 [rs4728142], BLK [rs2736340], 
STAT4 [rs3024912], and HLA-DRB1*0301 and DRB1*1501) did not substantively alter
this relationship.
CONCLUSION: European ancestry is protective against the development of renal
disease in SLE, an effect that is independent of other genetic ancestries,
candidate risk alleles, and socioeconomic factors.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3865923
PMID: 23023776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Immunobiology. 2012 Dec;217(12):1315-24. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2012.07.026. Epub
2012 Aug 11.

KAP1/TRIM28: an inhibitor of IRF5 function in inflammatory macrophages.

Eames HL(1), Saliba DG, Krausgruber T, Lanfrancotti A, Ryzhakov G, Udalova IA.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, Imperial College, 65 Aspenlea Road, London 
W6 8LH, United Kingdom. h.eames09@imperial.ac.uk

IRF5 plays a key role in the induction of pro-inflammatory cytokines,
contributing to the plasticity and polarisation of macrophages to an M1 phenotype
and initiation of a potent T(H)1-T(H)17 response. To better understand the means 
of IRF5 transcriptional action, we conducted a screen for IRF5-interacting
partners by affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry and identified
KAP1/TRIM28 as a novel protein-protein interaction partner of IRF5. KAP1 acts as 
a transcriptional co-repressor, chiefly via recruitment of complexes involved in 
chromatin silencing, such as histone deacetylases and methyltransferases. We
mapped the N-terminus of IRF5, encompassing its DNA-binding domain together with 
a highly intrinsically disordered region, as crucial for the IRF5-KAP1
interaction interface, and demonstrated that IRF5 can also form complexes with
the methyltransferase SETDB1. Knockdown of KAP1 (TRIM28) gene expression in human
M1 macrophages potentiated IRF5-mediated expression of TNF and other M1
macrophage markers. This effect may be linked to methyltransferase activity of
SETDB1, such as trimethylation of lysine 9 of histone 3 (H3K9me3), deposition of 
which was decreased at the human TNF locus upon KAP1 knockdown. Our study
furthers an understanding of the complex molecular interactions between the TRIM 
and IRF protein families, and highlights a role of the inhibitory properties of
KAP1 in association with IRF5-mediated gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22995936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Bing Du Xue Bao. 2012 Jun;28(4):462-70.

[Function of tumor suppressor p53 and its role in antiviral immunity].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan WJ(1), Wu KB, Ma ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. yanwenjun01@163.com

Tumor suppressor p53, known as 'the guardian of the genome', has the ability to
prevent the emergence of transformed cells by the induction of cell cycle arrest 
and apoptosis. Otherwise, there were researches about the function of p53, such
as NDA repair, regulating metabolism and maternal reproduction in recent years.
Furthermore, there was a new function for p53 in antiviral apoptosis mentioned in
the research, Integration of interferon-alpha/beta signaling to p53 responses in 
tumour suppression and antiviral defense. In order to define the antiviral
function of p53, many target genes has been defined, such as IRF9, IRF5, ISG15
and TLR3. All of these implied there must be a complex mechanism for role of p53 
in antiviral innate immunity, adaptive immunity and inflammation.

PMID: 22978174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. BMC Genomics. 2012 Sep 4;13:450.

Time-course microarrays reveal early activation of the immune transcriptome and
adipokine dysregulation leads to fibrosis in visceral adipose depots during
diet-induced obesity.

Kwon EY(1), Shin SK, Cho YY, Jung UJ, Kim E, Park T, Park JH, Yun JW, McGregor
RA, Park YB, Choi MS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Food and Nutritional Genomics Research, Kyungpook National
University, Daegu, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Visceral white adipose tissue (WAT) hypertrophy, adipokine
production, inflammation and fibrosis are strongly associated with obesity, but
the time-course of these changes in-vivo are not fully understood. Therefore, the
aim of this study was to establish the time-course of changes in adipocyte
morphology, adipokines and the global transcriptional landscape in visceral WAT
during the development of diet-induced obesity.
RESULTS: C57BL/6<U+2009>J mice were fed a high-fat diet (HFD) or normal diet (ND) and
sacrificed at 8 time-points over 24<U+2009>weeks. Excessive fat accumulation was evident
in visceral WAT depots (Epidydimal, Perirenal, Retroperitoneum, Mesentery) after 
2-4<U+2009>weeks. Fibrillar collagen accumulation was evident in epidydimal adipocytes
at 24<U+2009>weeks. Plasma adipokines, leptin, resistin and adipsin, increased early and
time-dependently, while adiponectin decreased late after 20<U+2009>weeks. Only plasma
leptin and adiponectin levels were associated with their respective mRNA levels
in visceral WAT. Time-course microarrays revealed early and sustained activation 
of the immune transcriptome in epididymal and mesenteric depots. Up-regulated
inflammatory genes included pro-inflammatory cytokines, chemokines (Tnf, Il1rn,
Saa3, Emr1, Adam8, Itgam, Ccl2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 9) and their upstream signalling
pathway genes (multiple Toll-like receptors, Irf5 and Cd14). Early changes also
occurred in fibrosis, extracellular matrix, collagen and cathepsin related-genes,
but histological fibrosis was only visible in the later stages.
CONCLUSIONS: In diet-induced obesity, early activation of TLR-mediated
inflammatory signalling cascades by CD antigen genes, leads to increased
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, resulting in chronic
low-grade inflammation. Early changes in collagen genes may trigger the
accumulation of ECM components, promoting fibrosis in the later stages of
diet-induced obesity. New therapeutic approaches targeting visceral adipose
tissue genes altered early by HFD feeding may help ameliorate the deleterious
effects of diet-induced obesity.

PMCID: PMC3447724
PMID: 22947075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Dec 1;21(23):5209-21. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds359. Epub 2012 Aug 
29.

Immunochip analyses identify a novel risk locus for primary biliary cirrhosis at 
13q14, multiple independent associations at four established risk loci and
epistasis between 1p31 and 7q32 risk variants.

Juran BD(1), Hirschfield GM, Invernizzi P, Atkinson EJ, Li Y, Xie G, Kosoy R,
Ransom M, Sun Y, Bianchi I, Schlicht EM, Lleo A, Coltescu C, Bernuzzi F, Podda M,
Lammert C, Shigeta R, Chan LL, Balschun T, Marconi M, Cusi D, Heathcote EJ, Mason
AL, Myers RP, Milkiewicz P, Odin JA, Luketic VA, Bacon BR, Bodenheimer HC Jr,
Liakina V, Vincent C, Levy C, Franke A, Gregersen PK, Bossa F, Gershwin ME,
deAndrade M, Amos CI; Italian PBC Genetics Study Group, Lazaridis KN, Seldin MF, 
Siminovitch KA.

Collaborators: Almasio PL, Alvaro D, Andreone P, Andriulli A, Barlassina C,
Battezzati PM, Benedetti A, Bragazzi M, Brunetto M, Bruno S, Caliari L, Casella
G, Civardi F, Coco B, Colli A, Colombo M, Colombo S, Cursaro C, Crocè LS,
Crosignani A, Donato F, Fabris L, Ferrari C, Floreani A, Fontana R, Galli A,
Grattagliano I, Lazzari R, Macaluso F, Malinverno F, Marra F, Marzioni M, Mascia 
E, Mattalia A, Montanari R, Morini L, Morisco F, Muratori L, Muratori P, Niro GA,
Picciotto A, Portincasa P, Prati D, Rosina F, Rossi S, Selmi C, Spinzi G,
Strazzabosco M, Tarallo S, Tiribelli C, Toniutto P, Vinci M, Zuin M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Basic Research in Digestive Diseases, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN,
USA.

To further characterize the genetic basis of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), we 
genotyped 2426 PBC patients and 5731 unaffected controls from three independent
cohorts using a single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array (Immunochip) enriched 
for autoimmune disease risk loci. Meta-analysis of the genotype data sets
identified a novel disease-associated locus near the TNFSF11 gene at 13q14,
provided evidence for association at six additional immune-related loci not
previously implicated in PBC and confirmed associations at 19 of 22 established
risk loci. Results of conditional analyses also provided evidence for multiple
independent association signals at four risk loci, with haplotype analyses
suggesting independent SNP effects at the 2q32 and 16p13 loci, but complex
haplotype driven effects at the 3q25 and 6p21 loci. By imputing classical HLA
alleles from this data set, four class II alleles independently contributing to
the association signal from this region were identified. Imputation of genotypes 
at the non-HLA loci also provided additional associations, but none with stronger
effects than the genotyped variants. An epistatic interaction between the IL12RB2
risk locus at 1p31and the IRF5 risk locus at 7q32 was also identified and
suggests a complementary effect of these loci in predisposing to disease. These
data expand the repertoire of genes with potential roles in PBC pathogenesis that
need to be explored by follow-up biological studies.

PMCID: PMC3490520
PMID: 22936693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Immunol. 2012 Oct 1;189(7):3741-50. Epub 2012 Aug 29.

Monocytes from Irf5-/- mice have an intrinsic defect in their response to
pristane-induced lupus.

Yang L(1), Feng D, Bi X, Stone RC, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

The transcription factor IFN regulatory factor (IRF)5 has been identified as a
human systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) susceptibility gene by numerous joint
linkage and genome-wide association studies. Although IRF5 expression is
significantly elevated in primary blood cells of SLE patients, it is not yet
known how IRF5 contributes to SLE pathogenesis. Recent data from mouse models of 
lupus indicate a critical role for IRF5 in the production of pathogenic
autoantibodies and the expression of Th2 cytokines and type I IFN. In the present
study, we examined the mechanisms by which loss of Irf5 protects mice from
pristane-induced lupus at early time points of disease development. We
demonstrate that Irf5 is required for Ly6C(hi) monocyte trafficking to the
peritoneal cavity, which is thought to be one of the initial key events leading
to lupus pathogenesis in this model. Chemotaxis assays using peritoneal lavage
from pristane-injected Irf5(+/+) and Irf5(-/-) littermates support an intrinsic
defect in Irf5(-/-) monocytes. We found the expression of chemokine receptors
CXCR4 and CCR2 to be dysregulated on Irf5(-/-) monocytes and less responsive to
their respective ligands, CXCL12 and CCL2. Bone marrow reconstitution experiments
further supported an intrinsic defect in Irf5(-/-) monocytes because Irf5(+/+)
monocytes were preferentially recruited to the peritoneal cavity in response to
pristane. Taken together, these findings demonstrate an intrinsic role for IRF5
in the response of monocytes to pristane and their recruitment to the primary
site of inflammation that is thought to trigger lupus onset in this experimental 
model of SLE.

PMCID: PMC3454479
PMID: 22933628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Chin Med J (Engl). 2012 Aug;125(16):2873-7.

Toll-like receptor 9 is correlated to disease activity in Chinese systemic lupus 
erythematosus population.

Mu R(1), Sun XY, Lim LT, Xu CH, Dai CX, Su Y, Jia RL, Li ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing
100044, China.

BACKGROUND: Toll like receptor (TLR) 9 has been shown to play a crucial role in
the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in animal models. Its
pathogenic role in human SLE, however, was poorly elucidated. This study was
performed to investigate the role of TLR9 involved in the aberrant signaling
pathway and its correlation with disease activity in SLE.
METHODS: mRNA level of TLR9 and interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were determined by real-time
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). IFN-a expression was measured in the serum of
the SLE patients by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: TLR9 expression was significantly higher in SLE patients than that in
health controls (P = 0.011). SLE patients with positive anti-dsDNA antibody had
significantly higher expression of TLR9 than that with negative anti-dsDNA
antibody (P = 0.001). TLR9 expression was positively correlated with fever (P =
0.017), alopecia (P = 0.046), safety of estrogens in lupus erythematosus national
assessment SLE disease activity index (SELENA-SLEDAI) score (r(s) = 0.385, P =
0.003), and the level of IRF5 (r(s) = 0.35, P = 0.027) and IFN-a (r(s) = 0.627, P
= 0.001) in SLE patients.
CONCLUSION: TLR9 is associated with SLE disease activity and might be involved in
the IFN-a pathway of SLE.

PMID: 22932083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(8):e1002882. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002882. Epub 2012 Aug 
16.

Genetics and regulatory impact of alternative polyadenylation in human
B-lymphoblastoid cells.

Yoon OK(1), Hsu TY, Im JH, Brem RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California Berkeley,
Berkeley, California, United States of America.

Gene expression varies widely between individuals of a population, and regulatory
change can underlie phenotypes of evolutionary and biomedical relevance. A key
question in the field is how DNA sequence variants impact gene expression, with
most mechanistic studies to date focused on the effects of genetic change on
regulatory regions upstream of protein-coding sequence. By contrast, the role of 
RNA 3'-end processing in regulatory variation remains largely unknown, owing in
part to the challenge of identifying functional elements in 3' untranslated
regions. In this work, we conducted a genomic survey of transcript ends in
lymphoblastoid cells from genetically distinct human individuals. Our analysis
mapped the cis-regulatory architecture of 3' gene ends, finding that transcript
end positions did not fall randomly in untranslated regions, but rather
preferentially flanked the locations of 3' regulatory elements, including miRNA
sites. The usage of these transcript length forms and motifs varied across human 
individuals, and polymorphisms in polyadenylation signals and other 3' motifs
were significant predictors of expression levels of the genes in which they lay. 
Independent single-gene experiments confirmed the effects of polyadenylation
variants on steady-state expression of their respective genes, and validated the 
regulatory function of 3' cis-regulatory sequence elements that mediated
expression of these distinct RNA length forms. Focusing on the immune regulator
IRF5, we established the effect of natural variation in RNA 3'-end processing on 
regulatory response to antigen stimulation. Our results underscore the importance
of two mechanisms at play in the genetics of 3'-end variation: the usage of
distinct 3'-end processing signals and the effects of 3' sequence elements that
determine transcript fate. Our findings suggest that the strategy of integrating 
observed 3'-end positions with inferred 3' regulatory motifs will prove to be a
critical tool in continued efforts to interpret human genome variation.

PMCID: PMC3420953
PMID: 22916029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Transl Med. 2012 Aug 21;10:170. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-170.

IRF5 gene polymorphisms in melanoma.

Uccellini L(1), De Giorgi V, Zhao Y, Tumaini B, Erdenebileg N, Dudley ME, Tomei
S, Bedognetti D, Ascierto ML, Liu Q, Simon R, Kottyan L, Kaufman KM, Harley JB,
Wang E, Rosenberg SA, Marincola FM.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Disease and Immunogenetics Section, Department of Transfusion
Medicine, Clinical Center and trans-NIH Center for Human Immunology, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. uccellinilorenzo@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-5 is a transcription factor
involved in type I interferon signaling whose germ line variants have been
associated with autoimmune pathogenesis. Since relationships have been observed
between development of autoimmunity and responsiveness of melanoma to several
types of immunotherapy, we tested whether polymorphisms of IRF5 are associated
with responsiveness of melanoma to adoptive therapy with tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs).
METHODS: 140 TILs were genotyped for four single nucleotide polymorphisms
(rs10954213, rs11770589, rs6953165, rs2004640) and one insertion-deletion in the 
IRF5 gene by sequencing. Gene-expression profile of the TILs, 112 parental
melanoma metastases (MM) and 9 cell lines derived from some metastases were
assessed by Affymetrix Human Gene ST 1.0 array.
RESULTS: Lack of A allele in rs10954213 (G > A) was associated with non-response 
(p < 0.005). Other polymorphisms in strong linkage disequilibrium with rs10954213
demonstrated similar trends. Genes differentially expressed in vitro between cell
lines carrying or not the A allele could be applied to the transcriptional
profile of 112 melanoma metastases to predict their responsiveness to therapy,
suggesting that IRF5 genotype may influence immune responsiveness by affecting
the intrinsic biology of melanoma.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to analyze associations between melanoma
immune responsiveness and IRF5 polymorphism. The results support a common genetic
basis which may underline the development of autoimmunity and melanoma immune
responsiveness.

PMCID: PMC3492128
PMID: 22909381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Br J Haematol. 2012 Sep;158(6):712-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2012.09226.x.
Epub 2012 Jul 23.

High-throughput sequencing analysis of the chromosome 7q32 deletion reveals IRF5 
as a potential tumour suppressor in splenic marginal-zone lymphoma.

Fresquet V(1), Robles EF, Parker A, Martinez-Useros J, Mena M, Malumbres R,
Agirre X, Catarino S, Arteta D, Osaba L, Mollejo M, Hernandez-Rivas JM, Calasanz 
MJ, Daibata M, Dyer MJ, Prosper F, Vizcarra E, Piris MÁ, Oscier D,
Martinez-Climent JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Centre for Applied Medical Research, University of
Navarra, Pamplona, Spain. vfresquet@unav.es

Using high-resolution genomic microarray analysis, a distinct genomic profile was
defined in 114 samples from patients with splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL). 
Deletion or uniparental disomy of chromosome 7q were detected in 42 of 114 (37%) 
SMZLs but in only nine of 170 (5%) mature B-cell lymphomas (P < 0·00001). The
presence of unmutated IGHV, genomic complexity, 17p13-TP53 deletion and 8q-MYC
gain, but not 7q deletion, correlated with shorter overall survival of SMZL
patients. Mapping studies narrowed down a commonly deleted region of 2·7 Mb in
7q32.1-q32.2 spanning a region between the SND1 and COPG2 genes. High-throughput 
sequencing analysis of the 7q32-deleted segment did not identify biallelic
deletions/insertions or clear pathogenic gene mutations, but detected six
nucleotide changes in IRF5 (n = 2), TMEM209 (n = 2), CALU (n = 1) and ZC3HC1 (n =
1) not found in healthy individuals. Comparative expression analysis found a
fourfold down-regulation of IRF5 gene in lymphomas with 7q32 deletion versus
non-deleted tumours (P = 0·032). Ectopic expression of IRF5 in marginal-zone
lymphoma cells decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis in vitro, and
impaired lymphoma development in vivo. These results show that cryptic deletions,
insertions and/or point mutations inactivating genes within 7q32 are not common
in SMZL, and suggest that IRF5 may be a haploinsufficient tumour suppressor in
this lymphoma entity.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22816737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Immunol. 2013 Jan;53(1-2):15-23. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.06.013. Epub 2012
Jul 10.

Murine BAFF expression is up-regulated by estrogen and interferons: implications 
for sex bias in the development of autoimmunity.

Panchanathan R(1), Choubey D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, 3223 Eden
Avenue, P.O. Box-670056, Cincinnati, OH 45267, United States.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in patients and certain mouse models exhibits 
a strong sex bias. Additionally, in most patients, increased serum levels of type
I interferon (IFN-a) are associated with severity of the disease. Because
increased levels of B cell activating factor (BAFF) in SLE patients and mouse
models are associated with the development of SLE, we investigated whether the
female sex hormone estrogen (E2) and/or IFNs (IFN-a or <U+03B3>) could regulate the
expression of murine BAFF. We found that steady-state levels of BAFF mRNA and
protein were measurably higher in immune cells (CD11b(+), CD11c(+), and CD19(+)) 
isolated from C57BL/6 females than the age-matched male mice. Treatment of immune
cells with IFN or E2 significantly increased levels of BAFF mRNA and protein and 
a deficiency of estrogen receptor-a, IRF5, or STAT1 expression in splenic cells
decreased expression of BAFF. Moreover, treatment of RAW264.7 macrophage cells
with IFN-a, IFN-<U+03B3>, or E2 induced expression of BAFF. Interestingly, increased
expression of p202, an IFN and estrogen-inducible protein, in RAW264.7 cells
significantly increased the expression levels of BAFF and also stimulated the
activity of the BAFF-luc-reporter. Accordingly, the increased expression of the
p202 protein in lupus-prone B6.Nba2-ABC than non lupus-prone C57BL/6 and
B6.Nba2-C female mice was associated with increased expression levels of BAFF.
Together, our observations demonstrated that estrogen and IFN-induced increased
levels of the p202 protein in immune cells contribute to sex bias in part through
up-regulation of BAFF expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3439561
PMID: 22784990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Ann Rheum Dis. 2013 Jan;72(1):96-103. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2012-201364. Epub 
2012 Jun 23.

Genome-wide profiling of target genes for the systemic lupus
erythematosus-associated transcription factors IRF5 and STAT4.

Wang C(1), Sandling JK, Hagberg N, Berggren O, Sigurdsson S, Karlberg O, Rönnblom
L, Eloranta ML, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) are encoded by two of 
the strongest susceptibility genes for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the target genes and functional roles of IRF5 and STAT4
in human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs).
METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) was performed in
PBMCs stimulated to activate IRF5 and STAT4. The expression of the target genes
of IRF5 and STAT4 was investigated in a publicly available dataset generated from
PBMCs from patients with SLE and healthy controls. The genomic regions bound by
the transcription complexes mediated by IRF5 and STAT4 were examined for
transcription factor binding motifs and SLE-associated sequence variants.
RESULTS: More than 7000 target genes for IRF5 and STAT4 were identified in
stimulated PBMCs. These genes were enriched to functional pathways in the type I 
interferon system, and have key roles in the inflammatory response. The
expression patterns of the target genes were characteristic for patients with
SLE. The transcription factors high mobility group-I/Y, specificity protein 1,
and paired box 4 may function cooperatively with IRF5 and STAT4 in
transcriptional regulation. Eight of the target regions for IRF5 and STAT4
contain SLE-associated sequence variants.
CONCLUSIONS: By participating in transcription complex with other co-factors,
IRF5 and STAT4 harbour the potential of regulating a large number of target
genes, which may contribute to their strong association with SLE.

PMID: 22730365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Oct;38(2):377-82. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2012.06.001. Epub
2012 Jun 12.

Characteristics of the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and its expression
in response to LCDV and poly I:C challenges in Japanese flounder, Paralichthys
olivaceus.

Hu GB(1), Lou HM, Dong XZ, Liu QM, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)College of Marine Life Sciences, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003,
China. huguobin@mail.ouc.edu.cn

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) has been identified as a key
transcriptional mediator regulating expression of both type I interferons (IFNs) 
and proinflammatory cytokines. In this study, the cDNA and genomic sequences of
IRF5 were isolated from Japanese flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus. The gene of
Japanese flounder (Jf)IRF5 is 7326 bp long, contains 9 exons and 8 introns and
encodes a putative protein of 472 amino acids. The predicted protein sequence
shares 61.1-81.9% identity to fish IRF5 and possesses a DNA-binding domain (DBD),
a middle region (MR), an IRF association domain (IAD), a virus activated domain
(VAD) and two nuclear localization signals (NLSs) conserved in all known IRF5s.
Phylogenetic analysis clustered it into the teleost IRF5 subgroup within
vertebrate IRF5 group. JfIRF5 mRNA was constitutively expressed in all tissues
examined, with higher levels observed in the gills and head kidney. Gene
expression of JfIRF5 was analyzed over a 7-day time course in the gills, head
kidney, spleen and muscle of Japanese flounders challenged with lymphocystis
disease virus (LCDV) and polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly I:C). The data
showed that JfIRF5 expression was slightly up-regulated by LCDV, but its
induction time was clearly moved up; in contrast, the induction upon poly I:C
challenge started not earlier than day 2 post-injection and was stronger and more
persistent with a later peak time in all four organs. The late and long-lasting
inductive expression of JfIRF5 following poly I:C challenge suggests that it
might be an interferon stimulated gene (ISG), the induction of which is driven by
poly I:C-induced type I IFNs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22698613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(6):e1002707. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002707. Epub 2012 Jun 
7.

Brain expression genome-wide association study (eGWAS) identifies human
disease-associated variants.

Zou F(1), Chai HS, Younkin CS, Allen M, Crook J, Pankratz VS, Carrasquillo MM,
Rowley CN, Nair AA, Middha S, Maharjan S, Nguyen T, Ma L, Malphrus KG, Palusak R,
Lincoln S, Bisceglio G, Georgescu C, Kouri N, Kolbert CP, Jen J, Haines JL,
Mayeux R, Pericak-Vance MA, Farrer LA, Schellenberg GD; Alzheimer's Disease
Genetics Consortium, Petersen RC, Graff-Radford NR, Dickson DW, Younkin SG,
Ertekin-Taner N.

Collaborators: Apostolova LG, Arnold SE, Baldwin CT, Barber R, Barmada MM, Beach 
T, Beecham GW, Beekly D, Bennett DA, Bigio EH, Bird TD, Blacker D, Boeve BF,
Bowen JD, Boxer A, Burke JR, Buros J, Buxbaum JD, Cairns NJ, Cantwell LB, Cao C, 
Carlson CS, Carney RM, Carroll SL, Chui HC, Clark DG, Corneveaux J, Cotman CW,
Crane PK, Cruchaga C, Cummings JL, De Jager PL, DeCarli C, DeKosky ST, Demirci
FY, Diaz-Arrastia R, Dick M, Dombroski BA, Duara R, Ellis WG, Evans D, Faber KM, 
Fallon KB, Farlow MR, Ferris S, Foroud TM, Frosch MP, Galasko DR, Gallins PJ,
Ganguli M, Gearing M, Geschwind DH, Ghetti B, Gilbert JR, Gilman S, Giordani B,
Glass JD, Goate AM, Green RC, Growdon JH, Hakonarson H, Hamilton RL, Hardy J,
Harrell LE, Head E, Honig LS, Huentelman MJ, Hulette CM, Hyman BT, Jarvik GP,
Jicha GA, Jin LW, Johnson N, Jun G, Kamboh I, Karlawish J, Karydas A, Kauwe JS,
Kaye JA, Kim R, Koo EH, Kowall NW, Kramer P, Kukull WA, Lah JJ, Larson EB, Levey 
AI, Lieberman AP, Lopez OL, Lunetta KL, Mack WJ, Marson DC, Martin ER, Martiniuk 
F, Mash DC, Masliah E, McCormick WC, McCurry SM, McDavid AN, McKee AC, Mesulam M,
Miller BL, Miller CA, Miller JW, Montine TJ, Morris JC, Myers AJ, Naj AC, Nowotny
P, Parisi JE, Perl DP, Peskind E, Poon WW, Potter H, Quinn JF, Raj A, Rajbhandary
RA, Raskind M, Reiman EM, Reisberg B, Reitz C, Ringman JM, Roberson ED, Rogaeva
E, Rosenberg RN, Sano M, Saykin AJ, Schneider JA, Schneider LS, Seeley W,
Shelanski ML, Slifer MA, Smith CD, Sonnen JA, Spina S, George-Hyslop PS, Stern
RA, Tanzi RE, Trojanowski JQ, Troncoso JC, Tsuang DW, Van Deerlin VM, Vardarajan 
BN, Vinters HV, Vonsattel JP, Wang LS, Weintraub S, Welsh-Bohmer KA, Williamson
J, Woltjer RL.

Genetic variants that modify brain gene expression may also influence risk for
human diseases. We measured expression levels of 24,526 transcripts in brain
samples from the cerebellum and temporal cortex of autopsied subjects with
Alzheimer's disease (AD, cerebellar n=197, temporal cortex n=202) and with other 
brain pathologies (non-AD, cerebellar n=177, temporal cortex n=197). We conducted
an expression genome-wide association study (eGWAS) using 213,528 cisSNPs within 
± 100 kb of the tested transcripts. We identified 2,980 cerebellar
cisSNP/transcript level associations (2,596 unique cisSNPs) significant in both
ADs and non-ADs (q<0.05, p=7.70 × 10(-5)-1.67 × 10(-82)). Of these, 2,089 were
also significant in the temporal cortex (p=1.85 × 10(-5)-1.70 × 10(-141)). The
top cerebellar cisSNPs had 2.4-fold enrichment for human disease-associated
variants (p<10(-6)). We identified novel cisSNP/transcript associations for human
disease-associated variants, including progressive supranuclear palsy
SLCO1A2/rs11568563, Parkinson's disease (PD) MMRN1/rs6532197, Paget's disease
OPTN/rs1561570; and we confirmed others, including PD MAPT/rs242557, systemic
lupus erythematosus and ulcerative colitis IRF5/rs4728142, and type 1 diabetes
mellitus RPS26/rs1701704. In our eGWAS, there was 2.9-3.3 fold enrichment
(p<10(-6)) of significant cisSNPs with suggestive AD-risk association (p<10(-3)) 
in the Alzheimer's Disease Genetics Consortium GWAS. These results demonstrate
the significant contributions of genetic factors to human brain gene expression, 
which are reliably detected across different brain regions and pathologies. The
significant enrichment of brain cisSNPs among disease-associated variants
advocates gene expression changes as a mechanism for many central nervous system 
(CNS) and non-CNS diseases. Combined assessment of expression and disease GWAS
may provide complementary information in discovery of human disease variants with
functional implications. Our findings have implications for the design and
interpretation of eGWAS in general and the use of brain expression quantitative
trait loci in the study of human disease genetics.

PMCID: PMC3369937
PMID: 22685416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Eur J Immunol. 2012 Jun;42(6):1477-87. doi: 10.1002/eji.201141642.

Irf5-deficient mice are protected from pristane-induced lupus via increased Th2
cytokines and altered IgG class switching.

Feng D(1), Yang L, Bi X, Stone RC, Patel P, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
UMDNJ, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Polymorphisms in the transcription factor interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 5
(IRF5) have been identified that show a strong association with an increased risk
of developing the autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). A
potential pathological role for IRF5 in SLE development is supported by the fact 
that increased IRF5 mRNA and protein are observed in primary blood cells of SLE
patients and this correlates with an increased risk of developing the disease.
Here, we demonstrate that IRF5 is required for pristane-induced SLE via its
ability to control multiple facets of autoimmunity. We show that IRF5 is required
for pathological hypergammaglobulinemia and, in the absence of IRF5, IgG class
switching is reduced. Examination of in vivo cytokine expression (and
autoantibody production) identified an increase in Irf5(-/-) mice of Th2
cytokines. In addition, we provide clear evidence that loss of Irf5 significantly
weakens the in vivo type I IFN signature critical for disease pathogenesis in
this model of murine lupus. Together, these findings demonstrate the importance
of IRF5 for autoimmunity and provide a significant new insight into how
overexpression of IRF5 in blood cells of SLE patients may contribute to disease
pathogenesis.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3684952
PMID: 22678902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Oct;64(10):3383-7. doi: 10.1002/art.34571.

Brief Report: IRF5 systemic lupus erythematosus risk haplotype is associated with
asymptomatic serologic autoimmunity and progression to clinical autoimmunity in
mothers of children with neonatal lupus.

Cherian TS(1), Kariuki SN, Franek BS, Buyon JP, Clancy RM, Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Variation in the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene has been
associated with risk of developing systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and this
association is largely dependent upon anti-Ro autoantibodies. This study was
undertaken to determine if the IRF5 genotype is associated with maternal
diagnosis or progression of autoimmunity.
METHODS: Genotyping of haplotype-tagging polymorphisms in IRF5 was performed in
93 subjects of European ancestry who were recruited to the Research Registry for 
Neonatal Lupus. All subjects had high-titer anti-Ro autoantibodies and had a
child with neonatal lupus (NL); allele frequencies were compared to those in
nonautoimmune controls. The mothers had SLE, Sjögren's syndrome (SS), or
undifferentiated autoimmune syndrome (UAS), or were asymptomatic.
RESULTS: The SLE risk haplotype of IRF5 was enriched in all anti-Ro-positive
subjects except in those with SS (odds ratio [OR] 2.55, P = 8.8 × 10(-4) ). The
SLE risk haplotype was even enriched in asymptomatic individuals with anti-Ro
antibodies (OR 2.69, P = 0.019). The same haplotype was more prevalent in
subjects who were initially asymptomatic but developed symptomatic SLE during
followup (OR 5.83, P = 0.0024). Interestingly, SS was associated with 2 minor
IRF5 haplotypes, and these same haplotypes were decreased in frequency in mothers
with SLE and those with UAS.
CONCLUSION: The IRF5 SLE risk haplotype was associated with anti-Ro antibody
positivity in asymptomatic individuals, as well as with progression to SLE in
asymptomatic anti-Ro-positive individuals. SS in mothers of children with NL was 
associated with different IRF5 haplotypes. These data suggest that IRF5
polymorphisms play a role in serologic autoimmunity in humans and may promote the
progression to clinical autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3449035
PMID: 22674082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Gene. 2012 Aug 10;504(2):220-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.05.021. Epub 2012 May
18.

Evidence of association between interferon regulatory factor 5 gene polymorphisms
and asthma.

Wang C(1), Rose-Zerilli MJ, Koppelman GH, Sandling JK, Holloway JW, Postma DS,
Holgate ST, Bours V, Syvänen AC, Dideberg V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, University Hospital, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. chuan.wang@medsci.uu.se

Asthma is a heterogeneous disorder hallmarked by chronic inflammation in the
respiratory system. Exacerbations of asthma are correlated with respiratory
infections. Considering the implication of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) 
in innate and adaptive immunity, we investigated the preferential transmission
patterns of ten IRF5 gene polymorphisms in two asthmatic family cohorts. A common
IRF5 haplotype was found to be associated with asthma and the severity of
asthmatic symptoms. Stratified analysis of subgroups of asthmatic individuals
revealed that the associations were more pronounced in nonatopic asthmatic
individuals. In addition, the risk alleles of IRF5 polymorphisms for asthma were 
almost completely opposite to those for autoimmune disorders. Our study provides 
the first evidence of association between IRF5 and asthma, and sheds light on the
related but potentially distinct roles of IRF5 alleles in the pathogenesis of
asthma and autoimmune disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22613848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nat Immunol. 2012 May 20;13(7):659-66. doi: 10.1038/ni.2307.

Cross-interference of RLR and TLR signaling pathways modulates antibacterial T
cell responses.

Negishi H(1), Yanai H, Nakajima A, Koshiba R, Atarashi K, Matsuda A, Matsuki K,
Miki S, Doi T, Aderem A, Nishio J, Smale ST, Honda K, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Industrial Science,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Microbiol. 2012 Jul;10(7):441.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2012 Jul;12(7):474.
    Nat Immunol. 2012 Jul;13(7):634-5.

Although the mechanisms by which innate pathogen-recognition receptors enhance
adaptive immune responses are increasingly well understood, whether signaling
events from distinct classes of receptors affect each other in modulating
adaptive immunity remains unclear. We found here that the activation of cytosolic
RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) resulted in the selective suppression of
transcription of the gene encoding the p40 subunit of interleukin 12 (Il12b) that
was effectively induced by the activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs). The
RLR-activated transcription factor IRF3 bound dominantly, relative to IRF5, to
the Il12b promoter, where it interfered with the TLR-induced assembly of a
productive transcription-factor complex. The activation of RLRs in mice
attenuated TLR-induced responses of the T helper type 1 cell (T(H)1 cell) and
interleukin 17-producing helper T cell (T(H)17 cell) subset types and,
consequently, viral infection of mice caused death at sublethal doses of
bacterial infection. The innate immune receptor cross-interference we describe
may have implications for infection-associated clinical episodes.

PMID: 22610141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 1;188(11):5752-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103426. Epub 2012
Apr 30.

Defining GM-CSF- and macrophage-CSF-dependent macrophage responses by in vitro
models.

Lacey DC(1), Achuthan A, Fleetwood AJ, Dinh H, Roiniotis J, Scholz GM, Chang MW, 
Beckman SK, Cook AD, Hamilton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Arthritis and Inflammation Research Centre, University
of Melbourne, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3050, Australia.

GM-CSF and M-CSF (CSF-1) induce different phenotypic changes in macrophage
lineage populations. The nature, extent, and generality of these differences were
assessed by comparing the responses to these CSFs, either alone or in
combination, in various human and murine macrophage lineage populations. The
differences between the respective global gene expression profiles of
macrophages, derived from human monocytes by GM-CSF or M-CSF, were compared with 
the differences between the respective profiles for macrophages, derived from
murine bone marrow cells by each CSF. Only 17% of genes regulated differently by 
these CSFs were common across the species. Whether a particular change in
relative gene expression is by direct action of a CSF can be confounded by
endogenous mediators, such as type I IFN, IL-10, and activin A. Time-dependent
differences in cytokine gene expression were noted in human monocytes treated
with the CSFs; in this system, GM-CSF induced a more dramatic expression of
IFN-regulated factor 4 (IRF4) than of IRF5, whereas M-CSF induced IRF5 but not
IRF4. In the presence of both CSFs, some evidence of "competition" at the level
of gene expression was observed. Care needs to be exercised when drawing
definitive conclusions from a particular in vitro system about the roles of
GM-CSF and M-CSF in macrophage lineage biology.

PMID: 22547697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 1;188(11):5348-56. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103319. Epub 2012
Apr 27.

IRF5 risk polymorphisms contribute to interindividual variance in pattern
recognition receptor-mediated cytokine secretion in human monocyte-derived cells.

Hedl M(1), Abraham C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Monocyte-derived cells display highly variable cytokine secretion upon pattern
recognition receptor (PRR) stimulation across individuals; such variability
likely affects interindividual inflammatory/autoimmune disease susceptibility. To
define mechanisms for this heterogeneity, we examined PRR-induced
monocyte-derived cell cytokine secretion from a large cohort of healthy
individuals. Although cytokine secretion ranged widely among individuals, the
magnitude of cytokine induction after individual nucleotide-binding
oligomerization domain 2 (Nod2) and TLR2 stimulation (a cohort of 86 individuals)
or stimulation of multiple TLRs (a cohort of 77 individuals), either alone or in 
combination with Nod2, was consistent intraindividually across these stimuli.
Nod2 and TLRs signal through IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), and common IRF5
polymorphisms confer risk for autoimmunity. We find that cells from rs2004640
IRF5 risk-associated allele carriers secrete increased cytokines upon individual 
or synergistic PRR stimulation in a gene dose- and ligand dose-dependent manner
in both monocyte-derived dendritic cells and monocyte-derived macrophages. IRF5
expression knockdown in IRF5 risk allele carrier cells significantly decreases
PRR-induced cytokines. Moreover, we find that IRF5 knockdown profoundly decreases
Nod2-mediated MAPK and NF-<U+03BA>B pathway activation, whereas the PI3K and mammalian
target of rapamycin pathways are not impaired. Finally, the IRF5 rs2004640
polymorphism is a major determinant of the variance (r(2) = 0.53) in Nod2-induced
cytokine secretion by monocyte-derived cells from different individuals. We
therefore show a profound contribution of a single gene to the variance in
interindividual PRR-induced cytokines. The hyperresponsiveness of IRF5
disease-associated polymorphisms to a wide spectrum of microbial triggers has
broad implications on global immunological responses, host defenses against
pathogens, and inflammatory/autoimmune disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3409850
PMID: 22544929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Genes Immun. 2012 Jul;13(5):421-30. doi: 10.1038/gene.2012.10. Epub 2012 Apr 26.

Unique contribution of IRF-5-Ikaros axis to the B-cell IgG2a response.

Fang CM(1), Roy S, Nielsen E, Paul M, Maul R, Paun A, Koentgen F, Raval FM,
Szomolanyi-Tsuda E, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.

IRF-5 is a transcription factor activated by toll like receptor (TLR)7 and TLR9
during innate immune responses. IRF-5 activates not only Type I IFN, but also
inflammatory cytokines. Most importantly, a genetic variation in the IRF-5 gene
shows a strong association with autoimmune diseases such as Lupus. Here, we
report that IRF5-deficient mice have attenuated IgG2a/c responses to
T-cell-dependent and -independent antigens and to polyoma virus infection. This
defect is due to the intrinsic deletion of IRF-5 in B cells, as SCID mice
reconstituted with Irf5-/- B cells show a decrease in IgG2a/c expression after
viral infection compared with mice that received wild-type B cells. Irf5-/-B
cells in vitro have diminished TLR and cytokine-induced class switching to
IgG2a/c. Addressing the molecular mechanism, we show that IRF-5 regulates IgG2a/c
expression by decreasing Ikaros expression; reconstitution of IRF-5 in Irf5-/- B 
cells downregulates Ikaros levels and increases switching to IgG2a/c. The IRF
site in ikzf1 promoter binds IRF-5, IRF-4 and IRF-8. We show that IRF-8 but not
IRF-4 activates the ikzf1 promoter, and IRF-5 inhibits the transcriptional
activity of IRF-8. Collectively, these results identify the IRF-5-Ikaros axis as 
a critical modulator of IgG2a/c class switching.

PMCID: PMC3628768
PMID: 22535200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2012 Apr;32(2):287-90. doi:
10.1007/s11596-012-0050-6. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Expression of IRF-4 and IBP in skin lesions of patients with psoriasis vulgaris.

Ni A(1), Chen H, Wu Y, Li W, Chen S, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430022, China. dermatoni@163.com

The expression of the interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF-4) and the
IRF-4-binding protein (IBP) in psoriatic skin lesions was investigated. The
expression of IRF-4 and IBP in skin lesions of 20 patients with psoriasis
vulgaris were immunohistochemically dectected. Normal skin from 10 healthy people
was used as normal control. The study showed that expression of IRF-4 was
increased significantly in keratinocytes and inflammatory cells in the lesions of
psoriasis vulgaris than that in the normal control. The detection revealed that
IBP expression in keratinocytes, lymphocytes, hair follicles, and sebaceous
glands in normal skin was significantly lower than that in the lesions of
psoriasis vulgaris (P<0.05). Both IRF-4 and IBP might be involved in the
pathogenesis of psoriasis vulgaris.

PMID: 22528235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cancer. 2012 Apr 16;11:21. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-11-21.

IRF5 promotes the proliferation of human thyroid cancer cells.

Massimino M(1), Vigneri P, Fallica M, Fidilio A, Aloisi A, Frasca F, Manzella L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Bio-Medicine, University of Catania, Via 
Androne, 83-95124 Catania, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 is a transcription factor that
regulates the expression of genes involved in the response to viral infection and
in the stimulation of the immune system. Moreover, multiple studies have
demonstrated that it negatively regulates cell growth and oncogenesis, favoring
cell differentiation and apoptosis.Thyroid carcinoma represents 98% of all
thyroid malignancies and has shown a steady increase in incidence in both the USA
and western European countries.
FINDINGS: We investigated the expression, localization and function of IRF5 in
thyroid cancer cells and found that it is highly expressed in both primary and
immortalized thyroid carcinomas but not in normal thyrocytes. IRF5 levels were
variably modulated by Interferon alpha but IRF5 only localized in the cytoplasmic
compartment, thus failing to induce p21 expression as previously reported in
different cell models. Furthermore, ectopic IRF5 increased both the proliferation
rate and the clonogenic potential of malignant thyroid cells, protecting them
from the cytotoxic effects of DNA-damaging agents. These results were directly
attributable to IRF5, as demonstrated by the reduction in colony-forming ability 
of thyroid cancer cells after IRF5 silencing. An IRF5-dependent induction of
endogenous B-Raf observed in all thyroid cancer cells might contribute to these
unexpected effects.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that, in thyroid malignancies, IRF5 displays 
tumor-promoting rather than tumor-suppressor activities.

PMCID: PMC3444366
PMID: 22507190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:594056. doi: 10.1155/2012/594056. Epub 2012 Feb
22.

Effects of IRF5 lupus risk haplotype on pathways predicted to influence B cell
functions.

Guthridge JM(1), Clark DN, Templeton A, Dominguez N, Lu R, Vidal GS, Kelly JA,
Kauffman KM, Harley JB, Gaffney PM, James JA, Poole BD.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Both genetic and environmental interactions affect systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) development and pathogenesis. One known genetic factor associated with
lupus is a haplotype of the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene. Analysis 
of global gene expression microarray data using gene set enrichment analysis
identified multiple interferon- and inflammation-related gene sets significantly 
overrepresented in cells with the risk haplotype. Pathway analysis using
expressed genes from the significant gene sets impacted by the IRF5 risk
haplotype confirmed significant correlation with the interferon pathway,
Toll-like receptor pathway, and the B-cell receptor pathway. SLE patients with
the IRF5 risk haplotype have a heightened interferon signature, even in an
unstimulated state (P = 0.011), while patients with the IRF5 protective haplotype
have a B cell interferon signature similar to that of controls. These results
identify multiple genes in functionally significant pathways which are affected
by IRF5 genotype. They also establish the IRF5 risk haplotype as a key
determinant of not only the interferon response, but also other B-cell pathways
involved in SLE.

PMCID: PMC3304673
PMID: 22500098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Immunol. 2012 Jul;51(3-4):255-62. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2012.03.017. Epub
2012 Mar 29.

Involvement of Notch signaling pathway in regulating IL-12 expression via c-Rel
in activated macrophages.

Boonyatecha N(1), Sangphech N, Wongchana W, Kueanjinda P, Palaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Biotechnology, Faculty of Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Phayathai Road, Pathumwan, Bangkok, Thailand.

Macrophages play an important role both in innate and adaptive immune responses. 
Treatment with interferon (IFN) <U+03B3> together with lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
activates pro-inflammatory macrophages which secrete various pro-inflammatory
cytokines including IL-12. IL-12 promotes a Th1 type immune response by directly 
controlling the differentiation of CD4(+) T helper 1 cells. Activation of Notch
signaling pathway was reported in activated macrophages but the involvement of
this signaling pathway in IL-12 expression has not been documented. In this
study, we investigated the role of Notch signaling in regulating expression of
the IL-12/IL-23 subunit, IL-12p40. Using a gamma-secretase inhibitor (GSI) to
inhibit Notch signaling, we observed a profound decrease in il12p40 mRNA levels
and IL-12p70 secretion upon IFN<U+03B3>/LPS stimulation. On the other hand,
overexpression of activated form of Notch1 in activated RAW264.7 macrophage-like 
cell lines significantly increased the level of il12p40 mRNA. GSI treatment did
not affect the expression of irf5, a master regulator of il12p40 transcription in
macrophages. Detailed analysis of the signaling cascades that were affected by
this inhibition showed that c-Rel nuclear translocation was inhibited and Erk1/2 
activation was compromised by GSI treatment. Addition of exogenous tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) a only partially rescued the expression of il12p40 in the presence
of GSI. Unexpectedly, inhibition of Notch signaling using a dominant negative
(DN) Mastermind-like (MAML) transcription co-activator, did not affect c-Rel
nuclear localization upon activation or il12p40 mRNA levels, suggesting that the 
transcriptional activity of Notch signaling is dispensable for the activation of 
c-Rel. These results strongly suggest that Notch signaling in activated
macrophages is involved in regulating the expression of il12p40 directly via
c-Rel and indirectly via TNFa production.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3358353
PMID: 22463790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Jul;71(7):1197-202. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200901.
Epub 2012 Mar 22.

IRF5 polymorphism predicts prognosis in patients with systemic sclerosis.

Sharif R(1), Mayes MD, Tan FK, Gorlova OY, Hummers LK, Shah AA, Furst DE, Khanna 
D, Martin J, Bossini-Castillo L, Gonzalez EB, Ying J, Draeger HT, Agarwal SK,
Reveille JD, Arnett FC, Wigley FM, Assassi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The first genome-wide association study (GWAS) of systemic sclerosis
(SSc) demonstrated three non-major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
susceptibility loci. The goal of this study was to investigate the impact of
these gene variants on survival and severity of interstitial lung disease (ILD)
in SSc.
METHODS: The authors examined 1443 Caucasian SSc patients enrolled in the
Genetics versus Environment In Scleroderma Outcome Study (GENISOS) and
Scleroderma Family Registry (n = 914 - discovery cohort) and The Johns Hopkins
Scleroderma Cohort (n = 529 - replication cohort). Forced vital capacity (FVC)%
predicted was used as a surrogate for ILD severity. Five single nucleotide
polymorphisms, IRF5 (rs10488631, rs12537284, rs4728142), STAT4 (rs3821236), CD247
(rs2056626) reached genome-wide significance in the SSc-GWAS and were examined in
the current study.
RESULTS: Overall, 15.5% of the patients had died over the follow-up period of 5.5
years. The IRF5 rs4728142 minor allele was predictive of longer survival in the
discovery cohort (p = 0.021) and in the independent replication cohort (p =
0.047) and combined group (HR: 0.75, 95% CI 0.62 to 0.90, p = 0.002). The
association of this SNP with survival was independent of age at disease onset,
disease type and autoantibody profile (anticentromere and antitopoisomerase
antibodies). The minor allele frequency of IRF5 rs4728142 was 49.4%. Moreover,
IRF5 rs4728142 minor allele correlated with higher FVC% predicted at enrolment (p
= 0.019). Finally, the IRF5 rs4728142 minor allele was associated with lower IRF5
transcript expression in patients and controls (p = 0.016 and p = 0.034,
respectively), suggesting that the IRF5, rs4728142 SNP, may be functionally
relevant.
CONCLUSION: An SNP in the IRF5 promoter region (rs4728142), associated with lower
IRF5 transcript levels, was predictive of longer survival and milder ILD in
patients with SSc.

PMCID: PMC3375372
PMID: 22440820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Apr 10;109(15):E898-904. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1118155109. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

Spontaneous mutation of the Dock2 gene in Irf5-/- mice complicates interpretation
of type I interferon production and antibody responses.

Purtha WE(1), Swiecki M, Colonna M, Diamond MS, Bhattacharya D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Genome-wide studies have identified associations between polymorphisms in the IFN
regulatory factor-5 (Irf5) gene and a variety of human autoimmune diseases. Its
functional role in disease pathogenesis, however, remains unclear, as studies in 
Irf5(-/-) mice have reached disparate conclusions regarding the importance of
this transcription factor in type I IFN production and antibody responses. We
identified a spontaneous genomic duplication and frameshift mutation in the
guanine exchange factor dedicator of cytokinesis 2 (Dock2) that has arisen in at 
least a subset of circulating Irf5(-/-) mice and inadvertently been bred to
homozygosity. Retroviral expression of DOCK2, but not IRF-5, rescued defects in
plasmacytoid dendritic cell and B-cell development, and Irf5(-/-) mice lacking
the mutation in Dock2 exhibited normal plasmacytoid dendritic cell and B-cell
development, largely intact type I IFN responses, and relatively normal antibody 
responses to viral infection. Thus, confirmation of the normal Dock2 genotype in 
circulating Irf5(-/-) mice is warranted, and our data may partly explain
conflicting results in this field.

PMCID: PMC3326475
PMID: 22431588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):4113-21. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103113. Epub 2012
Mar 14.

Pleiotropic IFN-dependent and -independent effects of IRF5 on the pathogenesis of
experimental lupus.

Xu Y(1), Lee PY, Li Y, Liu C, Zhuang H, Han S, Nacionales DC, Weinstein J,
Mathews CE, Moldawer LL, Li SW, Satoh M, Yang LJ, Reeves WH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610-0221, USA.

Genetic polymorphisms of IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) are associated with an
increased risk of lupus in humans. In this study, we examined the role of IRF5 in
the pathogenesis of pristane-induced lupus in mice. The pathological response to 
pristane in IRF5(-/-) mice shared many features with type I IFN receptor
(IFNAR)(-/-) and TLR7(-/-) mice: production of anti-Sm/RNP autoantibodies,
glomerulonephritis, generation of Ly6C(hi) monocytes, and IFN-I production all
were greatly attenuated. Lymphocyte activation following pristane injection was
greatly diminished in IRF5(-/-) mice, and Th cell differentiation was deviated
from Th1 in wild-type mice toward Th2 in IRF5(-/-) mice. Th cell development was 
skewed similarly in TLR7(-/-) or IFNAR(-/-) mice, suggesting that IRF5 alters T
cell activation and differentiation by affecting cytokine production. Indeed,
production of IFN-I, IL-12, and IL-23 in response to pristane was markedly
decreased, whereas IL-4 increased. Unexpectedly, plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(pDC) were not recruited to the site of inflammation in IRF5(-/-) or MyD88(-/-)
mice, but were recruited normally in IFNAR(-/-) and TLR7(-/-) mice. In striking
contrast to wild-type mice, pristane did not stimulate local expression of CCL19 
and CCL21 in IRF5(-/-) mice, suggesting that IRF5 regulates chemokine-mediated
pDC migration independently of its effects on IFN-I. Collectively, these data
indicate that altered production of IFN-I and other cytokines in IRF5(-/-) mice
prevents pristane from inducing lupus pathology by broadly affecting T and B
lymphocyte activation/differentiation. Additionally, we uncovered a new,
IFN-I-independent role of IRF5 in regulating chemokines involved in the homing of
pDCs and certain lymphocyte subsets.

PMCID: PMC3580234
PMID: 22422888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033098. Epub 2012 Mar 8.

Activation of interferon regulatory factor 5 by site specific phosphorylation.

Chang Foreman HC(1), Van Scoy S, Cheng TF, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, New York, United States of America.

The cellular defense to infection depends on accurate activation of transcription
factors and expression of select innate immunity genes. Interferon regulatory
factor 5 (IRF5), a risk factor for systemic lupus erythematosus, is activated in 
response to pathogen recognition receptor engagement and downstream effector
molecules. We find the nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain containing
protein 2 (NOD2) receptor to be a significant activator of IRF5. Phosphorylation 
is key to the regulation of IRF5, but the precise phosphorylation sites in IRF5
remained to be identified. We used mass spectrometry to identify for the first
time specific residues that are phosphorylated in response to TANK-binding
kinase-1 (TBK-1), tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6), or 
receptor interacting protein 2 (RIP2). RIP2, a kinase known to function
downstream of NOD2, was the most effective activator of IRF5-regulated gene
expression. To determine if the phosphorylated residues are required or
sufficient for IRF5 activity, aspartic acid phosphomimetic substitutions or
inactivating alanine substitutions were tested. Phosphorylation of carboxyl
serines 451 and 462 appear the primary trigger of IRF5 function in nuclear
accumulation, transcription, and apoptosis. Results indicate polyubiquitination
of IRF5 does not play a major role in its transcriptional activity, and that
ubiquitination and phosphorylation are independent modifications.

PMCID: PMC3297630
PMID: 22412986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jun 15;21(12):2825-35. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds099. Epub 2012 Mar
9.

Identification of CSK as a systemic sclerosis genetic risk factor through Genome 
Wide Association Study follow-up.

Martin JE(1), Broen JC, Carmona FD, Teruel M, Simeon CP, Vonk MC, van 't Slot R, 
Rodriguez-Rodriguez L, Vicente E, Fonollosa V, Ortego-Centeno N, González-Gay MA,
García-Hernández FJ, de la Peña PG, Carreira P; Spanish Scleroderma Group,
Voskuyl AE, Schuerwegh AJ, van Riel PL, Kreuter A, Witte T, Riemekasten G, Airo
P, Scorza R, Lunardi C, Hunzelmann N, Distler JH, Beretta L, van Laar J, Chee MM,
Worthington J, Herrick A, Denton C, Tan FK, Arnett FC, Assassi S, Fonseca C,
Mayes MD, Radstake TR, Koeleman BP, Martin J.

Collaborators: Portales RG, Camps M, Fernández-Nebro A, Román-Ivorra J, Beltran
E, Castillo MJ, Sánchez-Román J, Vicente E, Díaz B, Trapiella L, Gallego M,
Aguirre MÁ, Callejas-Rubio JL, Ríos R, Castellvi I, Egurbide MV, Espinosa G, Pros
A, Navarrete N, Díaz-González F, Hernández V, Andréu JL, Fernández-Castro M,
Comet LS, López-Longo FJ, Martinez-Estupiñan L, Rodríguez-Carballeira M, Narváez 
FJ, Freire Mdel C, Vaqueiro I.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitologia y Biomedicina Lopez-Neyra, CSIC, Granada, Spain.
cebercoto@ipb.csic.es

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is complex autoimmune disease affecting the connective
tissue; influenced by genetic and environmental components. Recently, we
performed the first successful genome-wide association study (GWAS) of SSc. Here,
we perform a large replication study to better dissect the genetic component of
SSc. We selected 768 polymorphisms from the previous GWAS and genotyped them in
seven replication cohorts from Europe. Overall significance was calculated for
replicated significant SNPs by meta-analysis of the replication cohorts and
replication-GWAS cohorts (3237 cases and 6097 controls). Six SNPs in regions not 
previously associated with SSc were selected for validation in another five
independent cohorts, up to a total of 5270 SSc patients and 8326 controls. We
found evidence for replication and overall genome-wide significance for one novel
SSc genetic risk locus: CSK [P-value = 5.04 × 10(-12), odds ratio (OR) = 1.20].
Additionally, we found suggestive association in the loci PSD3 (P-value = 3.18 × 
10(-7), OR = 1.36) and NFKB1 (P-value = 1.03 × 10(-6), OR = 1.14). Additionally, 
we strengthened the evidence for previously confirmed associations. This study
significantly increases the number of known putative genetic risk factors for
SSc, including the genes CSK, PSD3 and NFKB1, and further confirms six previously
described ones.

PMCID: PMC3368627
PMID: 22407130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Autoimmun. 2012 Aug;39(1-2):77-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2012.01.014. Epub 2012
Mar 7.

The immunobiology of Ro52 (TRIM21) in autoimmunity: a critical review.

Oke V(1), Wahren-Herlenius M.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine
L8:04, Karolinska Institutet, 17176 Stockholm, Sweden.

Ro52 is a common target of circulating autoantibodies in autoimmune disease. Data
indicate that anti-Ro52 antibodies are associated with distinct clinical
manifestations. It is therefore of major interest to understand how it becomes an
antigenic target and what cells express this protein under what conditions and
what cellular function it has. Ro52 contains a RING and a B-box motif, followed
by a coiled-coil domain and a B30.2 (or PRYSPRY) region in the C-terminal end.
This molecular structure places Ro52 within the family of tripartite motif
proteins (TRIM), and it is also denoted TRIM21. Like several other TRIM proteins,
Ro52 has E3 ligase activity and functions in the process of ubiquitination. Ro52 
is expressed in the immune system as a predominantly cytoplasmic protein that can
be upregulated and translocate to the nucleus in a proinflammatory environment.
Reported substrates for Ro52-mediated ubiquitination include IRF3, IRF5, IRF7 and
IRF8, and via these transcription factors Ro52 regulates type 1 interferon and
cytokine production. Ro52 is upregulated at the site of autoimmune inflammation, 
such as cutaneous lupus lesions. This implies that Ro52 may have an important
role in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity, and this paper will review the
available data on the role of Ro52 in immune responses and autoimmune
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22402340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Adv Wound Care (New Rochelle). 2012 Feb;1(1):10-16.

Regulation of Macrophage Polarization and Wound Healing.

Ferrante CJ(1), Leibovich SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine and The Cardiovascular
Research Institute, New Jersey Medical School, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey , Newark, New Jersey.

BACKGROUND: Macrophages (Mfs) participate in wound healing by coordinating
inflammatory and angiogenic processes. Mfs respond to environmental cues by
adopting either "classically" activated (M1) proinflammatory or "alternatively"
activated (M2a, M2b, M2c, M2d) wound healing phenotypes.
THE PROBLEM: Mf polarization is essential for wound healing and aberrations in
this process are linked to several pathologies. It is important to elucidate
molecular mechanisms underlying Mf polarization.
BASIC/CLINICAL SCIENCE ADVANCES: Mfs are categorized as proinflammatory (M1) or
anti-inflammatory/wound healing (M2). M1 Mfs are observed in initial tissue
damage responses, are induced by exogenous pathogen-associated molecular patterns
or endogenous damage-associated molecular patterns, and exhibit increased
phagocytosis and pro-inflammatory cytokine production, facilitating innate
immunity and wound debridement. M2 Mfs predominate later in repair, express
vascular endothelial growth factor, transforming growth factor beta, and
interleukin 10 (IL-10), are activated by varied stimuli, assist in the resolution
of inflammation, and promote tissue formation and remodeling. Recent work has
characterized a novel "M2d" phenotype resulting from adenosine-dependent
"switching" of M1 Mfs that exhibits a pattern of marker expression that is
distinct from canonical IL-4/IL-13-dependent M2a Mfs. Recent studies have
demonstrated important roles for specific transcriptional elements in M1 and M2a 
Mf polarization, notably members of the interferon regulatory factor family
interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and IRF4, respectively. The role of these
IRFs in M2d polarization and wound healing remains to be determined.
CLINICAL CARE RELEVANCE: Knowledge of microenvironmental signals and molecular
mechanisms that mediate Mf polarization should permit their manipulation to
regulate important physiological processes and resolve pathological conditions.
CONCLUSION: Proper Mf polarization is essential to effective wound healing, and
distinct phenotypes, such as the angiogenic M2d Mf, may be of critical importance
to this process. The IRF5 transcription factor has been shown to play a key role 
in M1 Mf activation and the Jumonji domain containing-3-IRF4 pathway has been
implicated in M2 Mf activation.

PMCID: PMC3623587
PMID: 24527272  [PubMed]


207. Genes Immun. 2012 Jun;13(4):351-5. doi: 10.1038/gene.2011.90. Epub 2012 Jan 19.

A two-marker haplotype in the IRF5 gene is associated with inflammatory bowel
disease in a North American cohort.

Gathungu G(1), Zhang CK, Zhang W, Cho JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stony Brook Medical Center, Stony Brook, NY 11794,
USA. grace.gathungu@stonybrook.edu

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) located on human chromosome 7q32 is
associated with many chronic inflammatory disorders. IRF5 is the key regulator of
proinflammatory cytokines and type I interferons. We surveyed two cohorts of
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients from a North American Consortium. Six
single-nucleotide polymorphisms and a 5-base-pair (bp) insertion-deletion (CGGGG 
indel)polymorphism were investigated. Cytokine secretion was measured in primary 
lymphocytes after toll-like receptor 9 stimulation. Two-marker haplotypes
containing the pairs (rs4728142-CGGGG indel) and (CGGGG indel-rs7808907) were
associated with IBD protection (P=2.89 × 10(-6), P=9.32 × 10(-4) (non-Jewish
ancestry) and P=4.68 × 10(-8), P=2.50 × 10(-8) (Jewish ancestry)) and IBD risk
(P=0.004, P=0.003 (Jewish ancestry), respectively. IRF5 polymorphisms were risk
factors for IBD in a single cohort. Interleukin-12-p70 cytokine production was
higher (P=0.04) in lymphocytes from controls with two alleles of the 5-bp
insertion. IRF5 polymorphisms contribute to the risk profile for Crohn's disease 
and ulcerative colitis along with ancestry and NOD2 genotypes.

PMCID: PMC3809990
PMID: 22257839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Curr Pharm Biotechnol. 2012 Aug;13(10):2054-62.

Primary Sjögren's syndrome and the type I interferon system.

Nordmark G(1), Eloranta ML, Ronnblom L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. Gunnel.Nordmark@medsci.uu.se

Patients with primary Sjögren's syndrome (pSS) have an activated type I
interferon (IFN) system that contribute to the etiopathogenesis and clinical
manifestations of the disease. The type I IFN system consists of the stimuli for 
type I IFN production, the receptors, cells and transcription factors involved in
the synthesis of type I IFNs, the type I IFN-receptor and the effects on target
cells. Increased type I IFN activity has been demonstrated in sera from patients 
with pSS and IFN-a, the main type I IFN, has been detected in the minor salivary 
glands. Gene expression profiling of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
and minor salivary glands from pSS patients display an up-regulation of type I
IFN-induced genes, an "IFN signature". The professional IFN-a producing
plasmacytoid dendritic cell (pDC) shows a reduced frequency in the peripheral
blood, but has been detected in the salivary glands, possibly due to tissue
recruitment. Polymorphisms in the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) and
signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) genes in the type I
IFN system, are associated with increased risk for pSS. A postulated disease
model is that an initial viral infection induces type I IFN production in the
salivary glands with subsequent activation of the adaptive immune system
resulting in the production of autoantibodies against the RNA-binding proteins
SSA/SSB/RNP. Interferogenic immune complexes are formed, which trigger the pDCs
to an ongoing type I IFN production, which sustain the disease process. Potential
therapeutic targets can be identified within the type I IFN system.

PMID: 22208657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28683. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028683. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Epigenetic silencing of IRF7 and/or IRF5 in lung cancer cells leads to increased 
sensitivity to oncolytic viruses.

Li Q(1), Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Genetics, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

Defective IFN signaling results in loss of innate immunity and sensitizes cells
to enhanced cytolytic killing after Vesticular Stomatitis Virus (VSV) infection. 
Examination of the innate immunity status of normal human bronchial epithelial
cells Beas2B and 7 lung cancer cells revealed that the abrogation of IFN
signaling in cancer cells is associated with greater sensitivity to VSV
infection. The disruption of the IFN pathway in lung cancer cell lines and
primary tumor tissues is caused by epigenetic silencing of critical interferon
responsive transcription factors IRF7 and/or IRF5. Although
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment fails to reactivate IRF7 and IRF5 expression or 
protect cells from VSV infection, manipulating IFN signaling by altering IRF
expression changes the viral susceptibility of these cells. Lung cancer cells can
be partially protected from viral killing using IRF5+IRF7 overexpression, whereas
IFN pathway disruption by transfection of siRNAs to IRF5+IRF7 increases cells'
vulnerability to viral infection. Therefore, IRF5 and IRF7 are key transcription 
factors in IFN pathway that determine viral sensitivity of lung cancer cells; the
epigenetically impaired IFN pathway in lung cancer tissues provides potential
biomarkers for successful selective killing of cancer cells by oncolytic viral
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3237484
PMID: 22194884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Apr;51(4):619-26. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ker364.
Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 gene polymorphism confers risk to several
rheumatic diseases and correlates with expression of alternative thymic
transcripts.

Nordang GB(1), Viken MK, Amundsen SS, Sanchez ES, Flatø B, Førre OT, Martin J,
Kvien TK, Lie BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål, Kirkeveien 
166, N-0407 Oslo, Norway. g.b.namlos@medisin.uio.no

OBJECTIVES: Polymorphisms in genes related to the IFN pathway were investigated
for susceptibility to rheumatic diseases and correlation with gene expression in 
thymus.
METHODS: Forty-five polymorphisms were genotyped in Norwegian patients with RA
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>518), JIA (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>440), SLE (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>154) and healthy controls (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>756). Forty-two
thymic samples were used for gene expression analysis. Six hundred and fifty SLE 
patients and 737 healthy controls from Spain were available for replication.
RESULTS: We found a novel association between interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF5), rs2004640 and JIA, in particular with the polyarthritis RF-negative
patients [odds ratio (OR)<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.60; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.17, 2.20;
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003]. Also, we confirmed the associations between rs2004640 and SLE
(OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.95; 95% CI 1.50, 2.53; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>3.75<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7)), which was further strengthened
in a meta-analysis (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.44; 95% CI 1.36, 1.52; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.11<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-37)). Suggestive
evidence of association between rs2004640 and RA was found in the Norwegian
discovery cohort (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.19; 95% CI 1.02, 1.40; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.029) and strengthened in a 
meta-analysis (OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.11; 95% CI 1.05, 1.18; P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00028). Expression levels of
exon 1B IRF5 transcripts were dependent on the presence of the rs2004640 T risk
allele in thymic tissue, while exon 1A transcript levels correlated with IRF5
promoter CGGGG-indel variants.
CONCLUSION: The IFN pathway gene, IRF5, is a common susceptibility factor for
several rheumatic and autoimmune diseases, and risk variants are correlated with 
expression of alternative IRF5 transcripts in thymus implying a regulatory role.

PMID: 22179739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Immunol. 2012 Jan 1;188(1):270-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1102311. Epub 2011 Nov 
23.

Distinct regulation of murine lupus susceptibility genes by the IRF5/Blimp-1
axis.

Panchanathan R(1), Liu H, Liu H, Fang CM, Erickson LD, Pitha PM, Choubey D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
45267, USA.

Genome-wide association studies have identified lupus susceptibility genes such
as IRF5 and PRDM1 (encoding for IFN regulatory factor 5 [IRF]5 and Blimp-1) in
the human genome. Accordingly, the murine Irf5 and Prdm1 genes have been shown to
play a role in lupus susceptibility. However, it remains unclear how IRF5 and
Blimp-1 (a transcriptional target of IRF5) contribute to lupus susceptibility.
Given that the murine lupus susceptibility locus Nba2 includes the IFN-regulated 
genes Ifi202 (encoding for the p202 protein), Aim2 (encoding for the Aim2
protein), and Fcgr2b (encoding for the Fc<U+03B3>RIIB receptor), we investigated whether
the IRF5/Blimp-1 axis could regulate the expression of these genes. We found that
an Irf5 deficiency in mice decreased the expression of Blimp-1 and reduced the
expression of the Ifi202. However, the deficiency increased the expression of
Aim2 and Fcgr2b. Correspondingly, increased expression of IRF5 in cells increased
levels of Blimp-1 and p202 protein. Moreover, Blimp-1 expression increased the
expression of Ifi202, whereas it reduced the expression of Aim2. Interestingly,
an Aim2 deficiency in female mice increased the expression of IRF5. Similarly,
the Fcgr2b-deficient mice expressed increased levels of IRF5. Moreover, increased
expression of IRF5 and Blimp-1 in lupus-prone C57BL/6.Nba2, New Zealand Black,
and C57BL/6.Sle123 female mice (as compared with age-matched C57BL/6 female mice)
was associated with increased levels of the p202 protein. Taken together, our
observations demonstrate that the IRF5/Blimp-1 axis differentially regulates the 
expression of Nba2 lupus susceptibility genes, and they suggest an important role
for the IRF5/Blimp-1/p202 axis in murine lupus susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3244553
PMID: 22116829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 May;71(5):694-9. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200385. Epub
2011 Nov 21.

Analysis of autosomal genes reveals gene-sex interactions and higher total
genetic risk in men with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Hughes T(1), Adler A, Merrill JT, Kelly JA, Kaufman KM, Williams A, Langefeld CD,
Gilkeson GS, Sanchez E, Martin J, Boackle SA, Stevens AM, Alarcón GS, Niewold TB,
Brown EE, Kimberly RP, Edberg JC, Ramsey-Goldman R, Petri M, Reveille JD,
Criswell LA, Vilá LM, Jacob CO, Gaffney PM, Moser KL, Vyse TJ, Alarcón-Riquelme
ME; BIOLUPUS Network, James JA, Tsao BP, Scofield RH, Harley JB, Richardson BC,
Sawalha AH.

Collaborators: Frostegård J, Truedsson L, de Ramón E, Sabio JM,
González-Escribano MF, Ortego N, Callejas JL, Sánchez-Román J, D'Alfonso S,
Migliarese S, Sebastiani GD, Galeazzi M, Witte T, Lauwerys BR, Endreffy E, Kovács
L, Vasconcelos C, da Silva BM.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Clinical Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a sexually dimorphic autoimmune
disease which is more common in women, but affected men often experience a more
severe disease. The genetic basis of sexual dimorphism in SLE is not clearly
defined. A study was undertaken to examine sex-specific genetic effects among SLE
susceptibility loci.
METHODS: A total of 18 autosomal genetic susceptibility loci for SLE were
genotyped in a large set of patients with SLE and controls of European descent,
consisting of 5932 female and 1495 male samples. Sex-specific genetic association
analyses were performed. The sex-gene interaction was further validated using
parametric and non-parametric methods. Aggregate differences in sex-specific
genetic risk were examined by calculating a cumulative genetic risk score for SLE
in each individual and comparing the average genetic risk between male and female
patients.
RESULTS: A significantly higher cumulative genetic risk for SLE was observed in
men than in women. (P=4.52x10-8) A significant sex-gene interaction was seen
primarily in the human leucocyte antigen (HLA) region but also in IRF5, whereby
men with SLE possess a significantly higher frequency of risk alleles than women.
The genetic effect observed in KIAA1542 is specific to women with SLE and does
not seem to have a role in men.
CONCLUSIONS: The data indicate that men require a higher cumulative genetic load 
than women to develop SLE. These observations suggest that sex bias in
autoimmunity could be influenced by autosomal genetic susceptibility loci.

PMCID: PMC3324666
PMID: 22110124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Mar;71(3):463-8. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200463. Epub
2011 Nov 16.

IRF5 haplotypes demonstrate diverse serological associations which predict serum 
interferon alpha activity and explain the majority of the genetic association
with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Niewold TB(1), Kelly JA, Kariuki SN, Franek BS, Kumar AA, Kaufman KM, Thomas K,
Walker D, Kamp S, Frost JM, Wong AK, Merrill JT, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Tikly M,
Ramsey-Goldman R, Reveille JD, Petri MA, Edberg JC, Kimberly RP, Alarcón GS,
Kamen DL, Gilkeson GS, Vyse TJ, James JA, Gaffney PM, Moser KL, Crow MK, Harley
JB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology and Gwen Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology
Research, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.
tniewold@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

OBJECTIVE: High serum interferon a (IFNa) activity is a heritable risk factor for
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Auto-antibodies found in SLE form immune
complexes which can stimulate IFNa production by activating endosomal Toll-like
receptors and interferon regulatory factors (IRFs), including IRF5. Genetic
variation in IRF5 is associated with SLE susceptibility; however, it is unclear
how IRF5 functional genetic elements contribute to human disease.
METHODS: 1034 patients with SLE and 989 controls of European ancestry, 555
patients with SLE and 679 controls of African-American ancestry, and 73 patients 
with SLE of South African ancestry were genotyped at IRF5 polymorphisms, which
define major haplotypes. Serum IFNa activity was measured using a functional
assay.
RESULTS: In European ancestry subjects, anti-double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) and
anti-Ro antibodies were each associated with different haplotypes characterised
by a different combination of functional genetic elements (OR>2.56, p<1.9×10(-14)
for both). These IRF5 haplotype-auto-antibody associations strongly predicted
higher serum IFNa in patients with SLE and explained >70% of the genetic risk of 
SLE due to IRF5. In African-American patients with SLE a similar relationship
between serology and IFNa was observed, although the previously described
European ancestry-risk haplotype was present at admixture proportions in
African-American subjects and absent in African patients with SLE.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors define a novel risk haplotype of IRF5 that is associated
with anti-dsDNA antibodies and show that risk of SLE due to IRF5 genotype is
largely dependent upon particular auto-antibodies. This suggests that
auto-antibodies are directly pathogenic in human SLE, resulting in increased IFNa
in cooperation with particular combinations of IRF5 functional genetic elements. 
SLE is a systemic autoimmune disorder affecting multiple organ systems including 
the skin, musculoskeletal, renal and haematopoietic systems. Humoral autoimmunity
is a hallmark of SLE, and patients frequently have circulating auto-antibodies
directed against dsDNA, as well as RNA binding proteins (RBP). Anti-RBP
autoantibodies include antibodies which recognize Ro, La, Smith (anti-Sm), and
ribonucleoprotein (anti-nRNP), collectively referred to as anti-retinol-binding
protein). Anti-retinol-binding protein and anti-dsDNA auto-antibodies are rare in
the healthy population. These auto-antibodies can be present in sera for years
preceding the onset of clinical SLE illness and are likely pathogenic in SLE.

PMCID: PMC3307526
PMID: 22088620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Ups J Med Sci. 2011 Nov;116(4):227-37. doi: 10.3109/03009734.2011.624649.

The type I interferon system in the etiopathogenesis of autoimmune diseases.

Rönnblom L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. Lars.Ronnblom@medsci.uu.se

Many patients with systemic autoimmune diseases have signs of a continuous
production of type I interferon (IFN) and display an increased expression of
IFN-a-regulated genes. The reason for the on-going IFN-a synthesis in these
patients seems to be an activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) by
immune complexes (ICs), consisting of autoantibodies in combination with DNA or
RNA-containing autoantigens. Such interferogenic ICs are internalized via the
Fc<U+03B3>RIIa expressed on pDCs, reach the endosome, and stimulate Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-7 or -9, which subsequently leads to IFN-a gene transcription. Variants of 
genes involved in both the IFN-a synthesis and response have been linked to an
increased risk to develop systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and other autoimmune
diseases. Among these autoimmunity risk genes are IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5),
which is involved in TLR signaling, and the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) that interacts with the type I IFN receptor. Several
other gene variants in the IFN signaling pathway also confer an increased risk to
develop an autoimmune disease. The observations that IFN-a therapy can induce
autoimmunity and that many autoimmune conditions have an on-going type I IFN
production suggest that the type I IFN system has a pivotal role in the
etiopathogenesis of these diseases. Possible mechanisms behind the dysregulated
type IFNsystem in autoimmune diseases and how the IFN-a produced can contribute
to the development of an autoimmune process will be reviewed.

PMCID: PMC3207297
PMID: 22066971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Breast Cancer Res. 2011;13(6):R111. doi: 10.1186/bcr3053. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Loss of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) expression in human ductal
carcinoma correlates with disease stage and contributes to metastasis.

Bi X(1), Hameed M, Mirani N, Pimenta EM, Anari J, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
UMDNJ, Newark, NJ 07101, USA.

INTRODUCTION: New signaling pathways of the interleukin (IL) family, interferons 
(IFN) and interferon regulatory factors (IRF) have recently been found within
tumor microenvironments and in metastatic sites. Some of these cytokines
stimulate while others inhibit breast cancer proliferation and/or invasion. IRFs,
a family of nine mammalian transcription factors, have multiple biologic
functions that when dysregulated may contribute to tumorigenesis; most well-known
are their roles in regulating/initiating host immunity. Some IRF family members
have been implicated in tumorigenesis yet little is still known of their
expression in primary human tumors or their role(s) in disease
development/progression. IRF5 is one of the newer family members to be studied
and has been shown to be a critical mediator of host immunity and the cellular
response to DNA damage. Here, we examined the expression of IRF5 in primary
breast tissue and determined how loss of expression may contribute to breast
cancer development and/or progression.
METHODS: Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded archival breast tissue specimens from
patients with atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH), ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) 
and invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC) were examined for their expression of IRF1
and IRF5. Knockdown or overexpression of IRF5 in MCF-10A, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231
mammary epithelial cell lines was used to examine the role of IRF5 in growth
inhibition, invasion and tumorigenesis.
RESULTS: Analysis of IRF expression in human breast tissues revealed the unique
down-regulation of IRF5 in patients with different grades of DCIS and IDC as
compared to IRF1; loss of IRF5 preceded that of IRF1 and correlated with
increased invasiveness. Overexpression of IRF5 in breast cancer cells inhibited
in vitro and in vivo cell growth and sensitized them to DNA damage. Complementary
experiments with IRF5 siRNAs made normal mammary epithelial cells resistant to
DNA damage. By 3-D culture, IRF5 overexpression reverted MDA-MB-231 to normal
acini-like structures; cells overexpressing IRF5 had decreased CXCR4 expression
and were insensitive to SDF-1/CXCL12-induced migration. These findings were
confirmed by CXCR4 promoter reporter assays.
CONCLUSIONS: IRF5 is an important tumor suppressor that regulates multiple
cellular processes involved in the conversion of normal mammary epithelial cells 
to tumor epithelial cells with metastatic potential.

PMCID: PMC3326553
PMID: 22053985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Jan;51(1):87-92. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ker263.
Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Replication of GWAS-identified systemic lupus erythematosus susceptibility genes 
affirms B-cell receptor pathway signalling and strengthens the role of IRF5 in
disease susceptibility in a Northern European population.

Järvinen TM(1), Hellquist A, Zucchelli M, Koskenmies S, Panelius J, Hasan T,
Julkunen H, D'Amato M, Kere J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Hälsovägen
7-9, S-14183 Huddinge, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: A large number of genes, including several not previously implicated
in SLE susceptibility, have recently been identified or confirmed by genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS). In this study, we sought to replicate some of these
results in Finnish SLE patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>275) and control individuals (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>356).
METHODS: We genotyped 32 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 12 of the
best-supported GWAS-identified SLE genes and loci. We further investigated
gene-gene interactions between the loci included in the study.
RESULTS: The strongest evidence of association was found at the IRF5-TNPO3 locus,
with the most significant P-value being 2.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7) and an odds ratio of 1.95
(95% CI 1.51, 2.50). Association between SLE and TNFAIP3, FAM167A-BLK, BANK1 and 
KIAA1542 was also confirmed, although at a lower significance level and
contribution to individual risk. No significant association was found with
1q25.1, PXK, ATG5, ICA1, XKR6, LYN and SCUBE1. Furthermore, no significant
gene-gene interactions were detected.
CONCLUSION: Replication of previous GWAS findings across diverse populations is
of importance to validate these associations and to get a better understanding of
potential genetic heterogeneity between populations in SLE susceptibility. Our
results attest the importance of B-cell receptor pathway and IFN signalling in
SLE pathogenesis.

PMID: 22039224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Oct 25;11(11):750-61. doi: 10.1038/nri3088.

Transcriptional regulation of macrophage polarization: enabling diversity with
identity.

Lawrence T(1), Natoli G.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Immunologie Marseille-Luminy, Parc Scientifique & Technologique de
Luminy, Case 906, F-13288 Marseille, France. lawrence@ciml.univ-mrs.fr

In terms of both phenotype and function, macrophages have remarkable
heterogeneity, which reflects the specialization of tissue-resident macrophages
in microenvironments as different as liver, brain and bone. Also, marked changes 
in the activity and gene expression programmes of macrophages can occur when they
come into contact with invading microorganisms or injured tissues. Therefore, the
macrophage lineage includes a remarkable diversity of cells with different
functions and functional states that are specified by a complex interplay between
microenvironmental signals and a hardwired differentiation programme that
determines macrophage identity. In this Review, we summarize the current
knowledge of transcriptional and chromatin-mediated control of macrophage
polarization in physiology and disease.

PMID: 22025054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Hum Immunol. 2011 Dec;72(12):1204-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2011.10.002. Epub 2011
Oct 8.

The CREM gene is involved in genetic predisposition to inflammatory bowel disease
in the Tunisian population.

Bouzid D(1), Fourati H, Amouri A, Marques I, Abida O, Haddouk S, Ben Ayed M,
Tahri N, Penha-Gonçalves C, Masmoudi H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Department, Medicine School and Habib Bourguiba Hospital, Sfax,
Tunisia. dorra-ing@voila.fr

The identification of susceptibility genes for inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
is key to understanding pathogenic mechanisms. Recently, the results of genetic
association studies have highlighted many loci that are shared among several
autoimmune diseases. We aimed to study the genetic epidemiology of polymorphisms 
in specific genes previously associated with other autoimmune diseases, namely
the CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes. Twelve polymorphisms in the
CREM, STAT4, STAT5a, Stat5b, and IRF5 genes were genotyped in a cohort of 107 IBD
patients (39 Crohn's disease [CD] and 68 ulcerative colitis [UC]) and 162
controls from southern Tunisia. One CREM single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
displayed evidence for genetic association with IBD (p=8.7×10(-4), odds ratio
[OR]=2.84 [1.58; 5.09]). One STAT4 SNP (p=0.026; OR=1.65 [1.06; 2.58]) exhibited 
a marginal association with UC but not with CD. No significant association was
observed with the SNPs in STAT5a, IRF5, and STAT5b. These results suggest that
common variants of the CREM gene are involved in the genetic component conferring
general susceptibility to IBD, whereas STAT4 appears to be more specifically
associated with UC. This work provides motivation for studies aiming to replicate
these findings in larger populations.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 22019623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Mar;64(3):788-98. doi: 10.1002/art.33395.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 activation in monocytes of systemic lupus
erythematosus patients is triggered by circulating autoantigens independent of
type I interferons.

Stone RC(1), Feng D, Deng J, Singh S, Yang L, Fitzgerald-Bocarsly P, Eloranta ML,
Rönnblom L, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and New Jersey Medical
School-University Hospital Cancer Center, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic variants of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) are
associated with susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). IRF-5
regulates the expression of proinflammatory cytokines and type I interferons
(IFNs) believed to be involved in the pathogenesis of SLE. The aim of this study 
was to determine the activation status of IRF-5 by assessing its nuclear
localization in the immune cells of SLE patients and healthy donors, and to
identify SLE-associated triggers of IRF-5 activation.
METHODS: IRF-5 nuclear localization in subpopulations of peripheral blood
mononuclear cells from 14 genotyped SLE patients and 11 healthy controls was
assessed using imaging flow cytometry. The activation and function of IRF-5 were 
examined after ex vivo stimulation of healthy donor monocytes with SLE serum or
components of SLE serum. Cellular localization was determined by ImageStream flow
cytometry, and cytokine expression was analyzed by quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: IRF-5 was activated in a cell type-specific manner; monocytes from SLE
patients had constitutively elevated levels of nuclear IRF-5, as compared to
natural killer cells and T cells. SLE serum was identified as a trigger for IRF-5
nuclear accumulation; however, neither IFNa nor SLE immune complexes could induce
nuclear localization. Instead, autoantigens composed of apoptotic/necrotic
material triggered IRF-5 nuclear accumulation in monocytes. Production of the
cytokines IFNa, tumor necrosis factor a, and interleukin-6 in monocytes
stimulated with SLE serum or autoantigens was distinct, yet showed a correlation 
with the kinetics of IRF-5 nuclear localization.
CONCLUSION: This study provides the first formal proof that IRF-5 activation is
altered in the monocytes of SLE patients, which can be attributed, in part, to
the SLE blood environment.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3288585
PMID: 21968701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Arthritis Rheum. 2012 Feb;64(2):485-92. doi: 10.1002/art.33354.

Evidence for gene-gene epistatic interactions among susceptibility loci for
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Hughes T(1), Adler A, Kelly JA, Kaufman KM, Williams AH, Langefeld CD, Brown EE, 
Alarcón GS, Kimberly RP, Edberg JC, Ramsey-Goldman R, Petri M, Boackle SA,
Stevens AM, Reveille JD, Sanchez E, Martín J, Niewold TB, Vilá LM, Scofield RH,
Gilkeson GS, Gaffney PM, Criswell LA, Moser KL, Merrill JT, Jacob CO, Tsao BP,
James JA, Vyse TJ, Alarcón-Riquelme ME; BIOLUPUS Network, Harley JB, Richardson
BC, Sawalha AH.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Several confirmed genetic susceptibility loci for lupus have been
described. To date, no clear evidence for genetic epistasis in lupus has been
established. The aim of this study was to test for gene-gene interactions in a
number of known lupus susceptibility loci.
METHODS: Eighteen single-nucleotide polymorphisms tagging independent and
confirmed lupus susceptibility loci were genotyped in a set of 4,248 patients
with lupus and 3,818 normal healthy control subjects of European descent.
Epistasis was tested by a 2-step approach using both parametric and nonparametric
methods. The false discovery rate (FDR) method was used to correct for multiple
testing.
RESULTS: We detected and confirmed gene-gene interactions between the HLA region 
and CTLA4, IRF5, and ITGAM and between PDCD1 and IL21 in patients with lupus. The
most significant interaction detected by parametric analysis was between
rs3131379 in the HLA region and rs231775 in CTLA4 (interaction odds ratio 1.19, Z
= 3.95, P = 7.8 × 10(-5) [FDR =0.05], P for multifactor dimensionality reduction 
= 5.9 × 10(-45)). Importantly, our data suggest that in patients with lupus, the 
presence of the HLA lupus risk alleles in rs1270942 and rs3131379 increases the
odds of also carrying the lupus risk allele in IRF5 (rs2070197) by 17% and 16%,
respectively (P = 0.0028 and P = 0.0047, respectively).
CONCLUSION: We provide evidence for gene-gene epistasis in systemic lupus
erythematosus. These findings support a role for genetic interaction contributing
to the complexity of lupus heritability.

Copyright © 2012 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3268866
PMID: 21952918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Rheumatol Int. 2012 Dec;32(12):4065-7. doi: 10.1007/s00296-011-2113-6. Epub 2011 
Sep 18.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-5: a potential therapeutic target for
ankylosing spondylitis.

Xu WD(1), Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui 230032, People's Republic of
China.

Ankylosing spondylitis is a common inflammatory rheumatic disease that affects
the axial skeleton, causing characteristic inflammatory back pain, which can lead
to structural and functional impairments and a decrease in quality of life. New
imaging techniques and therapies have substantially changed the management of
this disease in the past decade. Whether inhibition of radiographic progression
and structural damage can be reached with available drugs is as yet unclear.
Furthermore, treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents and
physiotherapy remains an important approach to long-term management of patients
with ankylosing spondylitis. The new treatment options with IRF-5 seem to be a
breakthrough for patients' refractory to conventional and feasible treatment.

PMID: 21928121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Clin Immunol. 2011 Dec;31(6):946-51. doi: 10.1007/s10875-011-9583-x. Epub 2011 
Sep 4.

Association of IRF5 polymorphisms with susceptibility to hemophagocytic
lymphohistiocytosis in children.

Yanagimachi M(1), Goto H, Miyamae T, Kadota K, Imagawa T, Mori M, Sato H,
Yanagisawa R, Kaneko T, Morita S, Ishii E, Yokota S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Hemophagocytic lymphohistiocytosis (HLH) is a hyperinflammatory
syndrome and has a varied genetic background. The polymorphism of interferon
regulatory factor 5 gene (IRF5) was reported to be associated with susceptibility
to macrophage activation syndrome. IRF5 acts as a master transcription factor in 
the activation of pro-inflammatory cytokines. We assessed associations of IRF5
gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to secondary HLH.
METHODS: Three IRF5 single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs729302, rs2004640, and
rs2280714) were genotyped using TaqMan assays in 82 secondary HLH patients and
188 control subjects.
RESULTS: There was a significant association of the GT/TT genotype at rs2004640
with secondary HLH susceptibility (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01). The IRF5 haplotype (rs729302 A,
rs2004640 T, and rs2280714 T) was associated with secondary HLH susceptibility
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that IRF5 is a genetic factor influencing
the susceptibility to secondary HLH and that the IRF5-associated immune response 
contributes to the pathogenesis of HLH.

PMID: 21898142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cell Immunol. 2011;271(2):342-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2011.07.014. Epub 2011
Aug 10.

Targeting interferon regulatory factors to inhibit activation of the type I IFN
response: implications for treatment of autoimmune disorders.

Sweeney SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, United States. ssweeney@ucsd.edu

The type I interferon (IFN) response plays a critical role in autoimmunity and is
induced by innate receptor ligation and activation of IFN-regulatory factors
(IRF). The present study investigated the roles and functional hierarchy of IRF3,
IRF5, and IRF7 in expression of cytokines, chemokines, and matrix
metalloproteinases in human THP1 monocytic cells. Targeted IRF knockdown was
followed by evaluation of gene expression, promoter activation, and mRNA
stability to determine the role of IRF as potential targets for modulating IFN
responses in patients with autoimmune diseases. IRF played a distinct role in
regulation of type I IFN gene expression in human monocytic cells and
specifically regulated gene expression through the IFN-stimulated response
element, with no contribution to transcription of traditionally AP-1 or NF-kB
regulated genes. IRF7 regulated IL-6 gene expression by increasing IL-6 mRNA
stability. IRF regulation of inflammation and induction of the IFN signature
might contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases and therefore
represent novel therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3248225
PMID: 21872224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Virol. 2011 Oct;85(20):10814-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00104-11. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Myxoma virus induces type I interferon production in murine plasmacytoid
dendritic cells via a TLR9/MyD88-, IRF5/IRF7-, and IFNAR-dependent pathway.

Dai P(1), Cao H, Merghoub T, Avogadri F, Wang W, Parikh T, Fang CM, Pitha PM,
Fitzgerald KA, Rahman MM, McFadden G, Hu X, Houghton AN, Shuman S, Deng L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10065, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(23):12835.

Poxviruses are large DNA viruses that replicate in the cytoplasm of infected
cells. Myxoma virus is a rabbit poxvirus that belongs to the Leporipoxvirus
genus. It causes a lethal disease called myxomatosis in European rabbits but
cannot sustain any detectable infection in nonlagomorphs. Vaccinia virus is a
prototypal orthopoxvirus that was used as a vaccine to eradicate smallpox. Myxoma
virus is nonpathogenic in mice, whereas systemic infection with vaccinia virus
can be lethal even in immunocompetent mice. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs)
are potent type I interferon (IFN)-producing cells that play important roles in
antiviral innate immunity. How poxviruses are sensed by pDCs to induce type I IFN
production is not well understood. Here we report that infection of primary
murine pDCs with myxoma virus, but not with vaccinia virus, induces IFN-a, IFN-ß,
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and interleukin-12p70 (IL-12p70) production. Using
pDCs derived from genetic knockout mice, we show that the myxoma virus-induced
innate immune response requires the endosomal DNA sensor TLR9 and its adaptor
MyD88, transcription factors IRF5 and IRF7, and the type I IFN positive-feedback 
loop mediated by IFNAR1. It is independent of the cytoplasmic RNA sensing pathway
mediated by the mitochondrial adaptor molecule MAVS, the TLR3 adaptor TRIF, or
the transcription factor IRF3. Using pharmacological inhibitors, we demonstrate
that myxoma virus-induced type I IFN and IL-12p70 production in murine pDCs is
also dependent on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt. Furthermore, our 
results reveal that the N-terminal Z-DNA/RNA binding domain of vaccinia virulence
factor E3, which is missing in the orthologous M029 protein expressed by myxoma
virus, plays an inhibitory role in poxvirus sensing and innate cytokine
production by murine pDCs.

PMCID: PMC3187486
PMID: 21835795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Int J Immunogenet. 2011 Oct;38(5):411-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-313X.2011.01025.x.
Epub 2011 Aug 11.

A meta-analysis of the association of IRF5 polymorphism with systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Hu W(1), Ren H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Lianyungang Municipal Frist People Hospital,
Lianyungang Jiangsu, China.

To more precisely estimate the association between interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF5) polymorphisms and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) risk, we surveyed
studies on the association of IRF5 rs2204640, rs10954213, rs729302 or rs2280714
with SLE using PubMed, Embase and Web of Science up to February 2011. Two
investigators independently assessed the data quality and extracted the data. A
total of 17 comparisons from ten relevant studies involving 6403 patients and
7475 controls were included to analyse the association between IRF5 rs2004640 and
SLE risk (odds ratio, OR = 1.41, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.34-1.49, P =
0.000). As for rs10954213, there were ten comparisons from six relevant studies
involving 3461 patients and 3692 controls were included to analyse the
association between IRF5 rs10954213 and SLE risk (OR = 1.23, 95% CI 1.08-1.39, P 
= 0.002). And this meta-analysis also showed a significant association of
rs729302 (OR = 0.78, 95% CI 0.74-0.83, P = 0.000), rs2280714 (OR = 0.90, 95% CI
0.83-0.98, P = 0.021) with SLE. In a subgroup analysis by ethnicity,
significantly increased SLE risk was associated with IRF5 rs2004640 T allele in
populations of European, Asian and Latin American origin, and the rs10954213 A
allele is significantly associated with SLE in European origin but not in Asian
origin. This meta-analysis suggested that IRF5 gene polymorphism was associated
with SLE in multiple ethnic populations.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21834935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Rheumatol. 2011 Oct;38(10):2130-2. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.110322. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Preferential association of interferon regulatory factor 5 gene variants with
seronegative rheumatoid arthritis in 2 Swedish case-control studies.

Wang C(1), Kokkonen H, Sandling JK, Johansson M, Seddighzadeh M, Padyukov L,
Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Molecular Medicine,
Research Department II, Entrance 70, 3rd Floor, Academic Hospital, SE-75185
Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Two interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene variants were examined 
for association with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: A total of 2300 patients with RA and 1836 controls were recruited from 2
independent RA studies in Sweden. One insertion-deletion polymorphism (CGGGG
indel) and one single-nucleotide polymorphism (rs10488631) in the IRF5 gene were 
genotyped and analyzed within RA subgroups stratified by rheumatoid factor (RF)
and anticitrullinated peptide antibodies (ACPA).
RESULTS: The CGGGG indel was preferentially associated with the RF-negative (OR
1.29, p = 7.9 × 10(-5)) and ACPA-negative (OR 1.27, p = 7.3 × 10(-5)) RA
subgroups compared to the seropositive counterparts. rs10488631 was exclusively
associated within the seronegative RA subgroups (RF-negative: OR 1.24, p = 0.016;
ACPA-negative: OR 1.27, p = 4.1 × 10(-3)).
CONCLUSION: Both the CGGGG indel and rs10488631 are relevant for RA
susceptibility, especially for seronegative RA.

PMID: 21807777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Clin Invest. 2011 Sep;121(9):3635-44. doi: 10.1172/JCI45790. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

The PTPN22 allele encoding an R620W variant interferes with the removal of
developing autoreactive B cells in humans.

Menard L(1), Saadoun D, Isnardi I, Ng YS, Meyers G, Massad C, Price C, Abraham C,
Motaghedi R, Buckner JH, Gregersen PK, Meffre E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, 300 George
Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

Protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 22 (PTPN22) gene polymorphisms are 
associated with many autoimmune diseases. The major risk allele encodes an R620W 
amino acid change that alters B cell receptor (BCR) signaling involved in the
regulation of central B cell tolerance. To assess whether this PTPN22 risk allele
affects the removal of developing autoreactive B cells, we tested by ELISA the
reactivity of recombinant antibodies isolated from single B cells from
asymptomatic healthy individuals carrying one or two PTPN22 risk allele(s)
encoding the PTPN22 R620W variant. We found that new emigrant/transitional and
mature naive B cells from carriers of this PTPN22 risk allele contained high
frequencies of autoreactive clones compared with those from non-carriers,
revealing defective central and peripheral B cell tolerance checkpoints. Hence, a
single PTPN22 risk allele has a dominant effect on altering autoreactive B cell
counterselection before any onset of autoimmunity. In addition, gene array
experiments analyzing mature naive B cells displaying PTPN22 risk allele(s)
revealed that the association strength of PTPN22 for autoimmunity may be due not 
only to the impaired removal of autoreactive B cells but also to the upregulation
of genes such as CD40, TRAF1, and IRF5, which encode proteins that promote B cell
activation and have been identified as susceptibility genes associated with
autoimmune diseases. These data demonstrate that early B cell tolerance defects
in autoimmunity can result from specific polymorphisms and precede the onset of
disease.

PMCID: PMC3163953
PMID: 21804190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2011 Jul;7(4):481-9. doi: 10.1586/eci.11.40.

Novel insights on the role of the innate immune system in systemic sclerosis.

York MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Boston University Medical Campus, 72 East Concord St,
Evans 501, Boston, MA 02118, USA. mikyork@bu.edu

Over the last several years the involvement of the innate immune system in the
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
has become well established. As systemic sclerosis (SSc; scleroderma) shares
clinical features and autoantibodies with SLE, investigation has recently focused
on the role of innate immunity in SSc. This has been supported by recent genetic 
studies. However, unlike SLE and other related autoimmune diseases, SSc patients 
suffer from pathologic fibrosis of skin and internal organs. The fibrotic
component of SSc shares several features with syndromes following environmental
exposures to agents such as organic solvents, silica dust and bleomycin. Recent
work in SSc and these related fibrotic diseases have identified several areas in 
which innate immunity can stimulate inflammation as well as fibrosis. This
article will focus on the recent discoveries identifying a prominent role of
cells of the innate immune system, pattern recognition receptors, and activation 
of dendritic cells in the pathogenesis of SSc.

PMID: 21790291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2011 Jul;7(4):449-62. doi: 10.1586/eci.11.26.

Deciphering the genetic background of systemic sclerosis.

Broen JC(1), Coenen MJ, Radstake TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a severe autoimmune connective tissue disease. Over
the years, evidence for a genetic background of SSc susceptibility has clearly
accumulated. This article aims to provide an extensive overview of genetics in
SSc research. We discuss indicators for a genetic component present in SSc,
family studies, chromosomal aberrances, the involvement of the HLA region and
multiple candidate genes and, finally, genome-wide association studies.

PMID: 21790288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Immunol Lett. 2011 Dec 30;141(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.imlet.2011.06.007. Epub 2011
Jul 12.

The complexity of Sjögren's syndrome: novel aspects on pathogenesis.

Jonsson R(1), Vogelsang P, Volchenkov R, Espinosa A, Wahren-Herlenius M, Appel S.

Author information: 
(1)Broegelmann Research Laboratory, The Gade Institute, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway. roland.jonsson@gades.uib.no

In Sjögren's syndrome, like in most other autoimmune diseases, the enigma leading
to a pathogenic attack against self has not yet been solved. By definition, the
disease must be mediated by specific immune reactions against endogenous tissues 
to qualify as an autoimmune disease. In Sjögren's syndrome the autoimmune
response is directed against the exocrine glands, which, as histopathological
hallmark of the disease, display persistent and progressive focal mononuclear
cell infiltrates. Clinically, the disease in most patients is manifested by two
severe symptoms: dryness of the mouth (xerostomia) and the eyes
(keratoconjunctivitis sicca). A number of systemic features have also been
described and the presence of autoantibodies against the ubiquitously expressed
ribonucleoprotein particles Ro (Sjögren's-syndrome-related antigen A - SSA) and
La (SSB) further underline the systemic nature of Sjögren's syndrome. The
original explanatory concept for the pathogenesis of Sjögren's syndrome proposed 
a specific, self-perpetuating, immune mediated loss of acinar and ductal cells as
the principal cause of salivary gland hypofunction. Although straightforward and 
plausible, the hypothesis, however, falls short of accommodating several
Sjögren's syndrome-related phenomena and experimental findings. Consequently,
researchers considered immune-mediated salivary gland dysfunction prior to
glandular destruction and atrophy as potential molecular mechanisms underlying
the symptoms of dryness in Sjögren's syndrome. Accordingly, apoptosis, fibrosis
and atrophy of the salivary glands would represent consequences of salivary gland
hypofunction. The emergence of advanced bio-analytical platforms further enabled 
the identification of potential biomarkers with the intent to improve Sjögren's
syndrome diagnosis, promote the development of prognostic tools for Sjögren's
syndrome and the long-term goal to identify possible processes for therapeutic
treatment interventions. In addition, such approaches allowed us to glimpse at
the apparent complexity of Sjögren's syndrome.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21777618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Aug;22(8):1443-52. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010121260. Epub 2011 
Jul 8.

IRF4 deficiency abrogates lupus nephritis despite enhancing systemic cytokine
production.

Lech M(1), Weidenbusch M, Kulkarni OP, Ryu M, Darisipudi MN, Susanti HE,
Mittruecker HW, Mak TW, Anders HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Medizinische Poliklinik, University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.

The IFN-regulatory factors IRF1, IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 modulate processes involved
in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus and lupus nephritis, but the contribution
of IRF4, which has multiple roles in innate and adaptive immunity, is unknown. To
determine a putative pathogenic role of IRF4 in lupus, we crossed Irf4-deficient 
mice with autoimmune C57BL/6-(Fas)lpr mice. IRF4 deficiency associated with
increased activation of antigen-presenting cells in C57BL/6-(Fas)lpr mice,
resulting in a massive increase in plasma levels of TNF and IL-12p40, suggesting 
that IRF4 suppresses cytokine release in these mice. Nevertheless, IRF4
deficiency completely protected these mice from glomerulonephritis and lung
disease. The mice were hypogammaglobulinemic and lacked antinuclear and
anti-dsDNA autoantibodies, revealing the requirement of IRF4 for the maturation
of plasma cells. As a consequence, Irf4-deficient C57BL/6-(Fas)lpr mice neither
developed immune complex disease nor glomerular activation of complement. In
addition, lack of IRF4 impaired the maturation of Th17 effector T cells and
reduced plasma levels of IL-17 and IL-21, which are cytokines known to contribute
to autoimmune tissue injury. In summary, IRF4 deficiency enhances systemic
inflammation and the activation of antigen-presenting cells but also prevents the
maturation of plasma cells and effector T cells. Because these adaptive immune
effectors are essential for the evolution of lupus nephritis, we conclude that
IRF4 promotes the development of lupus nephritis despite suppressing
antigen-presenting cells.

PMCID: PMC3148699
PMID: 21742731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Surg Res. 2011 Sep;170(1):e47-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2011.05.033. Epub 2011 Jun
15.

Glucocorticoid modulates high-mobility group box 1 expression and Toll-like
receptor activation in obstructive jaundice.

Huang YH(1), Wang PW, Tiao MM, Chou MH, Du YY, Huang CC, Chuang JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan, ROC.

BACKGROUND: Obstructive jaundice is associated with bacterial translocation and
inflammatory cytokine induction. It is unknown if toll-like receptors (TLRs) and 
their upstream molecule high mobility group box-1 (HMGB1) are involved in the
pathogenetic mechanism and if glucocorticoid is effective in modulating the
process.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A rat model of cholestasis by ligation of the extrahepatic
bile duct (BDL) for 2 wk was created. TLRs, interferon regulatory factors (IRFs),
IL-6, IL-8, antimicrobial peptide ß-defensin, and cathelicidin, as well as HMGB1 
expressions were studied by using real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, Western blotting, 
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Glucocorticoid treatment was
applied to a group of BDL rats.
RESULTS: Obstructive jaundice for 2 wk was associated with significant
up-regulation of TLR1, 2, 4, 6, 7, and 9 mRNA expressions. There were significant
increases of liver IRF5, IL-6, and ß-defensin 1 mRNA levels in the BDL rats than 
in the sham and nonoperative control rats, which were associated with significant
increase of immunoreactive IRF5 protein staining in the nucleus of Kupffer cells 
and neutrophils. Hepatic HMGB1 expression and release into serum were
significantly elevated in the cholestatic rats than in the sham and control rats.
Glucocorticoid treatment significantly decreased hepatic HMGB1 expression and
release into serum, which was associated with significantly decreased hepatic
TLR4 mRNA expression in the cholestatic rats.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that obstructive jaundice may induce hepatic
HMGB1 expression with activation of TLR4 and a number of downstream signaling
molecules, which can be reversed by glucocorticoid administration.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21737101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Arthritis Res Ther. 2011 May 27;13(3):218. doi: 10.1186/ar3318.

Aspects of innate immunity in Sjögren's syndrome.

Low HZ(1), Witte T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinic for Immunology and Rheumatology, Medical School Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Str, 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Previously, a dominant role of the adaptive immune system in the pathogenesis of 
Sjögren's syndrome was suspected. Recent advances, however, have revealed a major
role of the type I IFN pathway, documented by an increased circulating type I IFN
activity and an IFN 'signature' in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and minor
salivary gland biopsies from the patients. Polymorphisms in the genes IRF5 and
STAT4 leading to increased IFN activation are associated with disease
susceptibility. In the pathogenesis of Sjögren's syndrome, the activation of
salivary gland epithelial cells appears to be the initial event. Once
intrinsically activated, they express costimulatory and Toll-like receptors
(TLRs) and MHC class I and II molecules, can present autoantigens and produce
proinflammatory cytokines. The subsequent activation of plasmacytoid dendritic
cells induces the production of high levels of proinflammatory cytokines in
individuals with the risk alleles of the susceptibility genes IRF5 and STAT4.
Under the influence of the high IFN concentration in the glands and through TLR
ligation, B-cell activating factor is produced by epithelial cells and, together 
with autoantigen presentation on salivary gland epithelial cells, stimulates the 
adaptive immune system. In view of the central role of IFNalpha in at least the
initiation of the pathogenesis of Sjögren's syndrome, blockade of this cytokine
may be a rational therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC3218872
PMID: 21635716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Arthritis Res Ther. 2011 May 31;13(3):R80. doi: 10.1186/ar3343.

Cis-regulation of IRF5 expression is unable to fully account for systemic lupus
erythematosus association: analysis of multiple experiments with lymphoblastoid
cell lines.

Alonso-Perez E(1), Suarez-Gestal M, Calaza M, Kwan T, Majewski J, Gomez-Reino JJ,
Gonzalez A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Investigacion 10 and Rheumatology Unit, Instituto de Investigacion
Sanitaria-Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Travesia Choupana sn,
Santiago de Compostela E-15706, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Interferon regulatory factor 5 gene (IRF5) polymorphisms are
strongly associated with several diseases, including systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). The association includes risk and protective components. They could be due
to combinations of functional polymorphisms and related to cis-regulation of IRF5
expression, but their mechanisms are still uncertain. We hypothesised that
thorough testing of the relationships between IRF5 polymorphisms, expression data
from multiple experiments and SLE-associated haplotypes might provide useful new 
information.
METHODS: Expression data from four published microarray hybridisation experiments
with lymphoblastoid cell lines (57 to 181 cell lines) were retrieved. Genotypes
of 109 IRF5 polymorphisms, including four known functional polymorphisms, were
considered. The best linear regression models accounting for the IRF5 expression 
data were selected by using a forward entry procedure. SLE-associated IRF5
haplotypes were correlated with the expression data and with the best
cis-regulatory models.
RESULTS: A large fraction of variability in IRF5 expression was accounted for by 
linear regression models with IRF5 polymorphisms, but at a different level in
each expression data set. Also, the best models from each expression data set
were different, although there was overlap between them. The SNP introducing an
early polyadenylation signal, rs10954213, was included in the best models for two
of the expression data sets and in good models for the other two data sets. The
SLE risk haplotype was associated with high IRF5 expression in the four
expression data sets. However, there was also a trend towards high IRF5
expression with some protective and neutral haplotypes, and the protective
haplotypes were not associated with IRF5 expression. As a consequence,
correlation between the cis-regulatory best models and SLE-associated haplotypes,
regarding either the risk or protective component, was poor.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analysis indicates that although the SLE risk haplotype of IRF5 
is associated with high expression of the gene, cis-regulation of IRF5 expression
is not enough to fully account for IRF5 association with SLE susceptibility,
which indicates the need to identify additional functional changes in this gene.

PMCID: PMC3218890
PMID: 21627826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. PLoS Pathog. 2011 May;7(5):e1001345. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001345. Epub 2011
May 19.

Type I interferon production induced by Streptococcus pyogenes-derived nucleic
acids is required for host protection.

Gratz N(1), Hartweger H, Matt U, Kratochvill F, Janos M, Sigel S, Drobits B, Li
XD, Knapp S, Kovarik P.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Microbiology, Immunobiology and
Genetics, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Streptococcus pyogenes is a Gram-positive human pathogen that is recognized by
yet unknown pattern recognition receptors (PRRs). Engagement of these receptor
molecules during infection with S. pyogenes, a largely extracellular bacterium
with limited capacity for intracellular survival, causes innate immune cells to
produce inflammatory mediators such as TNF, but also type I interferon (IFN).
Here we show that signaling elicited by type I IFNs is required for successful
defense of mice against lethal subcutaneous cellulitis caused by S. pyogenes.
Type I IFN signaling was accompanied with reduced neutrophil recruitment to the
site of infection. Mechanistic analysis revealed that macrophages and
conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) employ different signaling pathways leading
to IFN-beta production. Macrophages required IRF3, STING, TBK1 and partially
MyD88, whereas in cDCs the IFN-beta production was fully dependent on IRF5 and
MyD88. Furthermore, IFN-beta production by macrophages was dependent on the
endosomal delivery of streptococcal DNA, while in cDCs streptococcal RNA was
identified as the IFN-beta inducer. Despite a role of MyD88 in both cell types,
the known IFN-inducing TLRs were individually not required for generation of the 
IFN-beta response. These results demonstrate that the innate immune system
employs several strategies to efficiently recognize S. pyogenes, a pathogenic
bacterium that succeeded in avoiding recognition by the standard arsenal of TLRs.

PMCID: PMC3098218
PMID: 21625574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Lupus. 2011 Aug;20(9):975-80. doi: 10.1177/0961203310394897. Epub 2011 May 16.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplant for systemic lupus erythematosus: Interferon
regulatory factor 7 activation correlates with the IFN signature and recurrent
disease.

Sweeney SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. ssweeney@ucsd.edu

The expression and activation of regulatory factors (IRF) and rinterferon (IFN)
response genes were evaluated in a patient treated with autologous hematopoietic 
stem cell transplant (HSCT) for refractory systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In
SLE patients, genetic variants of IRF5 and IRF7 have been associated with
increased serum IFNa levels, suggesting a pathogenic role in the type I IFN
response. Clinical and molecular analyses of an SLE patient treated with
high-dose immunosuppressive therapy and autologous stem cell transplant was
performed. Western blot analysis showed that induction of IRF7 protein expression
correlated with recurrent lupus disease activity. In addition, phosphorylation of
IRF3 and activation of 4<U+2009>E-BP1, a translational repressor of IRF7, preceded the
disease flare. In SLE post-transplant, recurrent disease activity and induction
of IRF7 protein expression correlated with activation of the IFN signature. This 
unique trend in regulation of IRF warrants further mechanistic investigation and 
confirmation with increased numbers of SLE patients.

PMID: 21576205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Transl Res. 2011 Jun;157(6):326-31. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2011.01.006. Epub 2011
Feb 8.

Interferon regulatory factors in human lupus pathogenesis.

Salloum R(1), Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology and Gwen Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology
Research, University of Chicago, Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60637, 
USA.

Comment in
    Transl Res. 2011 Jun;157(6):323-5.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a severe multisystem autoimmune disease
that results from both genetic predisposition and environmental factors. Many
lines of investigation support interferon alpha (IFN-a) as a causal agent in
human lupus, and high levels of serum IFN-a are a heritable risk factor for SLE. 
Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are a family of transcription factors
involved in host defense, which can induce transcription of IFN-a and other
immune response genes after activation. In SLE, circulating immune complexes that
contain nucleic acid are prevalent. These complexes are recognized by endosomal
Toll-like receptors, resulting in activation of downstream IRF proteins. Genetic 
variants in the IRF5 and IRF7 genes have been associated with SLE susceptibility,
and these same variants are associated with increased serum IFN-a in SLE
patients. The increase in serum IFN-a related to IRF5 and 7 genotypes is observed
only in patients with particular antibody specificities. This suggests that
chronic stimulation of the endosomal Toll-like receptors by autoantibody immune
complexes is required for IRF SLE-risk variants to cause elevation of circulating
IFN-a and subsequent risk of SLE. Recently, genetic variation in the IRF8 gene
has been associated with SLE and multiple sclerosis, and studies support an
impact of IRF8 genotype on the IFN-a pathway. In summary, the SLE-associated
polymorphisms in the IRF family of proteins seem to be gain-of-function variants,
and understanding the impact of these variants on the IFN-a pathway in vivo may
guide therapeutic strategies directed at the Toll-like receptor/IRF/IFN-a pathway
in SLE.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3096827
PMID: 21575916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Recenti Prog Med. 2011 Apr;102(4):175-82. doi: 10.1701/624.7291.

[Rheumatoid arthritis: a typical multifactorial genetic disease: review of the
literature].

[Article in Italian]

Iebba F(1), Di Sora F, Tarasi A, Leti W, Montella F.

Author information: 
(1)UOC Medicina 5, Roma. filippo.iebba@virgilio.it

Environmental factors can be triggers for the clinical appearance of rheumatoid
arthritis in subjects with genetic susceptibility. Genetic factors account for
60% of disease susceptibility. This review is focused on the genetic and
environmental basis of the susceptibility to arthritis.

PMID: 21572496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Hum Genet. 2011 Jul;56(7):503-7. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.49. Epub 2011 May 12.

Cumulative association of eight susceptibility genes with systemic lupus
erythematosus in a Japanese female population.

Koga M(1), Kawasaki A, Ito I, Furuya T, Ohashi J, Kyogoku C, Ito S, Hayashi T,
Matsumoto I, Kusaoi M, Takasaki Y, Hashimoto H, Sumida T, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Doctoral Program in Biomedical 
Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.

Although large-scale studies established many susceptibility genes to systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), effect of each gene is not sufficiently large to be
used alone to identify individuals with strong genetic predisposition. In this
study, we analyzed the cumulative number of risk alleles at eight established
susceptibility loci, HLA-DRB1, IRF5, STAT4, BLK, TNFAIP3, TNIP1, FCGR2B and
TNFSF13, in 282 Japanese female SLE and 222 healthy female controls. The average 
number of risk alleles was significantly increased in SLE (8.07±1.60) than
healthy controls (7.02±1.64) (P=1.63 × 10(-12)). Significant gene-gene
interaction was not detected. When the subjects carrying seven risk alleles were 
used as a reference, the odds ratio (OR) for individuals carrying 10 and 11-13
risk alleles were 4.17 (95% confidence interval (CI) 1.89-9.19, P=0.0002) and
8.77 (95% CI 1.92-40.0, P=0.0016), respectively. In contrast, subjects with =4
risk alleles were significantly decreased in SLE (OR 0.15, CI 0.03-0.67,
P=0.007). The proportion of the patients with neurologic disorder was
significantly increased in those carrying =10 risk alleles than those with <10
(OR 2.30, CI 1.09-4.83, P=0.025). This study suggested that the cumulative number
of risk alleles may efficiently distinguish groups with high and low genetic
predisposition to SLE and its severe manifestation.

PMID: 21562514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Semin Liver Dis. 2011 May;31(2):147-56. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1276644. Epub 2011
May 2.

Progress in the genetics of primary biliary cirrhosis.

Hirschfield GM(1), Invernizzi P.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Centre, Toronto Western Hospital and Department of Medicine, University 
of Toronto, Ontario, Canada. gideon.hirschfield@uhn.on.ca

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a chronic cholestatic liver disease that has a
prevalence of 1 in 1000 women over the age of 40. Treatment is presently limited 
to ursodeoxycholic acid, a hydrophilic bile acid that has nonspecific,
choleretic, effects in cholestatic liver disease. PBC has strong autoimmune
features, including highly specific loss of tolerance to a ubiquitous
mitochondrial antigen. Both environmental and genetic factors are considered
important in the pathogenesis of disease. Prior to the advent of genome-wide
association studies, only class II human leucocyte antigen (HLA) loci
(HLA-DRB1*08, *11, and *13) had been reproducibly shown to associate with
disease. Non-HLA loci were suggested for several genes (e.g., CTLA-4, MDR3), but 
often inconclusively replicated. With the application of genome-wide technology, 
HLA was confirmed as the strongest association and many other risk loci have been
identified, with equivalent effect size to HLA, including IL12A, IL12RB2, STAT4, 
IRF5-TNPO3, 17q12.21, MMEL1, SPIB, and CTLA-4. These collectively support an
important role for innate and adaptive immunity in development of disease.
Further insights are predicted as studies with larger cohorts are assembled, and 
different approaches are taken to further discover common and uncommon gene
variants associated with disease. Disease subphenotypes such as response to
therapy, clinical progression, and symptoms remain additional areas for further
dedicated studies, and in which different genetic risk factors may be relevant.
Identification of risk loci associated with disease has the potential to aid
development of rational, disease-specific, therapies in the future.

© 2011 Thieme Medical Publishers, Inc.

PMID: 21538281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Immunotherapy. 2011 Mar;3(3):311.

Transcription factor presents new target for rheumatoid arthritis therapy.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 21516879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Tissue Antigens. 2011 Jul;78(1):65-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0039.2011.01684.x. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

Replicated association of 17q12-21 with susceptibility of primary biliary
cirrhosis in a Japanese cohort.

Tanaka A(1), Invernizzi P, Ohira H, Kikuchi K, Nezu S, Kosoy R, Seldin MF,
Gershwin ME, Takikawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
a-tanaka@med.teikyo-u.ac.jp

To examine the genetics of susceptibility to primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC),
genome-wide association studies GWAS have been performed in patients of European 
ancestry and have shown the significant associations of IL12-related pathways,
SPIB, IRF5-TNPO3, and 17q12-21. We tested whether these findings could be
extended to a Japanese cohort, 303 Japanese PBC and 298 controls. We failed to
detect significant associations at IL12A (rs574808, rs1075498) and IL12RB2
(rs3790567). There was no genetic variance at IRF5-TNPO3 (rs10488631) in
Japanese. A single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) at SPIB (rs3745516) reached
nominal significance, but the corrected P value did not reach significance. For
the 17q12-21 region, two SNPs had nominally significant associations [GSDMB
(rs2305480, P = 0.022) and ZPBP2 (rs11557467, P = 0.021)] and we noted a
significant P value at a SNP in IKZF3 (rs939327, P = 0.0024, P(c) = 0.017) after 
correction for multiple comparisons. Thus, these results indicate a haplotype on 
17q12-21 with a similar association in Japanese and European PBC.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21506939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Genes Immun. 2011 Sep;12(6):466-72. doi: 10.1038/gene.2011.18. Epub 2011 Apr 7.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 gene variants and pharmacological and clinical
outcome of Interferonß therapy in multiple sclerosis.

Vosslamber S(1), van der Voort LF, van den Elskamp IJ, Heijmans R, Aubin C,
Uitdehaag BM, Crusius JB, van der Pouw Kraan TC, Comabella M, Montalban X, Hafler
DA, De Jager PL, Killestein J, Polman CH, Verweij CL.

Author information: 
(1)VU University Medical Center, Department of Pathology, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. s.vosslamber@vumc.nl

Erratum in
    Genes Immun. 2012 Jul, 13(5):443. van der PouwKraan, T C T M [corrected to van
der Pouw Kraan, TCTM].

Interferon-ß (IFNß) therapy is effective in approximately half of the patients
with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis (RRMS). Clinical non-responders were 
characterized by an increased expression of IFN response genes before the start
of therapy, and a lack of a pharmacologically induced increase in IFN response
gene activity. Because Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 (IRF5) is a master
regulator of IFN-activity, we carried out a candidate gene study of IRF5 gene
variants in relation to the pharmacological and clinical response upon IFNß
treatment. We found that patients with the IRF5 rs2004640-TT and rs47281420-AA
genotype exerted a poor pharmacological response to IFNß compared with patients
carrying the respective G-alleles (P=0.0006 and P=0.0023, respectively).
Moreover, patients with the rs2004640-TT genotype developed more magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI)-based T2 lesions during IFNß treatment (P=0.003).
Accordingly, an association between MRI-based non-responder status and
rs2004640-TT genotype was observed (P=0.010). For the rs4728142-AA genotype a
trend of an association with more T2 lesions during IFNß treatment and MRI-based 
non-responder status was observed (P=0.103 and P=0.154, respectively). The
clinical relevance of the rs2004640-TT genotype was validated in an independent
cohort wherein a shorter time to first relapse was found (P=0.037). These
findings suggest a role for IRF5 gene variation in the pharmacological and
clinical outcome of IFNß therapy that might have relevance as biomarker to
predict the response to IFNß in multiple sclerosis.

PMID: 21471993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 20;286(20):18261-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.210542. Epub 2011
Mar 24.

Interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF-4) targets IRF-5 to regulate Epstein-Barr
virus transformation.

Xu D(1), Meyer F, Ehlers E, Blasnitz L, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska
68588, USA.

The cellular interferon regulatory factor-4 (IRF-4), which is a member of IRF
family, is involved in the development of multiple myeloma and Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-mediated transformation of B lymphocytes. However, the molecular mechanism 
of IRF-4 in cellular transformation is unknown. We have found that knockdown of
IRF-4 leads to high expression of IRF-5, a pro-apoptotic member in the IRF
family. Overexpression of IRF-4 represses IRF-5 expression. Reduction of IRF-4
leads to growth inhibition, and the restoration of IRF-4 by exogenous plasmids
correlates with the growth recovery and reduces IRF-5 expression. In addition,
IRF-4 negatively regulates IRF-5 promoter reporter activities and binds to IRF-5 
promoters in vivo and in vitro. Knockdown of IRF-5 rescues IRF-4
knockdown-mediated growth inhibition, and IRF-5 overexpression alone is
sufficient to induce cellular growth inhibition of EBV-transformed cells.
Therefore, IRF-5 is one of the targets of IRF-4, and IRF-4 regulates the growth
of EBV-transformed cells partially through IRF-5. This work provides insight on
how IRFs interact with one another to participate in viral pathogenesis and
transformation.

© 2011 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3093898
PMID: 21454650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Jun 1;81(11):1343-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.03.012.
Epub 2011 Mar 31.

Resveratrol exerts anti-obesity effects via mechanisms involving down-regulation 
of adipogenic and inflammatory processes in mice.

Kim S(1), Jin Y, Choi Y, Park T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food and Nutrition, Yonsei University, Seongsanno Seodaemun-gu, 
Seoul, South Korea.

Resveratrol is a natural polyphenolic stilbene derivative found in a variety of
edible fruits, including nuts, berries, and grape skin. Although resveratrol has 
been suggested to improve thermogenesis in the brown adipose tissues of obese
animals, there have been no reports on the anti-adipogenic and anti-inflammatory 
effects of resveratrol in the white adipose tissues of obese animals. The primary
aim of this study was to investigate whether resveratrol attenuates high-fat diet
(HFD)-induced adipogenesis and inflammation in the epididymal fat tissues of mice
and to explore the underlying mechanisms involved in this attenuation. In
comparison with HFD-fed mice, mice fed with a 0.4% resveratrol-supplemented diet 
(RSD) showed significantly lower body weight gain (-48%), visceral fat-pad
weights (-58%), and plasma levels of triglyceride, FFA, total cholesterol,
glucose, tumor necrosis factor (TNF) a, and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
(MCP1). Resveratrol significantly reversed the HFD-induced up-regulation of
galanin-mediated signaling molecules (GalR1/2, PKCd, Cyc-D, E2F1, and p-ERK) and 
key adipogenic genes (PPAR<U+03B3>2, C/EBPa, SREBP-1c, FAS, LPL, aP2, and leptin) in the
epididymal adipose tissues of mice. Furthermore, resveratrol significantly
attenuated the HFD-induced up-regulation of pro-inflammatory cytokines (TNFa,
IFNa, IFNß, and IL-6) and their upstream signaling molecules (TLR2/4, MyD88,
Tirap, TRIF, TRAF6, IRF5, p-IRF3, and NF-<U+03BA>B) in the adipose tissues of mice. The 
results of this study suggest that resveratrol inhibits visceral adipogenesis by 
suppressing the galanin-mediated adipogenesis signaling cascade. It may also
attenuate cytokine production in the adipose tissue by repressing the TLR2- and
TLR4-mediated pro-inflammatory signaling cascades in HFD-fed mice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21439945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Aug;63(8):2543. doi: 10.1002/art.30359.

New evidence for the role of interferon regulatory factor 5 in the development of
systemic lupus erythematosus: comment on the article by Tada et al.

Pan HF, Leng RX, Ye DQ.

Comment on
    Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Mar;63(3):738-48.

PMID: 21437872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Z Rheumatol. 2011 Apr;70(3):192-4, 196-7. doi: 10.1007/s00393-010-0691-4.

[Genetic analysis in collagen vascular diseases].

[Article in German]

Melchers I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Klinische Forschergruppe für Rheumatologie, Freiburg, Deutschland.
inga.melchers@uniklinik-freiburg.de

Genetic risk factors are known to exist for all collagen vascular diseases. They 
are most important for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and systemic
scleroderma (SSc), as shown by the systematic analysis of family data. Both
diseases to date share most of the validated risk factors (PTPN22, STAT4, BANK1, 
TNFAIP3, IRF5, BLK) underlining once again their relationship. Moreover, most of 
these factors were also shown to be associated with other autoimmune diseases.
Many additional risk factors exist, but need further analysis. The HLA complex is
of special interest, as many loci within this region, some highly polymorphic,
may contribute to the total genetic risk.

PMID: 21424427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. PLoS Genet. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1001323. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001323. Epub 2011 
Mar 3.

Differential genetic associations for systemic lupus erythematosus based on
anti-dsDNA autoantibody production.

Chung SA(1), Taylor KE, Graham RR, Nititham J, Lee AT, Ortmann WA, Jacob CO,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Tsao BP, Harley JB, Gaffney PM, Moser KL; SLEGEN, Petri M,
Demirci FY, Kamboh MI, Manzi S, Gregersen PK, Langefeld CD, Behrens TW, Criswell 
LA.

Collaborators: Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Criswell LA, Harley JB, Jacob CO, Kimberly
RP, Langefeld CD, Moser KL, Tsao BP, Vyse TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Rosalind Russell Medical Research Center for Arthritis, Department of
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, United States of America.
sharon.chung@ucsf.edu

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a clinically heterogeneous, systemic
autoimmune disease characterized by autoantibody formation. Previously published 
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have investigated SLE as a single
phenotype. Therefore, we conducted a GWAS to identify genetic factors associated 
with anti-dsDNA autoantibody production, a SLE-related autoantibody with
diagnostic and clinical importance. Using two independent datasets, over 400,000 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were studied in a total of 1,717 SLE cases
and 4,813 healthy controls. Anti-dsDNA autoantibody positive (anti-dsDNA +,
n<U+200A>=<U+200A>811) and anti-dsDNA autoantibody negative (anti-dsDNA -, n<U+200A>=<U+200A>906) SLE cases
were compared to healthy controls and to each other to identify SNPs associated
specifically with these SLE subtypes. SNPs in the previously identified SLE
susceptibility loci STAT4, IRF5, ITGAM, and the major histocompatibility complex 
were strongly associated with anti-dsDNA + SLE. Far fewer and weaker associations
were observed for anti-dsDNA - SLE. For example, rs7574865 in STAT4 had an OR for
anti-dsDNA + SLE of 1.77 (95% CI 1.57-1.99, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.0E-20) compared to an OR for
anti-dsDNA - SLE of 1.26 (95% CI 1.12-1.41, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.4E-04), with
p(heterogeneity)<0.0005. SNPs in the SLE susceptibility loci BANK1, KIAA1542, and
UBE2L3 showed evidence of association with anti-dsDNA + SLE and were not
associated with anti-dsDNA - SLE. In conclusion, we identified differential
genetic associations with SLE based on anti-dsDNA autoantibody production. Many
previously identified SLE susceptibility loci may confer disease risk through
their role in autoantibody production and be more accurately described as
autoantibody propensity loci. Lack of strong SNP associations may suggest that
other types of genetic variation or non-genetic factors such as environmental
exposures have a greater impact on susceptibility to anti-dsDNA - SLE.

PMCID: PMC3048371
PMID: 21408207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Jun;17(6):1343-58. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21476. Epub 2011 Feb 
8.

IRF4 regulates IL-17A promoter activity and controls ROR<U+03B3>t-dependent Th17 colitis
in vivo.

Mudter J(1), Yu J, Zufferey C, Brüstle A, Wirtz S, Weigmann B, Hoffman A, Schenk 
M, Galle PR, Lehr HA, Mueller C, Lohoff M, Neurath MF.

Author information: 
(1)1st Medical Clinic, University of Erlangen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor IRF4 is involved in several T-cell-dependent
chronic inflammatory diseases. To elucidate the mechanisms for pathological
cytokine production in colitis, we addressed the role of the IRF transcription
factors in human inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and experimental colitis.
METHODS: IRF levels and cytokine production in IBD patients were studied as well 
as the effects of IRF4 deficiency in experimental colitis.
RESULTS: In contrast to IRF1, IRF5, and IRF8, IRF4 expression in IBD was
augmented in the presence of active inflammation. Furthermore, IRF4 levels
significantly correlated with IL-6 and IL-17 mRNA expression and to a lesser
extent with IL-22 mRNA expression in IBD. To further explore the role of IRF4
under in vivo conditions, we studied IRF4-deficient and wildtype mice in
experimental colitis. In contrast to DSS colitis, IRF4 deficiency was protective 
in T-cell-dependent transfer colitis associated with reduced RORa/<U+03B3>t levels and
impaired IL-6, IL-17a, and IL-22 production, suggesting that IRF4 acts as a
master regulator of mucosal Th17 cell differentiation. Subsequent mechanistic
studies using database analysis, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays identified a novel IRF4 binding site in the
IL-17 gene promoter. Overexpression of IRF4 using retroviral infection induced
IL-17 production and IL-17 together with IL-6 induced ROR<U+03B3>t expression.
CONCLUSIONS: IRF4 can directly bind to the IL-17 promotor and induces mucosal
ROR<U+03B3>t levels and IL-17 gene expression thereby controlling Th17-dependent
colitis. Targeting of this molecular mechanism may lead to novel therapeutic
approaches in human IBD.

Copyright © 2011 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

PMID: 21305677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Mar;63(3):738-48. doi: 10.1002/art.30183.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 is critical for the development of lupus in
MRL/lpr mice.

Tada Y(1), Kondo S, Aoki S, Koarada S, Inoue H, Suematsu R, Ohta A, Mak TW,
Nagasawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, Saga, Japan.
taday@cc.saga-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Aug;63(8):2543.

OBJECTIVE: Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) is a transcription factor that 
mediates intracellular signals activated by engagement of Toll-like receptors
(TLRs). IRF5 polymorphisms are associated with an increased or decreased risk of 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in various human populations, but the precise 
role of IRF5 in SLE development is not fully understood. This study was
undertaken to examine the role of IRF5 in the development of murine lupus.
METHODS: We crossed gene-targeted IRF5-deficient (IRF5(-/-) ) mice with
MRL/MpJ-lpr/lpr (MRL/lpr) mice and examined the progeny for survival,
glomerulonephritis, autoantibody levels, immune system cell populations, and
dendritic cell function.
RESULTS: IRF5(-/-) MRL/lpr mice survived longer than control IRF5(+/+) MRL/lpr
mice and displayed only very mild glomerulonephritis. Autoantibodies to
SLE-related nuclear antigens were lower in IRF5(-/-) MRL/lpr mouse serum, and
numbers of activated CD4+ T cells were reduced in the spleen. Splenic DCs from
IRF5(-/-) MRL/lpr mice produced lower levels of inflammatory cytokines when
treated in vitro with TLR-7 or TLR-9 ligands or immune complexes. Interferon-a
production in response to CpG was also decreased.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that IRF5 is a crucial driver of lupus development
in mice, and indicate that IRF5 may be an attractive new target for therapeutic
intervention to control disease in SLE patients.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 21305501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Nat Genet. 2011 Mar;43(3):246-52. doi: 10.1038/ng.764. Epub 2011 Feb 6.

Meta-analysis identifies 29 additional ulcerative colitis risk loci, increasing
the number of confirmed associations to 47.

Anderson CA, Boucher G, Lees CW, Franke A, D'Amato M, Taylor KD, Lee JC, Goyette 
P, Imielinski M, Latiano A, Lagacé C, Scott R, Amininejad L, Bumpstead S, Baidoo 
L, Baldassano RN, Barclay M, Bayless TM, Brand S, Büning C, Colombel JF, Denson
LA, De Vos M, Dubinsky M, Edwards C, Ellinghaus D, Fehrmann RS, Floyd JA, Florin 
T, Franchimont D, Franke L, Georges M, Glas J, Glazer NL, Guthery SL, Haritunians
T, Hayward NK, Hugot JP, Jobin G, Laukens D, Lawrance I, Lémann M, Levine A,
Libioulle C, Louis E, McGovern DP, Milla M, Montgomery GW, Morley KI, Mowat C, Ng
A, Newman W, Ophoff RA, Papi L, Palmieri O, Peyrin-Biroulet L, Panés J, Phillips 
A, Prescott NJ, Proctor DD, Roberts R, Russell R, Rutgeerts P, Sanderson J, Sans 
M, Schumm P, Seibold F, Sharma Y, Simms LA, Seielstad M, Steinhart AH, Targan SR,
van den Berg LH, Vatn M, Verspaget H, Walters T, Wijmenga C, Wilson DC, Westra
HJ, Xavier RJ, Zhao ZZ, Ponsioen CY, Andersen V, Torkvist L, Gazouli M, Anagnou
NP, Karlsen TH, Kupcinskas L, Sventoraityte J, Mansfield JC, Kugathasan S,
Silverberg MS, Halfvarson J, Rotter JI, Mathew CG, Griffiths AM, Gearry R, Ahmad 
T, Brant SR, Chamaillard M, Satsangi J, Cho JH, Schreiber S, Daly MJ, Barrett JC,
Parkes M, Annese V, Hakonarson H, Radford-Smith G, Duerr RH, Vermeire S, Weersma 
RK, Rioux JD.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Sep;43(9):919.

Genome-wide association studies and candidate gene studies in ulcerative colitis 
have identified 18 susceptibility loci. We conducted a meta-analysis of six
ulcerative colitis genome-wide association study datasets, comprising 6,687 cases
and 19,718 controls, and followed up the top association signals in 9,628 cases
and 12,917 controls. We identified 29 additional risk loci (P < 5 × 10(-8)),
increasing the number of ulcerative colitis-associated loci to 47. After
annotating associated regions using GRAIL, expression quantitative trait loci
data and correlations with non-synonymous SNPs, we identified many candidate
genes that provide potentially important insights into disease pathogenesis,
including IL1R2, IL8RA-IL8RB, IL7R, IL12B, DAP, PRDM1, JAK2, IRF5, GNA12 and
LSP1. The total number of confirmed inflammatory bowel disease risk loci is now
99, including a minimum of 28 shared association signals between Crohn's disease 
and ulcerative colitis.

PMCID: PMC3084597
PMID: 21297633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Jan 6;7(1):e1001246. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1001246.

Critical role of IRF-5 in the development of T helper 1 responses to Leishmania
donovani infection.

Paun A(1), Bankoti R, Joshi T, Pitha PM, Stäger S.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Center, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, United States of America.

The transcription factor Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 (IRF-5) has been shown to
be involved in the induction of proinflammatory cytokines in response to viral
infections and TLR activation and to play an essential role in the innate
inflammatory response. In this study, we used the experimental model of visceral 
leishmaniasis to investigate the role of IRF-5 in the generation of Th1 responses
and in the formation of Th1-type liver granulomas in Leishmania donovani infected
mice. We show that TLR7-mediated activation of IRF-5 is essential for the
development of Th1 responses to L. donovani in the spleen during chronic
infection. We also demonstrate that IRF-5 deficiency leads to the incapacity to
control L. donovani infection in the liver and to the formation of smaller
granulomas. Granulomas in Irf5<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice are characterized by an increased IL-4 and
IL-10 response and concomitant low iNOS expression. Collectively, these results
identify IRF-5 as a critical molecular switch for the development of Th1 immune
responses following L. donovani infections and reveal an indirect role of IRF-5
in the regulation of iNOS expression.

PMCID: PMC3017120
PMID: 21253574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Nat Immunol. 2011 Mar;12(3):231-8. doi: 10.1038/ni.1990. Epub 2011 Jan 16.

IRF5 promotes inflammatory macrophage polarization and TH1-TH17 responses.

Krausgruber T(1), Blazek K, Smallie T, Alzabin S, Lockstone H, Sahgal N, Hussell 
T, Feldmann M, Udalova IA.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology Division, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Feb;11(2):74.

Polymorphisms in the gene encoding the transcription factor IRF5 that lead to
higher mRNA expression are associated with many autoimmune diseases. Here we show
that IRF5 expression in macrophages was reversibly induced by inflammatory
stimuli and contributed to the plasticity of macrophage polarization. High
expression of IRF5 was characteristic of M1 macrophages, in which it directly
activated transcription of the genes encoding interleukin 12 subunit p40
(IL-12p40), IL-12p35 and IL-23p19 and repressed the gene encoding IL-10.
Consequently, those macrophages set up the environment for a potent T helper type
1 (T(H)1)-T(H)17 response. Global gene expression analysis demonstrated that
exogenous IRF5 upregulated or downregulated expression of established phenotypic 
markers of M1 or M2 macrophages, respectively. Our data suggest a critical role
for IRF5 in M1 macrophage polarization and define a previously unknown function
for IRF5 as a transcriptional repressor.

PMID: 21240265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Rheumatol. 2011 Apr;38(4):769-74. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.100655. Epub 2011 Jan 15.

Association of IRF5 polymorphisms with susceptibility to macrophage activation
syndrome in patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

Yanagimachi M(1), Naruto T, Miyamae T, Hara T, Kikuchi M, Hara R, Imagawa T, Mori
M, Sato H, Goto H, Yokota S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine; and the CNV Laboratory, DNA Chip Research Institute, Yokohama, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Systemic-onset juvenile idiopathic arthritis (systemic JIA) and
macrophage activation syndrome (MAS), the most devastating complication of
systemic JIA, are characterized by abnormal levels of proinflammatory cytokines. 
Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is a member of the IRF family of
transcription factors, and acts as a master transcription factor in the
activation of genes encoding proinflammatory cytokines. Polymorphisms in the IRF5
gene have been associated with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases such as
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis. Our aim was to
assess associations of IRF5 gene polymorphisms with susceptibility to systemic
JIA and MAS.
METHODS: Three IRF5 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (rs729302, rs2004640, and
rs2280714) were genotyped using TaqMan assays in 81 patients with systemic JIA
(33 with MAS, 48 without) and 190 controls.
RESULTS: There were no associations of the IRF5 gene polymorphisms or haplotypes 
under study with susceptibility to systemic JIA. There was a significant
association of the rs2004640 T allele with MAS susceptibility (OR 4.11; 95% CI
1.84, 9.16; p = 0.001). The IRF5 haplotype (rs729302 A, rs2004640 T, and
rs2280714 T), which was reported as conferring an increased risk of SLE, was
significantly associated with MAS susceptibility in patients with systemic JIA
(OR 4.61; 95% CI 1.73, 12.3; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: IRF5 gene polymorphism is a genetic factor influencing susceptibility
to MAS in patients with systemic JIA, and IRF5 contributes to the pathogenesis of
MAS in these patients.

PMID: 21239750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Apr;19(4):479-84. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.197. Epub 2010 Dec
22.

A candidate gene study of the type I interferon pathway implicates IKBKE and IL8 
as risk loci for SLE.

Sandling JK(1), Garnier S, Sigurdsson S, Wang C, Nordmark G, Gunnarsson I,
Svenungsson E, Padyukov L, Sturfelt G, Jönsen A, Bengtsson AA, Truedsson L,
Eriksson C, Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Mälarstig A, Strawbridge RJ, Hamsten A,
Criswell LA, Graham RR, Behrens TW, Eloranta ML, Alm G, Rönnblom L, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune disease in which the 
type I interferon pathway has a crucial role. We have previously shown that three
genes in this pathway, IRF5, TYK2 and STAT4, are strongly associated with risk
for SLE. Here, we investigated 78 genes involved in the type I interferon pathway
to identify additional SLE susceptibility loci. First, we genotyped 896
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in these 78 genes and 14 other candidate genes in
482 Swedish SLE patients and 536 controls. Genes with P<0.01 in the initial
screen were then followed up in 344 additional Swedish patients and 1299
controls. SNPs in the IKBKE, TANK, STAT1, IL8 and TRAF6 genes gave nominal
signals of association with SLE in this extended Swedish cohort. To replicate
these findings we extracted data from a genomewide association study on SLE
performed in a US cohort. Combined analysis of the Swedish and US data,
comprising a total of 2136 cases and 9694 controls, implicates IKBKE and IL8 as
SLE susceptibility loci (P(meta)=0.00010 and P(meta)=0.00040, respectively).
STAT1 was also associated with SLE in this cohort (P(meta)=3.3 × 10<U+207B>5), but this 
association signal appears to be dependent of that previously reported for the
neighbouring STAT4 gene. Our study suggests additional genes from the type I
interferon system in SLE, and highlights genes in this pathway for further
functional analysis.

PMCID: PMC3060320
PMID: 21179067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(5):1970-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01801-10. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Diversity of interferon antagonist activities mediated by NSP1 proteins of
different rotavirus strains.

Arnold MM(1), Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-8026, USA.

Studies involving limited numbers of rotavirus (RV) strains have shown that the
viral gene 5 product, NSP1, can antagonize beta interferon (IFN-ß) expression by 
inducing the degradation of IFN-regulatory factors (IRFs) (IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7) 
or a component of the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex responsible for activating
NF-<U+03BA>B (ß-transducin repeat-containing protein [ß-TrCP]). To gain a broader
perspective of NSP1 activities, we examined various RV strains for the ability to
inhibit IFN-ß expression in human cells. We found that all strains encoding
wild-type NSP1 impeded IFN-ß expression but not always through IRF3 degradation. 
To identify other degradation targets involved in suppressing IFN-ß expression,
we used transient expression vectors to test the abilities of a diverse
collection of NSP1 proteins to target IRF3, IRF5, IRF7, and ß-TrCP for
degradation. The results indicated that human RVs rely predominantly on the
NSP1-induced degradation of IRF5 and IRF7 to suppress IFN signaling, whereas NSP1
proteins of animal RVs tended to target IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7, allowing the animal
viruses a broader attack on the IFN-ß signaling pathway. The results also
suggested that the NSP1-induced degradation of ß-TrCP is an uncommon mechanism of
subverting IFN-ß signaling but is one that can be shared with NSP1 proteins that 
induce IRF degradation. Our analysis reveals that the activities of NSP1 proteins
are diverse, with no obvious correlations between degradations of pairs of target
proteins. Thus, RVs have evolved functionally distinct approaches for subverting 
the host antiviral response, a property consistent with the immense sequence
variation noted for NSP1 proteins.

PMCID: PMC3067804
PMID: 21177809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Apr;70(4):668-74. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.131243. Epub 2010 Dec
13.

NLRP1 influences the systemic sclerosis phenotype: a new clue for the
contribution of innate immunity in systemic sclerosis-related fibrosing
alveolitis pathogenesis.

Dieudé P(1), Guedj M, Wipff J, Ruiz B, Riemekasten G, Airo P, Melchers I,
Hachulla E, Cerinic MM, Diot E, Hunzelmann N, Caramaschi P, Sibilia J, Tiev K,
Mouthon L, Riccieri V, Cracowski JL, Carpentier PH, Distler J, Amoura Z, Tarner
I, Avouac J, Meyer O, Kahan A, Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Rhumatologie, Paris Diderot University, INSERM U699, Hôpital Bichat
Claude Bernard, 46 rue Henri Huchard, 75018 Paris, France.
philippe.dieude@bch.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence has highlighted a potential role of interleukin 1ß
(IL-1ß) in systemic sclerosis (SSc). NLRP1 provides a scaffold for the assembly
of the inflammasome that promotes the processing and maturation of pro-IL-1ß. In 
addition, NLRP1 variants were found to confer susceptibility to autoimmune
disorders.
OBJECTIVE: /st> To study a possible association of the NLRP1 rs6502867, rs2670660
and rs8182352, rs12150220 and rs4790797 with SSc in the European Caucasian
population.
METHODS: NLRP1 single nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped in 3227 individuals
comprising a discovery set (870 SSc patients and 962 controls) and a replication 
set including individuals from Germany (532 SSc patients and 324 controls) and
Italy (527 SSc patients and 301 controls), all individuals being of European
Caucasian origin.
RESULTS: Conditional analyses revealed a significant association for the NLRP1
rs8182352 variant with both anti-topoisomerase-positive and SSc-related fibrosing
alveolitis (FA) subsets under an additive model: p=0.0042, OR 1.23 (95% CI 1.07
to 1.41) and p=0.0065 OR 1.19 (95% CI 1.05 to 1.36), respectively. Logistic
regression analysis showed an additive effect of IRF5 rs2004640, STAT4 rs7574865 
and NLRP1 rs8182352 risk alleles on SSc-related FA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results establish NLRP1 as a new genetic susceptibility factor
for SSc-related pulmonary fibrosis and anti-topoisomerase-positive SSc
phenotypes. This provides new insights into the pathogenesis of SSc, underlining 
the potential role of innate immunity in particular in the FA-positive SSc
subphenotype, which represents a severe subset of the disease.

PMID: 21149496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2011 Apr;31(4):373-82. doi: 10.1089/jir.2010.0084.
Epub 2010 Dec 6.

Modulation of interferon regulatory factor 5 activities by the Kaposi
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-encoded viral interferon regulatory factor 3
contributes to immune evasion and lytic induction.

Bi X(1), Yang L, Mancl ME, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, New Jersey, USA.

Multiple Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)-encoded proteins with
potential roles in KSHV-associated neoplasms have been identified. KSHV encodes 4
genes with homology to transcription factors of the interferon (IFN) regulatory
factor (IRF) family. Viral IRF3 (vIRF3) is expressed in latently KSHV-infected
primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) cells and was recently shown to be essential for 
the survival of PEL cells. The focus of this study was to determine the
mechanism(s) of vIRF3 oncogenic activity contributing to KSHV-associated
lymphoma. We report that vIRF3 interacts with the amino-terminal DNA binding
domain of human IRF5, leading to a complex manipulation of IRF5 function. vIRF3
associated with both exogenous and endogenous IRF5, thereby inhibiting
IRF5-mediated IFN promoter activation and the synthesis of biologically active
type I IFNs by blocking its binding to endogenous IFNA promoters. The function of
this interaction was not limited to the IFN system as IRF5-mediated cell growth
regulation was significantly altered by overexpression of vIRF3 in B cells. vIRF3
prevented IRF5-mediated growth inhibition and G2/M cell cycle arrest. Important, 
IRF5 was upregulated by the protein kinase C agonist
12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate in BCBL1 PEL cells and interaction with
vIRF3 was observed at the endogenous p21 promoter in response to
12-O-tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate, suggesting that these 2 proteins cooperate
in the regulation of lytic cycle-induced G1 arrest, which is an important early
step for the reactivation of KSHV. In conclusion, cellular IRF5 and vIRF3
interact, leading to the functional modulation of IRF5-mediated type I IFN
expression and cell cycle regulation. These findings support an important role
for vIRF3 in immune evasion and cell proliferation that likely contribute to the 
survival of PEL cells.

PMID: 21133648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Dec;6(12):683-92. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.176. Epub
2010 Nov 9.

Genetic susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus in the genomic era.

Deng Y(1), Tsao BP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Medicine, 900 Veteran Avenue, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1670, 
USA.

Our understanding of the genetic basis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) has 
been rapidly advanced using large-scale, case-control, candidate gene studies as 
well as genome-wide association studies during the past 3 years. These techniques
have identified more than 30 robust genetic associations with SLE including
genetic variants of HLA and Fc<U+03B3> receptor genes, IRF5, STAT4, PTPN22, TNFAIP3,
BLK, BANK1, TNFSF4 and ITGAM. Most SLE-associated gene products participate in
key pathogenic pathways, including Toll-like receptor and type I interferon
signaling pathways, immune regulation pathways and those that control the
clearance of immune complexes. Disease-associated loci that have not yet been
demonstrated to have important functions in the immune system might provide new
clues to the underlying molecular mechanisms that contribute to the pathogenesis 
or progression of SLE. Of note, genetic risk factors that are shared between SLE 
and other immune-related diseases highlight common pathways in the
pathophysiology of these diseases, and might provide innovative molecular targets
for therapeutic interventions.

PMCID: PMC3135416
PMID: 21060334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Ecol. 2011 Mar;20(5):893-909. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-294X.2010.04907.x. Epub
2010 Nov 9.

The analysis of immunological profiles in wild animals: a case study on
immunodynamics in the field vole, Microtus agrestis.

Jackson JA(1), Begon M, Birtles R, Paterson S, Friberg IM, Hall A, Lowe A, Ralli 
C, Turner A, Zawadzka M, Bradley JE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrative Biology, The University of Liverpool, Biosciences
Building, Crown Street, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK. jaj11@aber.ac.uk

A revolutionary advance in ecological immunology is that postgenomic technologies
now allow molecular mediators defined in laboratory models to be measured at the 
mRNA level in field studies of many naturally occurring species. Here, we
demonstrate the application of such an approach to generate meaningful
immunological profiles for wild mammals. We sampled a natural field vole
population across the year (n = 307) and developed a battery of cellular assays
in which functionally different pro- and anti-inflammatory signalling responses
(transcription factors and cytokines) were activated and quantified by Q-PCR.
Temporal trends were the strongest feature in the expression data, although some 
life history stages (mating vs. nonmating males and pregnant females) were also
associated with significant variation. There was a striking set of significant
negative associations between inflammatory mediators and condition indices
reflecting packed erythrocyte volume and relative liver size, spleen size and
splenocyte count. Grouped (principal component) measures of inflammatory and
anti-inflammatory expression were high in winter, with minima in the breeding
season that occurred earlier for grouped anti-inflammatory responses than for
grouped inflammatory responses. Some individual immunological mediators also
showed patterns unrelated to the breeding season or annual periodic cues. For
example, interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) expression declined throughout the
study period, indicating a systematic trend in antimicrobial defences.
Pinpointing the causes and consequences of such variation may help identify
underlying environmental drivers of individual fitness and demographic
fluctuation.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21059128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Nephrology (Carlton). 2010 Oct;15(7):710-3. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1797.2010.01327.x.

Association of IRF5 gene polymorphisms and lupus nephritis in a Chinese
population.

Qin L(1), Lv J, Zhou X, Hou P, Yang H, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Peking University First Hospital,
Institute of Nephrology, Peking University, Beijing, China.

AIM: Recently, several studies have provided convincing evidence that
polymorphisms in the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene were
significantly associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in several
populations. The aim of this study was to investigate the association between
IRF5 and lupus nephritis in a Chinese cohort and analyze the relationship between
the rs2004640 genotype and the clinical and pathological phenotypes of lupus
nephritis.
METHODS: The IRF5 rs2004640 polymorphism in a cohort of 190 Chinese lupus
nephritis patients and 182 healthy Chinese blood donors was analyzed. The
polymorphism examined was genotyped using the TaqMan assay. RESULTS The IRF5
rs2004640 T allele was associated with the susceptibility to lupus nephritis
(rs2004640 T, 41.6% in patients, 30.8% in healthy controls, odds ratio=1.6,
P=0.002). It was also found that the Chinese population had a much lower minor
allele frequency of rs2004640 than Western populations studied to date. In the
present cohort, 30.8% individuals in the control group had the detrimental T
allele, compared to frequencies in the range of 44-56% that exist in Western
populations. No association was found between IRF5 rs2004640 and pathology, or
clinical presentation of lupus nephritis in the Chinese cohort examined.
CONCLUSION: The results suggested that the rs2004640 T allele was associated with
susceptibility to lupus nephritis and that the IRF5 polymorphism analyzed did not
seem to be implicated in the pathology and clinical manifestation of lupus
nephritis in the Chinese population.

© 2010 The Authors. Nephrology © 2010 Asian Pacific Society of Nephrology.

PMID: 21040166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Ann Rheum Dis. 2011 Jan;70(1):117-21. doi: 10.1136/ard.2010.129171. Epub 2010 Oct
26.

The interferon regulatory factor 5 gene confers susceptibility to rheumatoid
arthritis and influences its erosive phenotype.

Dawidowicz K(1), Allanore Y, Guedj M, Pierlot C, Bombardieri S, Balsa A,
Westhovens R, Barrera P, Alves H, Teixeira VH, Petit-Teixeira E, van de Putte L, 
van Riel P, Prum B, Bardin T, Meyer O, Cornélis F, Dieudé P; ECRAF.

Collaborators: Bardin T, Charron D, Cornélis F, Fauré S, Kuntz D, Martinez M,
Prudhomme JF, Weissenbach J, Westhovens R, Dequeker J, Balsa A, Pascuale-Salcedo 
D, Spyropoulou M, Stavropoulos C, Migliorini P, Bombardieri S, Barrera P, Van de 
Putte L, Alves H, Lopez-Vaz A.

Author information: 
(1)GenHotel-EA 3886, University Evry-Paris 7 Medical School, Member of the
AutoCure European Consortium, Evry-Genopole cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: Increased expression of type I IFN genes, also referred to as an IFN 
signature, has been detected in various autoimmune diseases including rheumatoid 
arthritis (RA). Interferon regulatory factors, such as IRF5, coordinate type I
IFN expression. Multiple IRF5 variants were suggested as autoimmunity
susceptibility factors.
OBJECTIVE: As the linkage proof remains important to establish fully any genetic 
RA susceptibility factor, the authors took advantage of the largest reported
European trio family resource dedicated to RA to test for linkage IRF5 and
performed a genotype-phenotype analysis.
METHODS: 1140 European Caucasian individuals from 380 RA trio families were
genotyped for IRF5 rs3757385, rs2004640 and rs10954213 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNP).
RESULTS: Single marker analysis provided linkage evidence for each IRF5 SNP
investigated. IRF5 linked to RA with two haplotypes: the CTA risk haplotype 'R'
(transmission (T)=60.6%, p=23.1×10(-5)) and the AGG protective haplotype 'P'
(T=39.6%, p=0.0015). Linkage was significantly stronger in non-erosive disease
for both IRF5 R and P haplotypes (T=73.9%, p=4.20×10(-5) and T=19.6%,
p=3.66×10(-5), respectively). Multivariate logistic regression analysis found
IRF5 linked to RA independently of the rheumatoid factor status. IRF5 RR and PP
haplotypic genotypes were associated with RA, restricted to the non-erosive
phenotype: p=1.68×10(-4), OR 4.80, 95% CI 2.06 to 11.19; p=0.003, OR 0.17, 95% CI
0.05 to 0.57, respectively.
CONCLUSION: This study provides the 'association and linkage proof' establishing 
IRF5 as a RA susceptibility gene and the identification of a genetic factor that 
seems to contribute to the modulation of the erosive phenotype. Further studies
are warranted to clarify the role of IRF5 in RA and its subphenotypes.

PMID: 20980283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Genes Immun. 2011 Jan;12(1):51-8. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.47. Epub 2010 Oct 21.

A targeted association study in systemic lupus erythematosus identifies multiple 
susceptibility alleles.

Budarf ML(1), Goyette P, Boucher G, Lian J, Graham RR, Claudio JO, Hudson T,
Gladman D, Clarke AE, Pope JE, Peschken C, Smith CD, Hanly J, Rich E, Boire G,
Barr SG, Zummer M; GenES Investigators, Fortin PR, Wither J, Rioux JD.

Collaborators: Fortin PR, Wither J, Rioux J, Cooper G, Greenwood CM, Pope J,
Gladman D, Urowitz M, Hanly J, Smith CD, Clarke A, Bernatsky S, Pineau C, Hudson 
T, Peschken C, Hitchon C, Zummer M, Boire G, Rich E, Senécal JL, Carette S, Inman
R, Su J, McKenzie T, Hewitt S, Ouimet J, Dobaille D, Hodge M, Koonthanan T, Pabla
K, Zhou Y, Linehan T, Drouin K, Branco N, Piniero E, Craig A, Ferland D, Hart D, 
Ferland D, Steber W, Nedinis P, Boulet C, Gagnon I, Therrien D.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multisystem autoimmune disease. Multiple 
genetic and environmental factors contribute to the pathogenesis of this disease.
Recent genome-wide association studies have added substantially to the number of 
genes associated with SLE. To replicate some of these susceptibility loci,
single-nucleotide polymorphisms reported to be associated to SLE were evaluated
in a cohort of 245 well-phenotyped Canadian SLE trios. Our results replicate
previously reported associations to alleles of interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF5), major histocompatibility complex (MHC), tumor necrosis factor (ligand)
superfamily member 4 (TNFSF4), Kell blood group complex subunit-related family
member 6 (XKR6), B-cell scaffold protein with ankyrin repeats 1 (BANK1), protein 
tyrosine phosphatase non-receptor type 22 (PTPN22), ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme 
E2L 3 (UBE2L3) and islet cell autoantigen 1 (ICA1). We also identify putative
associations to cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4), a gene
associated with several autoimmune disorders, and ERBB3, a locus on 12q13 that
was previously reported to be associated with type 1 diabetes. This study
confirms the existence of multiple genetic risk factors for SLE, and supports the
notion that some risk factors for SLE are shared with other inflammatory
disorders.

PMID: 20962850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Lupus. 2010 Oct;19(12):1452-9. doi: 10.1177/0961203310370350.

What can we learn from genetic studies of systemic lupus erythematosus?
Implications of genetic heterogeneity among populations in SLE.

Lee HS(1), Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Hanyang University Hospital for Rheumatic
Diseases, Seoul, Korea.

Recent progress in genetics has expanded the number of the genes associated with 
SLE to more than 20 in the past 2 years. One might assign these candidate genetic
factors into several pre-existing biological pathways: (i) innate immune response
including TLR/interferon signaling pathways (IRF5, STAT4, TNFAIP3, and TREX1);
(ii) adaptive immune response (HLA-DR, PTPN22, PDCD1, STAT4, LYN, BLK, and BANK1)
including B, T cells, and antigen-presenting cells; and (iii) immune complex
clearance mechanism (FCGRs, CRP, and ITGAM). In addition, there are also several 
genes and loci that could not be assigned into previous known pathways (KIAA1542,
PXK, XKR6, ATG5, etc), providing possible novel mechanisms in SLE. It has also
been evident that there are similarities and differences in SLE susceptibility
loci across ethnic groups. Here we categorize the susceptible genes into four
groups. The first group is the consistently associated genes with similar risk
allele frequency between multiple ethnic populations such as STAT4, TNFAIP3,
BANK1, and IRAK1/MECP2. The second group is the genes that are consistently
associated but show marked difference in risk allele frequency (BLK, IRF5). The
third group is the genes in which different risk variants exist within a gene or 
genetic loci (allelic heterogeneity) such as HLA-DR, FCGRs, and IRF5. The fourth 
group is the genes that show consistently discrepancy between populations such as
PTPN22 and possibly ITGAM, PXK, and LYN (genetic heterogeneity). The possible
explanations for differences of susceptible genetic factors between populations
could be different genetic backgrounds, contribution of gene-gene or
gene-environment interaction, and the relation between marker and causal
variants. Therefore, efforts to identify ethnic-specific genetic factors or
disease causing variants should be necessary for individualized therapy for SLE
in future.

PMID: 20947557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Lupus. 2010 Oct;19(12):1374-83. doi: 10.1177/0961203310376639.

Current advances in lupus genetic and genomic studies in Asia.

Yuan YJ(1), Luo XB, Shen N.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Molecular Rheumatology Laboratory of the Institute of Health Sciences
and Shanghai Renji Hospital, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, and Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

The genetic components in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) have long been
established, however, it has been unclear for many years whether the same genetic
risk factors for SLE are shared across different ethnic groups. Over the past few
years, a number of genetic and genomic studies have been conducted in Asian
populations to address this question. These studies have demonstrated that
genetic heterogeneity does exist in SLE across different ethnic groups. With
these studies, it has been established that a number of genes associated with SLE
in Caucasians are also risk factors in Asians: HLA class II genes, STAT4, BANK1, 
BLK, IRF5, TNFSF4, ITGAM, etc., while there are also novel genetic risk factors
identified by these studies in Asians, for instance, the ETS1 and WDFY4 in
Chinese. For the genomic studies, the interferon signature has been confirmed as 
a major lupus molecular phenotype in Asians the same as in Caucasians; microRNA
expression profiling and its novel role in regulating the interferon pathway has 
been first revealed in Asians. Further understanding of the function of lupus
disease genes and delineating the key molecular pathway(s) will enhance the
development of novel therapeutic targets and biomarkers for individualized
clinical management for lupus patients.

PMID: 20947545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Immunol. 2010 Nov 15;185(10):6003-12. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000482. Epub 2010 
Oct 8.

Differential requirement of histone acetylase and deacetylase activities for
IRF5-mediated proinflammatory cytokine expression.

Feng D(1), Sangster-Guity N, Stone R, Korczeniewska J, Mancl ME,
Fitzgerald-Bocarsly P, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Recent evidence indicates a new role for histone deacetylases (HDACs) in the
activation of genes governing the host immune response. Virus, along with other
pathogenic stimuli, triggers an antiviral defense mechanism through the induction
of IFN, IFN-stimulated genes, and other proinflammatory cytokines. Many of these 
genes have been shown to be regulated by transcription factors of the IFN
regulatory factor (IRF) family. Recent studies from IRF5 knockout mice have
confirmed a critical role for IRF5 in virus-induced type I IFN expression and
proinflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-12, and TNF-a; yet, little is known of the
molecular mechanism of IRF5-mediated proinflammatory cytokine expression. In this
study, we show that both HDACs and histone acetyltransferases (HATs) associate
with IRF5, leading to alterations in its transactivation ability. Using the HDAC 
inhibitor trichostatin A, we demonstrate that ISRE, IFNA, and IL6 promoters
require HDAC activity for transactivation and transcription, whereas TNFa does
not. Mapping the interaction of corepressor proteins (HDAC1, silencing mediator
of retinoid and thyroid receptor/nuclear corepressor of retinoid receptor, and
Sin3a) and HATs to IRF5 revealed distinct differences, including the dependence
of IRF5 phosphorylation on HAT association resulting in IRF5 acetylation. Data
presented in this study support a mechanism whereby virus triggers the dynamic
conversion of an IRF5-mediated silencing complex to that of an activating complex
on promoters of target genes. These data provide the first evidence, to our
knowledge, of a tightly controlled transcriptional mechanism whereby IRF5
regulates proinflammatory cytokine expression in conjunction with HATs and HDACs.

PMCID: PMC3233222
PMID: 20935208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Autoimmun Rev. 2011 Mar;10(5):282-90. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2010.09.017. Epub
2010 Sep 21.

Immunogenetics of systemic sclerosis.

Dieudé P(1), Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Diderot, Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpital Bichat Claude
Bernard, APHP, Paris, France.

In the field of genetics of SSc, we are currently reaching a period of rapid data
production. Several themes are already rising from the first wave of results.
First, some genetic variants clearly predispose to multiple autoimmune diseases, 
thus providing evidence for a shared autoimmune genetic background. Second,
multiple genes are involved in the SSc predisposition and as expected the genetic
associations are quite modest. Third, unless for a small number of exceptions,
the causative genetic variations have not been definitively identified yet.
Lastly, to date, the most convincing associations detected relate to genes
playing a pivotal role in both innate and adaptative immunity. Indeed,
additionally to the MHC, candidate gene studies have convincingly and
reproducibly identified PTPN22, IRF5, STAT4, C8orf13-BLK, BANK1 and TNFSF4 as SSc
susceptibility genes. Although these results have substantially advanced our
understanding of the SSc pathogenesis, both gene-gene and gene-environment
studies are now awaited in order to further improve our understanding of this
multifacet disease. Finally, we should keep in mind that SSc is a very severe
that is until now unfortunately free of effective therapy. Therefore, the
identification of new susceptibility genes may offer a rich source of new
hypotheses and experimental directions to follow that we should try to assembly
in a near future to generate innovative therapies to fight this dramatic disease.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20863905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Joint Bone Spine. 2010 Dec;77(6):525-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jbspin.2010.08.005. Epub 
2010 Sep 21.

Role for interferon regulatory factors in autoimmunity.

Richez C(1), Barnetche T, Miceli-Richard C, Blanco P, Moreau JF, Rifkin I,
Schaeverbeke T.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 5164, université Bordeaux 2, 146, rue Léo-Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux,
France. christophe.richez@chu-bordeaux.fr

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) were first identified during studies of type
I interferons. Since then, many investigations have established that IRFs are
involved in regulating the innate immune response, the development of various
immune cell types, and carcinogenesis. Several genetic studies have identified
genetic variants, most notably IRF5, associated with an increased risk of
autoimmune disease. The biological role for IRFs in autoimmune diseases has been 
evaluated not only in vitro, but also in vivo in various murine models. Here, we 
discuss the role for the various IRFs, particularly in toll-like receptor
signaling pathways. We also review the evidence supporting a role for IRFs in
dysimmune diseases.

Copyright © 2010 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 20863736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Genes Immun. 2011 Jan;12(1):40-5. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.46. Epub 2010 Sep 23.

Validation of IRF5 as multiple sclerosis risk gene: putative role in interferon
beta therapy and human herpes virus-6 infection.

Vandenbroeck K(1), Alloza I, Swaminathan B, Antigüedad A, Otaegui D, Olascoaga J,
Barcina MG, de las Heras V, Bartolomé M, Fernández-Arquero M, Arroyo R,
Alvarez-Lafuente R, Cénit MC, Urcelay E.

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenomiks, University of the Basque Country (UPV/EHU), Leioa, Spain.

In recent reports, IRF5 polymorphisms showed significant association with
multiple sclerosis (MS) susceptibility in three studied populations and
Irf5-deficient mice exhibited an increased susceptibility to viral infection,
linked to a significant decrease in the induction of serum type I interferon
(IFN). In the present study, we evaluated the association of two IRF5
polymorphisms with MS predisposition and we also addressed whether these
polymorphisms were associated with active replication of human herpes virus-6
(HHV-6) observed in a subgroup of MS patients, and/or with response to IFN-ß
therapy. A total of 1494 MS patients and 1506 ethnically matched controls were
genotyped for rs4728142 and rs3807306 with TaqMan pre-designed assays. One
hundred and six patients were classified as responders to IFN-ß therapy (no
relapses/increases in EDSS over the 2-year follow-up) and 112 as non-responders
(at least two relapses or an increase in expanded disability status scale (EDSS) 
of at least one point during the same period). The combined analysis of available
datasets yielded an effect size on MS with odds ratio (OR)(Mantel-Haenszel)=1.14 
(P<0.002) for the IRF5 polymorphisms rs4728142 and rs3807306. Additionally,
trends for association were observed between rs3807306T and infection with HHV-6 
[p=0.05, OR (95% CI)=1.56 (1.00-2.44)] and response to IFN-ß therapy [P=0.09, OR 
(95% CI)=1.39 (0.95-2.05)].

PMID: 20861862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Genes Immun. 2011 Mar;12(2):100-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.44. Epub 2010 Sep 23.

Association of EBF1, FAM167A(C8orf13)-BLK and TNFSF4 gene variants with primary
Sjögren's syndrome.

Nordmark G(1), Kristjansdottir G, Theander E, Appel S, Eriksson P, Vasaitis L,
Kvarnström M, Delaleu N, Lundmark P, Lundmark A, Sjöwall C, Brun JG, Jonsson MV, 
Harboe E, Gøransson LG, Johnsen SJ, Söderkvist P, Eloranta ML, Alm G, Baecklund
E, Wahren-Herlenius M, Omdal R, Rönnblom L, Jonsson R, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden. Gunnel.Nordmark@medsci.uu.se

We performed a candidate gene association study in 540 patients with primary
Sjögren's Syndrome (SS) from Sweden (n=344) and Norway (n=196) and 532 controls
(n=319 Swedish, n=213 Norwegian). A total of 1139 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in 84 genes were analyzed. In the meta-analysis of the Swedish and
Norwegian cohorts, we found high signals for association between primary SS and
SNPs in three gene loci, not previously associated with primary SS. These are the
early B-cell factor 1 (EBF1) gene, P=9.9 × 10(-5), OR 1.68, the family with
sequence similarity 167 member A-B-lymphoid tyrosine kinase (FAM167A-BLK) locus, 
P=4.7 × 10(-4), OR 1.37 and the tumor necrosis factor superfamily (TNFSF4=Ox40L) 
gene, P=7.4 × 10(-4), OR 1.34. We also confirmed the association between primary 
SS and the IRF5/TNPO3 locus and the STAT4 gene. We found no association between
the SNPs in these five genes and the presence of anti-SSA/anti-SSB antibodies.
EBF1, BLK and TNFSF4 are all involved in B-cell differentiation and activation,
and we conclude that polymorphisms in several susceptibility genes in the immune 
system contribute to the pathogenesis of primary SS.

PMID: 20861858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Dec;62(12):3722-9. doi: 10.1002/art.27753.

Genetically determined Amerindian ancestry correlates with increased frequency of
risk alleles for systemic lupus erythematosus.

Sanchez E(1), Webb RD, Rasmussen A, Kelly JA, Riba L, Kaufman KM, Garcia-de la
Torre I, Moctezuma JF, Maradiaga-Ceceña MA, Cardiel-Rios MH, Acevedo E,
Cucho-Venegas M, Garcia MA, Gamron S, Pons-Estel BA, Vasconcelos C, Martin J,
Tusié-Luna T, Harley JB, Richardson B, Sawalha AH, Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether genetically determined Amerindian ancestry predicts 
increased presence of risk alleles of known susceptibility genes for systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within 16 confirmed genetic
susceptibility loci for SLE were genotyped in a set of 804 Mestizo lupus patients
and 667 Mestizo healthy controls. In addition, 347 admixture informative markers 
were genotyped. Individual ancestry proportions were determined using STRUCTURE. 
Association analysis was performed using PLINK, and correlation between ancestry 
and the presence of risk alleles was analyzed using linear regression.
RESULTS: A meta-analysis of the genetic association of the 16 SNPs across
populations showed that TNFSF4, STAT4, ITGAM, and IRF5 were associated with lupus
in a Hispanic Mestizo cohort enriched for European and Amerindian ancestry. In
addition, 2 SNPs within the major histocompatibility complex region, previously
shown to be associated in a genome-wide association study in Europeans, were also
associated in Mestizos. Using linear regression, we predicted an average increase
of 2.34 risk alleles when comparing an SLE patient with 100% Amerindian ancestry 
versus an SLE patient with 0% Amerindian ancestry (P < 0.0001). SLE patients with
43% more Amerindian ancestry were predicted to carry 1 additional risk allele.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that Amerindian ancestry is associated with
an increased number of risk alleles for SLE.

Copyright © 2010 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3078084
PMID: 20848568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Discov Med. 2010 Aug;10(51):134-43.

The genetics of systemic sclerosis.

Agarwal SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 6431 Fannin, 
MSB 5.270, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. Sandeep.K.Agarwal@uth.tmc.edu

Systemic sclerosis (SSc, scleroderma) is an autoimmune disease clinically
characterized by progressive fibrosis in the skin and internal organs. While the 
pathogenesis of SSc is not completely understood, familial studies and genetic
studies suggest that SSc is a complex polygenic disease. In the current review,
we will discuss recent studies investigating genetic susceptibility to SSc.
Candidate gene studies have identified critical immunoregulatory genes and gene
regions including BANK1, FAM167A-BLK, IL23R, IRF5, STAT4, TBX21, and TNFSF4 as
susceptibility genes for the development of SSc. More recently a genome-wide
association study has been performed and identified CD247 (CD3-zeta) as a novel
genetic risk factor for the susceptibility to SSc. Together these genetic
association studies have substantially advanced our understanding of SSc
pathogenesis and form the foundation for future studies seeking to understand the
complexities of SSc.

PMCID: PMC3803145
PMID: 20807474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;2(5):284-90. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjq023. Epub 2010 Aug
27.

Gender-dependent expression of murine Irf5 gene: implications for sex bias in
autoimmunity.

Shen H(1), Panchanathan R, Rajavelu P, Duan X, Gould KA, Choubey D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
45267, USA.

Molecular mechanisms that contribute to sex bias in the development of systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), an autoimmune disease, remain unknown. We found that
the expression levels of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), a lupus
susceptibility factor, depend on gender of mice. We found that steady-state
levels of the Irf5 mRNA were relatively higher in splenic cells from certain
autoimmune-prone mice (for example, NZB and NZB/W F(1)) than in non-autoimmune
C57BL/6 mice. Additionally, levels of Irf5 mRNA and protein were higher in
females than in strain and age-matched males. Accordingly, splenic cells from
estrogen receptor-alpha (ERa) knockout, when compared with the wild-type
(ERa(+/+)), female mice expressed relatively lower levels of Irf5 mRNA and the
treatment of splenic cells with 17ß-estradiol increased the levels. Furthermore, 
splenic B cells from the female mice had relatively more IRF5 protein in the
nucleus than the male mice. Collectively, our observations demonstrate a gender
bias in the expression and sub-cellular localization of the murine IRF5.

PMCID: PMC2952390
PMID: 20802013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Aug;6(8):437. doi: 10.1038/nrrheum.2010.113.

IRF5 and B cells in LUPUS development.

Beal E.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 1;107(22):10154-9.

PMID: 20704008  [PubMed]


275. Autoimmunity. 2011 Mar;44(2):82-9. doi: 10.3109/08916934.2010.491842. Epub 2010
Aug 9.

Exon 6 variants carried on systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) risk haplotypes
modulate IRF5 function.

Wen F(1), Ellingson SM, Kyogoku C, Peterson EJ, Gaffney PM.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Immunology Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) regulates innate immune responses to viral 
infection. IRF5 genetic variants have been shown to be strongly associated with
risk for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Functional roles of IRF5 exon 6
structural variants that occur as part of a SLE risk-associated haplotype,
including a 30-bp in/del (in/del-10) and a 48-bp splice-site variant (SV-16),
have not been established. In this study, we used IRF5-deficient cells
overexpressing human IRF5 (hIRF5) variants to investigate the roles of exon 6
in/del-10 and SV-16 in regulation of the apoptosis response, nuclear
translocation, and ability to transactivate IRF5 responsive cytokines. We found
that expression of IRF5 isoforms including either SV-16 or in/del-10 confers
ability of IRF5 to impair the apoptotic response and correlates with reduced
capacity for IRF5 nuclear translocation in MEFs after a DNA-damaging stimulus
treatment. Interestingly, the presence or absence of both SV-16 and in/del-10
results in abrogation of both the anti-apoptotic and enhanced nuclear
translocation effects of IRF5 expression. Only cells expressing IRF5 bearing
SV-16 show increased IL-6 production upon lipopolysaccharide stimulation. MEFs
expressing hIRF5 variants containing in/del-10 showed no significant difference
from the control; however, cells carrying hIRF5 lacking both SV-16 and in/del-10 
showed reduced IL-6 production. Our overall findings suggest that exon 6 SV-16 is
more potent than in/del-10 for IRF5-driven resistance to apoptosis and promotion 
of cytokine production; however, in/del-10 co-expression can neutralize these
effects of SV-16.

PMCID: PMC3104271
PMID: 20695768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. BMC Bioinformatics. 2010 Aug 6;11:416. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-11-416.

Survival dimensionality reduction (SDR): development and clinical application of 
an innovative approach to detect epistasis in presence of right-censored data.

Beretta L(1), Santaniello A, van Riel PL, Coenen MJ, Scorza R.

Author information: 
(1)Referral Center for Systemic Autoimmune Diseases, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico and University of Milan, Milan, Italy.
lorberimm@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Epistasis is recognized as a fundamental part of the genetic
architecture of individuals. Several computational approaches have been developed
to model gene-gene interactions in case-control studies, however, none of them is
suitable for time-dependent analysis. Herein we introduce the Survival
Dimensionality Reduction (SDR) algorithm, a non-parametric method specifically
designed to detect epistasis in lifetime datasets.
RESULTS: The algorithm requires neither specification about the underlying
survival distribution nor about the underlying interaction model and proved
satisfactorily powerful to detect a set of causative genes in synthetic epistatic
lifetime datasets with a limited number of samples and high degree of
right-censorship (up to 70%). The SDR method was then applied to a series of 386 
Dutch patients with active rheumatoid arthritis that were treated with anti-TNF
biological agents. Among a set of 39 candidate genes, none of which showed a
detectable marginal effect on anti-TNF responses, the SDR algorithm did find that
the rs1801274 SNP in the Fc gamma RIIa gene and the rs10954213 SNP in the IRF5
gene non-linearly interact to predict clinical remission after anti-TNF
biologicals.
CONCLUSIONS: Simulation studies and application in a real-world setting support
the capability of the SDR algorithm to model epistatic interactions in
candidate-genes studies in presence of right-censored data.
AVAILABILITY: http://sourceforge.net/projects/sdrproject/.

PMCID: PMC2928804
PMID: 20691091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 29;5(7):e11861. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011861.

Transcriptional profiles of leukocyte populations provide a tool for interpreting
gene expression patterns associated with high fat diet in mice.

Swindell WR(1), Johnston A, Gudjonsson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States of America. wswindell@genetics.med.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: Microarray experiments in mice have shown that high fat diet can lead
to elevated expression of genes that are disproportionately associated with
immune functions. These effects of high fat (atherogenic) diet may be due to
infiltration of tissues by leukocytes in coordination with inflammatory
processes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The Novartis strain-diet-sex microarray database 
(GSE10493) was used to evaluate the hepatic effects of high fat diet (4 weeks) in
12 mouse strains and both genders. We develop and apply an algorithm that
identifies "signature transcripts" for many different leukocyte populations
(e.g., T cells, B cells, macrophages) and uses this information to derive an in
silico "inflammation profile". Inflammation profiles highlighted monocytes,
macrophages and dendritic cells as key drivers of gene expression patterns
associated with high fat diet in liver. In some strains (e.g., NZB/BINJ, B6), we 
estimate that 50-60% of transcripts elevated by high fat diet might be due to
hepatic infiltration by these cell types. Interestingly, DBA mice appeared to
exhibit resistance to localized hepatic inflammation associated with atherogenic 
diet. A common characteristic of infiltrating cell populations was elevated
expression of genes encoding components of the toll-like receptor signaling
pathway (e.g., Irf5 and Myd88).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: High fat diet promotes infiltration of hepatic tissue
by leukocytes, leading to elevated expression of immune-associated transcripts.
The intensity of this effect is genetically controlled and sensitive to both
strain and gender. The algorithm developed in this paper provides a framework for
computational analysis of tissue remodeling processes and can be usefully applied
to any in vivo setting in which inflammatory processes play a prominent role.

PMCID: PMC2912331
PMID: 20686622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Korean Med Sci. 2010 Aug;25(8):1152-9. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2010.25.8.1152. Epub
2010 Jul 20.

Identification of novel methylation markers in hepatocellular carcinoma using a
methylation array.

Shin SH(1), Kim BH, Jang JJ, Suh KS, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute and Brain Korea 2nd
Stage, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Promoter CpG island hypermethylation has become recognized as an important
mechanism for inactivating tumor suppressor genes or tumor-related genes in human
cancers of various tissues. Gene inactivation in association with promoter CpG
island hypermethylation has been reported to be four times more frequent than
genetic changes in human colorectal cancers. Hepatocellular carcinoma is also one
of the human cancer types in which aberrant promoter CpG island hypermethylation 
is frequently found. However, the number of genes identified to date as
hypermethylated for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is fewer than that for
colorectal cancer or gastric cancer, which can be attributed to fewer attempts to
perform genome-wide methylation profiling for HCC. In the present study, we used 
bead-array technology and coupled methylation-specific PCR to identify new genes 
showing cancer-specific methylation in HCC. Twenty-four new genes have been
identified as hypermethylated at their promoter CpG island loci in a
cancer-specific manner. Of these, TNFRSF10C, HOXA9, NPY, and IRF5 were frequently
hypermethylated in hepatocellular carcinoma tissue samples and their methylation 
was found to be closely associated with inactivation of gene expression. Further 
study will be required to elucidate the clinicopathological implications of these
newly found DNA methylation markers in hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2908783
PMID: 20676325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Autoimmun. 2010 Nov;35(3):225-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2010.06.012. Epub 2010
Jul 31.

Activation of the type I interferon pathway in primary Sjogren's syndrome.

Mavragani CP(1), Crow MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Physiology, School of Medicine, University of
Athens, M. Asias 75, Goudi 11527, Athens, Greece. kmauragan@med.uoa.gr

Sjogren's syndrome (SS), a chronic autoimmune systemic disease affecting middle
aged women, is characterized by lymphocytic infiltration of the salivary and
lachrymal glands resulting in dry eyes and dry mouth. Recent advances have
revealed a major role for activation of the type I interferon (IFN) pathway in
the pathogenesis of the syndrome, as evidenced by the increased circulating type 
I IFN activity and an IFN "signature" in peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) and minor salivary gland (MSG) biopsies from these patients. Polymorphisms
in genes involved in the IFNa pathway, such as IRF5 and STAT4, have been found to
be associated with disease susceptibility. While the initial triggers of the
innate immune response in SS remain elusive, preliminary evidence supports the
role of inappropriately expressed endogenous LINE-1 (L1) retroelements as
potential triggers of type I IFN activation in SS, possibly through Toll-like
receptor (TLR) dependent or independent pathways. Proteins of the methylation
machinery and the APOBEC family of cytidine deaminases are coordinately
overexpressed, suggesting that those proteins might contribute to regulation of
the inappropriately expressed L1 endogenous retroelements in SS. Given the
apparent central role of IFNa in the pathogenesis of SS, blockade of this
cytokine may be a rational therapeutic approach. In the current review we
summarize the current evidence regarding the potential triggers of type I IFN
activation as well as the data supporting genetic and epigenetic regulation of
the type I IFN system in SS.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20674271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Sep;22(5):471-7. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32833c36c5.

Pathogenesis of Sjögren's syndrome and therapeutic consequences.

Mariette X(1), Gottenberg JE.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Bicêtre, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Université Paris-Sud
11, Institut Pour la Santé et la Recherche Médicale U1012, Le Kremlin Bicêtre,
France. xavier.mariette@bct.aphp.fr

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To summarize recent findings on new pathogenic mechanisms of
interaction between genetic and environmental factors and between innate and
adaptive immunity in primary Sjögren's syndrome and to reconcile pathogenesis and
treatment by focusing on the crucial pathogenic steps that could be targeted by
emerging therapies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Regarding genetic predisposition, the functional relevance of
IRF5 and STAT4 gene polymorphisms in the activation of type I interferon pathways
has been demonstrated. It has also been shown that the isolated stimulation of
innate immunity in mice can result in dryness, which precedes lymphocytic
infiltrates in salivary glands. In animal models, possible environmental triggers
of the disease, such as oestrogen deficiency and/or infection by Epstein-Barr
virus, can lead to innate immune followed by autoimmune epithelitis. The
IFN-BAFF-B lymphocyte pathogenic axis is, therefore, targeted by numerous drugs
currently in evaluation. The development of consensus disease activity scores and
patient-related outcomes might help to initiate new controlled trials. The first 
positive randomized controlled trial with rituximab has been recently published.
SUMMARY: Hopefully, persistent and joint efforts by many teams to improve the
knowledge on the pathogenesis of the disease may allow identification of new
therapeutic targets in Sjögren's syndrome.

PMID: 20671520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2010 Nov 1;112(1-2):107-16. doi:
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.05.008. Epub 2010 Jun 20.

Alcohol impairs interferon signaling and enhances full cycle hepatitis C virus
JFH-1 infection of human hepatocytes.

Ye L(1), Wang S, Wang X, Zhou Y, Li J, Persidsky Y, Ho W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

Alcohol drinking and hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection frequently coexist in
patients with chronic liver disease. There is limited information, however, about
the impact of alcohol on host cell innate immunity and full cycle replication of 
HCV. This study investigated whether alcohol impairs the intracellular innate
immunity in human hepatocytes, promoting HCV infection and replication. Alcohol
treatment of human hepatocytes before, during and after viral infection
significantly enhanced full cycle HCV replication. Alcohol suppressed
intracellular expression of type I interferons (IFN-a/ß) in human hepatocytes.
Investigation of the mechanisms responsible for the alcohol action revealed that 
alcohol inhibited the expression of the IFN regulatory factors (IRF-5 and IRF-7),
and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT-1 and STAT-2), the key
positive regulators in type I IFN signaling pathway. In addition, alcohol induced
the expression of suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS-2 and SOCS-3), the key 
negative regulators of IFN-a/ß expression. These in vitro findings suggest that
alcohol, through modulating the expression of key regulators in IFN signaling
pathway, inhibits type I IFN-based intracellular innate immunity in hepatocytes, 
which may contribute to the chronicity of HCV infection and the poor efficacy of 
IFN-a-based therapy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2967585
PMID: 20646875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Nat Genet. 2010 Aug;42(8):658-60. doi: 10.1038/ng.627. Epub 2010 Jul 18.

Genome-wide meta-analyses identify three loci associated with primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Liu X(1), Invernizzi P, Lu Y, Kosoy R, Lu Y, Bianchi I, Podda M, Xu C, Xie G,
Macciardi F, Selmi C, Lupoli S, Shigeta R, Ransom M, Lleo A, Lee AT, Mason AL,
Myers RP, Peltekian KM, Ghent CN, Bernuzzi F, Zuin M, Rosina F, Borghesio E,
Floreani A, Lazzari R, Niro G, Andriulli A, Muratori L, Muratori P, Almasio PL,
Andreone P, Margotti M, Brunetto M, Coco B, Alvaro D, Bragazzi MC, Marra F,
Pisano A, Rigamonti C, Colombo M, Marzioni M, Benedetti A, Fabris L, Strazzabosco
M, Portincasa P, Palmieri VO, Tiribelli C, Croce L, Bruno S, Rossi S, Vinci M,
Prisco C, Mattalia A, Toniutto P, Picciotto A, Galli A, Ferrari C, Colombo S,
Casella G, Morini L, Caporaso N, Colli A, Spinzi G, Montanari R, Gregersen PK,
Heathcote EJ, Hirschfield GM, Siminovitch KA, Amos CI, Gershwin ME, Seldin MF.

Author information: 
(1)University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2011 Jan;53(1):362-4.

A genome-wide association screen for primary biliary cirrhosis risk alleles was
performed in an Italian cohort. The results from the Italian cohort replicated
IL12A and IL12RB associations, and a combined meta-analysis using a Canadian
dataset identified newly associated loci at SPIB (P = 7.9 x 10(-11), odds ratio
(OR) = 1.46), IRF5-TNPO3 (P = 2.8 x 10(-10), OR = 1.63) and 17q12-21 (P = 1.7 x
10(-10), OR = 1.38).

PMCID: PMC3150510
PMID: 20639880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nat Genet. 2010 Aug;42(8):655-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.631. Epub 2010 Jul 18.

Variants at IRF5-TNPO3, 17q12-21 and MMEL1 are associated with primary biliary
cirrhosis.

Hirschfield GM(1), Liu X, Han Y, Gorlov IP, Lu Y, Xu C, Lu Y, Chen W, Juran BD,
Coltescu C, Mason AL, Milkiewicz P, Myers RP, Odin JA, Luketic VA, Speiciene D,
Vincent C, Levy C, Gregersen PK, Zhang J, Heathcote EJ, Lazaridis KN, Amos CI,
Siminovitch KA.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Centre, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We genotyped individuals with primary biliary cirrhosis and unaffected controls
for suggestive risk loci (genome-wide association P < 1 x 10(-4)) identified in a
previous genome-wide association study. Combined analysis of the genome-wide
association and replication datasets identified IRF5-TNPO3 (combined P = 8.66 x
10(-13)), 17q12-21 (combined P = 3.50 x 10(-13)) and MMEL1 (combined P = 3.15 x
10(-8)) as new primary biliary cirrhosis susceptibility loci. Fine-mapping
studies showed that a single variant accounts for the IRF5-TNPO3 association. As 
these loci are implicated in other autoimmune conditions, these findings confirm 
genetic overlap among such diseases.

PMCID: PMC2929126
PMID: 20639879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Dev Comp Immunol. 2010 Dec;34(12):1263-73. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2010.07.003. Epub
2010 Jul 23.

Characteristics of the interferon regulatory factor pairs zfIRF5/7 and their
stimulation expression by ISKNV Infection in zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Xiang Z(1), Dong C, Qi L, Chen W, Huang L, Li Z, Xia Q, Liu D, Huang M, Weng S,
He J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, 135 Xingang Road West, Guangzhou 510275, PR China.

The interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family plays critical roles in a host's
virus infection responses. In this study, two IRF family members, zfIRF5 and
zfIRF7, are identified in zebrafish. The zfIRF5 protein encodes 297 amino acids
without the carboxyl IRF3 domain. We suggest that zfIRF5 is a new kind of
splicing variant, following the nine other kinds of IRF5 splicing variants found 
in mammals. The zfIRF7 protein is identified as a member of the IRF7 family,
compared to the human IRF7 protein, the amino acid sequence of zfIRF7 only with
29% identity and devoid a virus activated domain (VAD). There zfIRF5/7 proteins
are expressed in all 11 selective zebrafish tissues within 6-120h of embryonic
development. Laser confocal microscopy shows that the full length the proteins
are separately located in the cytoplasm. Mutation experiments show that the
nuclear localization signals (NLS) of zfIRF7 and zfIRF-5 are at the N-terminal
and C-terminals, respectively. In the assays, zfIRF7 expression increases during 
infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus (ISKNV) infection and by poly(I:C)
and LPS injections, both of which activate the transcriptional activity of
L8G5-luc plasmids. The over-expression of zfIRF5/7 activates the
interferon-stimulated response elements (ISRE) signal pathway. In addition,
zfIRF7 can activate IFN-ß, zfIRF5/7. Co-immunoprecipitation assays and laser
co-confocal microscopy show that the two proteins could interact, and zfIRF7 may 
stimulate zfIRF5 to move into the nucleus. The co-expression of zfIRF5/IRF7
suppresses the transcriptional activities of IFN-ß in HEK293T cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20637800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Sci. 2010 Jul;101(7):1708-16. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01581.x. Epub 
2010 Apr 2.

DNA methylation of interferon regulatory factors in gastric cancer and
noncancerous gastric mucosae.

Yamashita M(1), Toyota M, Suzuki H, Nojima M, Yamamoto E, Kamimae S, Watanabe Y, 
Kai M, Akashi H, Maruyama R, Sasaki Y, Yamano H, Sugai T, Shinomura Y, Imai K,
Tokino T, Itoh F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, St. Marianna Medical
University, School of Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are transcription factors known to play key 
roles in innate and adaptive immune responses, cell growth, apoptosis, and
development. Their function in tumorigenesis of gastric cancer remains to be
determined, however. In the present study, therefore, we examined epigenetic
inactivation of IRF1-9 in a panel of gastric cancer cell lines. We found that
expression of IRF4, IRF5, and IRF8 was frequently suppressed in gastric cancer
cell lines; that methylation of the three genes correlated with their silencing; 
and that treating the cells with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(DAC) restored their expression. Expression of IRF5 in cancer cells was enhanced 
by the combination of DAC treatment and adenoviral vector-mediated expression of 
p53, p63, or p73. Interferon-gamma-induced expression of IRF8 was also enhanced
by DAC. Moreover, treating gastric cancer cells with DAC enhanced the suppressive
effects of interferon-alpha, interferon-beta, and interferon-gamma on cell
growth. Among a cohort of 455 gastric cancer and noncancerous gastric tissue
samples, methylation of IRF4 was frequently observed in both gastric cancer
specimens and noncancerous specimens of gastric mucosa from patients with
multiple gastric cancers, which suggests IRF4 methylation could be a useful
molecular marker for diagnosing recurrence of gastric cancers. Our findings
indicate that epigenetic IRF inactivation plays a key role in tumorigenesis of
gastric cancer, and that inhibition of DNA methylation may restore the antitumor 
activity of interferons through up-regulation of IRFs.

PMID: 20507321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Immunol. 2010 Jun 15;184(12):7162-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903944. Epub 2010
May 17.

Synoviocyte innate immune responses: II. Pivotal role of IFN regulatory factor 3.

Sweeney SE(1), Kimbler TB, Firestein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California
San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. ssweeney@ucsd.edu

Innate immune responses contribute to synovial inflammation in rheumatoid
arthritis. The present study was designed to investigate the contribution of IFN 
regulatory factor (IRF)3 and IRF7 to type I IFN-regulated gene expression in
synoviocytes. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes were stimulated with
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly [I-C]) after transfection with IRF3 or IRF7
small interfering RNA to knockdown transcription factor expression. Western
blots, luciferase assay after transfection with reporter constructs, quantitative
PCR, and AP-1 DNA binding ELISA were performed to evaluate the role of IRF3 and
IRF7 in poly (I-C)-induced signaling and synoviocyte gene expression. IRF3
regulates IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) promoter activity as well as
IFN-beta, IRF5, IRF7, RANTES, IFN-inducible protein-10, MCP-1, and MIP1alpha gene
expression in response to poly (I-C). IRF7 knockdown modestly decreased a subset 
of genes and ISRE activity, although the results were not statistically
significant. Surprisingly, IRF3 knockdown almost completely blocked expression of
additional genes in which the ISRE is not traditionally considered a dominant
promoter site in fibroblast-like synoviocytes, including matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)3, MMP9, IL-6, and IL-8. Transcription factor activation studies
demonstrated a role for IRF3 in regulation of c-Jun phosphorylation and AP-1
binding. IRF3 rather than IRF7 regulates poly (I-C)-induced type I IFN responses 
in human synoviocytes by increasing ISRE promoter activity. IRF3 also partially
regulates expression of other cytokines and MMP through activation of c-Jun and
the AP-1 promoter site. Targeting synoviocyte IRF3 represents a potential
approach to suppress diverse mediators while limiting suppression of
IRF7-mediated immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2913682
PMID: 20483755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. PLoS One. 2010 May 10;5(5):e10559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010559.

Genetic risk factors in lupus nephritis and IgA nephropathy--no support of an
overlap.

Vuong MT(1), Gunnarsson I, Lundberg S, Svenungsson E, Wramner L, Fernström A,
Syvänen AC, Do LT, Jacobson SH, Padyukov L.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. maituyetvuong@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: IgA nephropathy (IgAN) and nephritis in Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 
(SLE) are two common forms of glomerulonephritis in which genetic findings are of
importance for disease development. We have recently reported an association of
IgAN with variants of TGFB1. In several autoimmune diseases, particularly in SLE,
IRF5, STAT4 genes and TRAF1-C5 locus have been shown to be important candidate
genes. The aim of this study was to compare genetic variants from the TGFB1,
IRF5, STAT4 genes and TRAF1-C5 locus with susceptibility to IgAN and lupus
nephritis in two Swedish cohorts.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We genotyped 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
four genetic loci in 1252 DNA samples from patients with biopsy proven IgAN or
with SLE (with and without nephritis) and healthy age- and sex-matched controls
from the same population in Sweden.
RESULTS: Genotype and allelic frequencies for SNPs from selected genes did not
differ significantly between lupus nephritis patients and SLE patients without
nephritis. In addition, haplotype analysis for seven selected SNPs did not reveal
a difference for the SLE patient groups with and without nephritis. Moreover,
none of these SPNs showed a significant difference between IgAN patients and
healthy controls. IRF5 and STAT4 variants remained significantly different
between SLE cases and healthy controls. In addition, the data did not show an
association of TRAF1-C5 polymorphism with susceptibility to SLE in this Swedish
population.
CONCLUSION: Our data do not support an overlap in genetic susceptibility between 
patients with IgAN or SLE and reveal no specific importance of SLE associated
SNPs for the presence of lupus nephritis.

PMCID: PMC2866667
PMID: 20479942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 1;107(22):10154-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1005599107. Epub 2010 May 17.

Contribution of IRF5 in B cells to the development of murine SLE-like disease
through its transcriptional control of the IgG2a locus.

Savitsky DA(1), Yanai H, Tamura T, Taniguchi T, Honda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0031, Japan.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Rheumatol. 2010 Aug;6(8):437.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 5 is a key transcription factor for the
activation of innate immune responses downstream of Toll-like receptor signaling.
Based on recent genetic analyses, IRF5 is a focus for its potential involvement
in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), although how IRF5 contributes to SLE is
uncertain. In this study, we demonstrate a requirement for IRF5 in the
development of murine SLE via its role in B lymphocytes. We show that antinuclear
autoantibodies and Ig glomerular deposits, hallmarks of SLE, are absent in
Irf5(-/-) mice challenged to develop SLE by pristane injection. In particular,
production of autoantibodies of the IgG2a subtype, the most prominent isotype in 
inducing autoimmunity, requires IRF5. Finally, we provide evidence for the
critical role of this transcription factor in the secretion of pathogenic
antibodies through its direct control of class switch recombination of the
gamma2a locus. By demonstrating a B-cell-intrinsic role, this study places IRF5
in a context that may have implications for understanding the pathogenesis of
human SLE.

PMCID: PMC2890425
PMID: 20479222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Nat Genet. 2010 Jun;42(6):508-14. doi: 10.1038/ng.582. Epub 2010 May 9.

Genome-wide association study meta-analysis identifies seven new rheumatoid
arthritis risk loci.

Stahl EA(1), Raychaudhuri S, Remmers EF, Xie G, Eyre S, Thomson BP, Li Y,
Kurreeman FA, Zhernakova A, Hinks A, Guiducci C, Chen R, Alfredsson L, Amos CI,
Ardlie KG; BIRAC Consortium, Barton A, Bowes J, Brouwer E, Burtt NP, Catanese JJ,
Coblyn J, Coenen MJ, Costenbader KH, Criswell LA, Crusius JB, Cui J, de Bakker
PI, De Jager PL, Ding B, Emery P, Flynn E, Harrison P, Hocking LJ, Huizinga TW,
Kastner DL, Ke X, Lee AT, Liu X, Martin P, Morgan AW, Padyukov L, Posthumus MD,
Radstake TR, Reid DM, Seielstad M, Seldin MF, Shadick NA, Steer S, Tak PP,
Thomson W, van der Helm-van Mil AH, van der Horst-Bruinsma IE, van der Schoot CE,
van Riel PL, Weinblatt ME, Wilson AG, Wolbink GJ, Wordsworth BP; YEAR Consortium,
Wijmenga C, Karlson EW, Toes RE, de Vries N, Begovich AB, Worthington J,
Siminovitch KA, Gregersen PK, Klareskog L, Plenge RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Immunology and Allergy, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

To identify new genetic risk factors for rheumatoid arthritis, we conducted a
genome-wide association study meta-analysis of 5,539 autoantibody-positive
individuals with rheumatoid arthritis (cases) and 20,169 controls of European
descent, followed by replication in an independent set of 6,768 rheumatoid
arthritis cases and 8,806 controls. Of 34 SNPs selected for replication, 7 new
rheumatoid arthritis risk alleles were identified at genome-wide significance (P 
< 5 x 10(-8)) in an analysis of all 41,282 samples. The associated SNPs are near 
genes of known immune function, including IL6ST, SPRED2, RBPJ, CCR6, IRF5 and
PXK. We also refined associations at two established rheumatoid arthritis risk
loci (IL2RA and CCL21) and confirmed the association at AFF3. These new
associations bring the total number of confirmed rheumatoid arthritis risk loci
to 31 among individuals of European ancestry. An additional 11 SNPs replicated at
P < 0.05, many of which are validated autoimmune risk alleles, suggesting that
most represent genuine rheumatoid arthritis risk alleles.

PMCID: PMC4243840
PMID: 20453842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2010;33(2):57-65.

Association of IRF5, STAT4 and BLK with systemic lupus erythematosus and other
rheumatic diseases.

Tsuchiya N(1), Ito I, Kawasaki A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Doctoral Program in Life System
Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of 
Tsukuba.

Recent large-scale studies in the Caucasian populations identified many new
susceptibility genes to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In this review, we
discuss our findings on some of such genes, interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF5), signal transducer and activator of transcription 4 (STAT4) and B lymphoid
tyrosine kinase (BLK), in the Japanese population. All of these genes were
associated with SLE also in Japanese; however, there are notable differences. In 
IRF5, the risk haplotype in Caucasians was not present in Japanese. Instead, a
SNP that does not exist in Caucasians defined a protective haplotype in Japanese.
In STAT4 and especially in BLK, the risk allele frequency was substantially
larger in the Japanese population than in Caucasians; as a result, the genetic
contribution of these genes in the population is considered to be greater in the 
Japanese. Presence of susceptibility genes shared by the Caucasian and Asian
populations as well as population-specific susceptibility genes was supported by 
the first genome-wide association study in the Asians published from China in
2009. We and other investigators also found that IRF5, STAT4 and BLK are
associated not only with SLE, but also rheumatoid arthritis and systemic
sclerosis. Thus, a substantial proportion of susceptibility genes are shared by
multiple autoimmune rheumatic diseases.

PMID: 20453440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Sep;69(9):1694-6. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.123828. Epub 2010 May
3.

Genetic variants in the prediction of rheumatoid arthritis.

van der Helm-van Mil AH(1), Toes RE, Huizinga TW.

Author information: 
(1)Leiden University Medical Center, Department of Rheumatology, Leiden, The
Netherlands. avdHelm@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the currently known genetic risk factors for
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) improve the prediction of the development of RA
compared to prediction using clinical risk factors alone in patients with
undifferentiated arthritis (UA).
METHODS: Five hundred and seventy early UA-patients included in the Leiden Early 
Arthritis Clinic cohort, previously used to derive a clinical prediction rule,
were used to explore the additional value of genetic variants. The following
genetic variants were assessed HLA-DRB1 shared epitope (SE) alleles, rs2476601
(PTPN22), rs108184088 (TRAF1-C5), rs7574865 (STAT4), rs3087243 (CTLA4), rs4810485
(CD40), rs1678542 (KIF5A-PIP4K2C), rs2812378 (CCL21), rs42041 (CDK6), rs4750316
(PRKCQ), rs6684865 (MMEL1-TNFRSF14), rs2004640 (IRF5), rs6920220 and rs10499194
(TNFAIP3-OLIG3), interactions between HLA-SE alleles and rs2476601 (PTPN22) and
between HLA-SE alleles and smoking. The area under the receiver operator curve
(AUC) was used as measure of the discriminative ability of the models.
RESULTS: The AUC of a model consisting of genetic variants only was low, 0.536
(95% CI 0.48 to 0.59). The AUC of the model including genetic and clinical risk
factors was not superior over the AUC of the clinical prediction rule (0.889, 95%
CI 0.86 to 0.95 and 0.884, 95% CI 0.86 to 0.92).
CONCLUSION: In a population at risk, information on currently known genetic risk 
factors for RA does not improve prediction of risk for RA compared to a
prediction rule based on common clinical risk factors alone.

PMID: 20439292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12 Suppl 1:S3. doi: 10.1186/ar2884. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Potential role of IFNa in adult lupus.

Rönnblom L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala University,
Uppsala University Hospital, Entrance 40, Uppsala, Sweden.
Lars.Ronnblom@medsci.uu.se

Patients with lupus have a continuous production of IFNa and display an increased
expression of IFNa-regulated genes. The reason for the ongoing IFNa synthesis in 
these patients seems to be an activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs)
by immune complexes (ICs), consisting of autoantibodies in combination with
DNA-containing or RNA-containing autoantigens. The mechanisms behind the
activation of pDCs by such ICs have to some extent been elucidated during the
last years. Thus, interferogenic ICs are internalized via the Fc<U+03B3>RIIa expressed
on pDCs, reach the endosomes and stimulate Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 or 9, which
subsequently leads to IFNa gene transcription. Variants of genes involved in both
the IFNa synthesis and response have been linked to an increased risk to develop 
lupus. Among these genes are interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), which is
involved in TLR signaling, and the signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) that interacts with the type I interferon receptor.
Produced IFNa may at least partially be responsible for several of the observed
alterations in the immune system of lupus patients and contribute to the
autoimmune disease process, which will be discussed in the present review. How
produced IFNa can contribute to some clinical manifestations will briefly be
described, as well as the possible consequences of this knowledge in clinical
practice for disease monitoring and therapy.

PMCID: PMC2991776
PMID: 20392290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Nat Genet. 2010 May;42(5):426-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.565. Epub 2010 Apr 11.

Genome-wide association study of systemic sclerosis identifies CD247 as a new
susceptibility locus.

Radstake TR(1), Gorlova O, Rueda B, Martin JE, Alizadeh BZ, Palomino-Morales R,
Coenen MJ, Vonk MC, Voskuyl AE, Schuerwegh AJ, Broen JC, van Riel PL, van 't Slot
R, Italiaander A, Ophoff RA, Riemekasten G, Hunzelmann N, Simeon CP,
Ortego-Centeno N, González-Gay MA, González-Escribano MF; Spanish Scleroderma
Group, Airo P, van Laar J, Herrick A, Worthington J, Hesselstrand R, Smith V, de 
Keyser F, Houssiau F, Chee MM, Madhok R, Shiels P, Westhovens R, Kreuter A,
Kiener H, de Baere E, Witte T, Padykov L, Klareskog L, Beretta L, Scorza R, Lie
BA, Hoffmann-Vold AM, Carreira P, Varga J, Hinchcliff M, Gregersen PK, Lee AT,
Ying J, Han Y, Weng SF, Amos CI, Wigley FM, Hummers L, Nelson JL, Agarwal SK,
Assassi S, Gourh P, Tan FK, Koeleman BP, Arnett FC, Martin J, Mayes MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. tradstake73@gmail.com

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is an autoimmune disease characterized by fibrosis of
the skin and internal organs that leads to profound disability and premature
death. To identify new SSc susceptibility loci, we conducted the first
genome-wide association study in a population of European ancestry including a
total of 2,296 individuals with SSc and 5,171 controls. Analysis of 279,621
autosomal SNPs followed by replication testing in an independent case-control set
of European ancestry (2,753 individuals with SSc (cases) and 4,569 controls)
identified a new susceptibility locus for systemic sclerosis at CD247 (1q22-23,
rs2056626, P = 2.09 x 10(-7) in the discovery samples, P = 3.39 x 10(-9) in the
combined analysis). Additionally, we confirm and firmly establish the role of the
MHC (P = 2.31 x 10(-18)), IRF5 (P = 1.86 x 10(-13)) and STAT4 (P = 3.37 x 10(-9))
gene regions as SSc genetic risk factors.

PMCID: PMC2861917
PMID: 20383147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 28;285(22):17011-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.068817. Epub 2010
Mar 29.

Differential gene expression downstream of Toll-like receptors (TLRs): role of
c-Src and activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3).

Nguyen TT(1), Johnsen IB, Knetter CF, Drabløs F, Fitzgerald KA, Lien E, Anthonsen
MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Norwegian
University of Science and Technology, N-7006 Trondheim, Norway.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are crucial for transcription during innate 
immune responses. We have previously shown that the tyrosine kinase c-Src
enhances IRF-3-dependent transcription in response to viral double-stranded RNA. 
In this study, we show that c-Src has distinct roles in Toll-like receptor
(TLR)-mediated activation of IRF-5 and IRF-3. Surprisingly, c-Src inhibition
markedly enhanced IRF-5 activation after treatment with unmethylated CpG, while
suppressing IRF-3 activation. Also, CpG-elicited interleukin-6 mRNA production
was increased, whereas IP10 mRNA synthesis was reduced in cells deficient in
c-Src. Interestingly, c-Src regulated TLR-stimulated induction of activating
transcription factor 3 (ATF3), a transcriptional repressor. Depletion of ATF3 by 
small interfering RNA markedly enhanced interleukin-6 production after CpG
treatment, whereas IP10 production was reduced. These results demonstrate
functional specificity for c-Src in TLR-stimulated responses and suggest that
c-Src modulation and ATF3 activity may contribute to differential regulation of
IRF-3- versus IRF-5-mediated gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2878043
PMID: 20351107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Blood. 2010 Jun 3;115(22):4421-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-01-263020. Epub 2010
Mar 17.

IRF5 is required for late-phase TNF secretion by human dendritic cells.

Krausgruber T(1), Saliba D, Ryzhakov G, Lanfrancotti A, Blazek K, Udalova IA.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology Division, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial
College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

Spatially and temporally controlled expression of inflammatory mediators is
critical for an appropriate immune response. In this study, we define the role
for interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) in secretion of tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) by human dendritic cells (DCs). We demonstrate that DCs but not macrophages
have high levels of IRF5 protein, and that IRF5 is responsible for the late-phase
expression of TNF, which is absent in macrophages. Sustained TNF secretion is
essential for robust T-cell activation by DCs. Systematic bioinformatic and
biochemical analyses of the TNF gene locus map 2 sites of IRF5 recruitment: 5'
upstream and 3' downstream of the TNF gene. Remarkably, while IRF5 can directly
bind to DNA in the upstream region, its recruitment to the downstream region
depends on the protein-protein interactions with NF-kappaB RelA. This study
provides new insights into diverse molecular mechanisms employed by IRF5 to
regulate gene expression and implicates RelA-IRF5 interactions as a putative
target for cell-specific modulation of TNF expression.

PMID: 20237317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Rheumatol. 2010 May;37(5):987-92. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.091163. Epub 2010 Mar 15.

Phenotype-haplotype correlation of IRF5 in systemic sclerosis: role of 2
haplotypes in disease severity.

Dieude P(1), Dawidowicz K, Guedj M, Legrain Y, Wipff J, Hachulla E, Diot E,
Sibilia J, Mouthon L, Cabane J, Amoura Z, Crakowski JL, Carpentier P, Avouac J,
Meyer O, Kahan A, Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard, APHP, Université
Diderot-Paris 7, Paris, France. philippe.dieude@bch.aphp.fr

OBJECTIVE: Identification of an association between IRF5 rs2004640 and systemic
sclerosis (SSc) has highlighted a key role for type 1 interferon (IFN).
Additional functional IRF5 variants have been identified as autoimmune
susceptibility factors. Our aim was to investigate whether IRF5 haplotypes confer
susceptibility to SSc, and to perform genotype haplotype-phenotype correlation
analyses.
METHODS: We genotyped IRF5 rs377385, rs2004640, and rs10954213 in 1623
individuals of French European Caucasian origin. SSc patient subphenotypes were
analyzed according to cutaneous subsets and for SSc-related pulmonary fibrosis.
RESULTS: Case-control studies of single markers revealed an association between
IRF5 rs3757385, rs2004640, and rs10954213 variants and SSc. We identified an IRF5
risk haplotype "R" (p(adj) = 0.024, OR 1.23, 95% CI 1.07-1.40) and a mirrored
protective haplotype "P" (p(adj) = 8.8 x 10(-3), OR 0.78, 95% CI 0.68-0.90) for
SSc susceptibility. Genotype-phenotype correlation analyses failed to detect any 
association with a single marker. By contrast, phenotype-haplotype correlation
analysis was able to detect intra-cohort association and to discriminate SSc
patients with from those without the following clinical traits: "R" and/or "P"
haplotypes identified diffuse cutaneous SSc (p = 0.0081) and fibrosing alveolitis
(p = 0.018).
CONCLUSION: IRF5 haplotypes are more informative than single markers, suggesting 
that they could be helpful for risk stratification of SSc patients. Our study
provides further evidence of a key role of IRF5 in SSc severity.

PMID: 20231204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Rheumatol. 2010 Mar;37(3):676-7; author reply 678. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.090823.

Lack of interaction between systemic lupus erythematosus-associated polymorphisms
in TYK2 and IRF5.

Suarez-Gestal M, Calaza M, Gonzalez A.

Comment on
    J Rheumatol. 2009 Aug;36(8):1631-8.

PMID: 20197570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Clin Genet. 2010 Sep;78(3):247-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01375.x. Epub
2010 Feb 10.

Epidemiology of Van der Woude syndrome from mutational analyses in affected
patients from Pakistan.

Malik S(1), Kakar N, Hasnain S, Ahmad J, Wilcox ER, Naz S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Department of Microbiology and Molecular
Genetics, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.

Mutations in IRF6 cause Van der Woude syndrome (VWS), one of the most common
syndromes associated with cleft lip (CL) with or without cleft palate (CP). The
presence of pits on the lower lip of patients is the most characteristic feature 
of the syndrome. We have identified three novel and seven previously reported
IRF6 mutations in 12 of 16 unrelated families segregating VWS from Pakistan. The 
three newly identified mutations include a frameshift (c.568delG) and two
missense mutations c.295G>A (p.G99S) and c.1219T>C (p.S407P). Recent functional
studies on IRF6 and the three-dimensional structure of IRF5 carboxy (C) terminus,
a protein encoded by a paralog of IRF6, shed light on the p.S407P substitution.
Additionally, the identification of the same mutations responsible for VWS in
Pakistan, as reported in other global populations worldwide, marks these residues
as mutational hotspots and indicates their essential role in structural stability
or function of IRF6. This is the first study of VWS in Pakistan and we estimate
that 1 in 100 patients with CL with or without CP (CL/P) are affected in the
Pakistani population predominantly from the Punjab area.

PMID: 20184620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Mar 9;107(10):4664-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0911193107. Epub 2010 Feb 22.

Critical role of IRF-5 in regulation of B-cell differentiation.

Lien C(1), Fang CM, Huso D, Livak F, Lu R, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biology and Comparative Medicine, The Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218,
USA.

IFN-regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5), a member of the IRF family, is a transcription
factor that has a key role in the induction of the antiviral and inflammatory
response. When compared with C57BL/6 mice, Irf5(-/-) mice show higher
susceptibility to viral infection and decreased serum levels of type I IFN and
the inflammatory cytokines IL-6 and TNF-alpha. Here, we demonstrate that IRF-5 is
involved in B-cell maturation and the stimulation of Blimp-1 expression. The
Irf5(-/-) mice develop an age-related splenomegaly, associated with a dramatic
accumulation of CD19(+)B220(-) B cells and a disruption of normal splenic
architecture. Splenic B cells from Irf5(-/-) mice also exhibited a decreased
level of plasma cells. The CD19(+) Irf5(-/-) B cells show a defect in Toll-like
receptor (TLR) 7- and TLR9-induced IL-6 production, and the aged Irf5(-/-) mice
have decreased serum levels of natural antibodies; however, the antigen-specific 
IgG1 primary response was already dependent in IRF-5 in young mice, although the 
IgM response was not. Analysis of the profile of transcription factors associated
with plasma cell differentiation shows down-regulation of Blimp-1 expression, a
master regulator of plasma cell differentiation, which can be reconstituted with 
ectopic IRF-5. IRF-5 stimulates transcription of the Prdm1 gene encoding Blimp-1 
and binds to the IRF site in the Prdm1 promoter. Collectively, these results
reveal that the age-related splenomegaly in Irf5(-/-) mice is associated with an 
accumulation of CD19(+)B220(-) B cells with impaired functions and show the role 
of IRF-5 in the direct regulation of the plasma cell commitment factor Blimp-1
and in B-cell terminal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2842054
PMID: 20176957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. PLoS Genet. 2010 Feb 12;6(2):e1000841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000841.

Genome-wide association study in Asian populations identifies variants in ETS1
and WDFY4 associated with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Yang W(1), Shen N, Ye DQ, Liu Q, Zhang Y, Qian XX, Hirankarn N, Ying D, Pan HF,
Mok CC, Chan TM, Wong RW, Lee KW, Mok MY, Wong SN, Leung AM, Li XP, Avihingsanon 
Y, Wong CM, Lee TL, Ho MH, Lee PP, Chang YK, Li PH, Li RJ, Zhang L, Wong WH, Ng
IO, Lau CS, Sham PC, Lau YL; Asian Lupus Genetics Consortium.

Collaborators: Lau YL, Shen N, Ye DQ, Hirankarn N, Yang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, LKS Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Systemic lupus erythematosus is a complex and potentially fatal autoimmune
disease, characterized by autoantibody production and multi-organ damage. By a
genome-wide association study (320 patients and 1,500 controls) and subsequent
replication altogether involving a total of 3,300 Asian SLE patients from Hong
Kong, Mainland China, and Thailand, as well as 4,200 ethnically and
geographically matched controls, genetic variants in ETS1 and WDFY4 were found to
be associated with SLE (ETS1: rs1128334, P = 2.33x10(-11), OR = 1.29; WDFY4:
rs7097397, P = 8.15x10(-12), OR = 1.30). ETS1 encodes for a transcription factor 
known to be involved in a wide range of immune functions, including Th17 cell
development and terminal differentiation of B lymphocytes. SNP rs1128334 is
located in the 3'-UTR of ETS1, and allelic expression analysis from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells showed significantly lower expression level from the risk
allele. WDFY4 is a conserved protein with unknown function, but is predominantly 
expressed in primary and secondary immune tissues, and rs7097397 in WDFY4 changes
an arginine residue to glutamine (R1816Q) in this protein. Our study also
confirmed association of the HLA locus, STAT4, TNFSF4, BLK, BANK1, IRF5, and
TNFAIP3 with SLE in Asians. These new genetic findings may help us to gain a
better understanding of the disease and the functions of the genes involved.

PMCID: PMC2820522
PMID: 20169177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Nov 24;89(43):3038-42.

[Relationship between polymorphism sites of IRF5, TLR-9 and SLE patients in
Shandong Han population].

[Article in Chinese]

Song WQ(1), Li HH, Chen HB, Yuan JS, Yin XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, China.
songweiqing68@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate two single nucleotide polymorphism sites of IRF5 and
TLR-9 and to detect their relationship with SLE (systemic lupus erythematosus) in
a Han population from Shandong province.
METHODS: The polymorphisms of rs2004640 G/T, rs10954213 G/A in IRF-5 and
rs187084C/T, rs352139A/G in TLR-9 were detected with PCR-RFLP in 92 cases of SLE 
and 88 healthy controls. The genotype and allele frequencies were calculated and 
analyzed.
RESULTS: (1) The genotype frequencies of GG, GT and TT in rs2004640 site in SLE
were 0.198, 0.521 and 0.281 respectively. The difference was significant between 
SLE and controls (chi(2) = 8.73, P < 0.05); the genotype frequencies of GG, GA
and AA at rs109542130 site in SLE were 0.318, 0.409 and 0.273 respectively. The
difference was significant between SLE and controls (chi(2) = 6.36, P < 0.05).
(2) The genotype frequencies of CC, CT and TT at rs187084 site in SLE were 0.185,
0.413 and 0.402 respectively. There was no difference between SLE and controls
(chi(2) = 2.99, P > 0.05); the genotype frequencies of AA, AG and GG at rs352139 
site in SLE were 0.228, 0.533 and 0.239 respectively. There was no difference
between SLE and controls (chi(2) = 4.54, P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The polymorphism of rs2004640 and rs10954213 in IRF5 may be
associated with SLE in the population of Han nationality from Shandong province. 
However, the polymorphism of rs187084 and rs352139 in TLR-9 is not associated
with SLE.

PMID: 20137629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Apr;62(4):1201-2. doi: 10.1002/art.27345.

IRF5 is associated with primary antiphospholipid syndrome, but is not a major
risk factor.

Fredi M, Tincani A, Yin H, Delgado-Vega AM, Borghi MO, Meroni PL,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Comment on
    Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Aug;60(8):2468-71.

PMID: 20131273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Mar;62(3):890-5. doi: 10.1002/art.27303.

Association of the FAM167A-BLK region with systemic sclerosis.

Ito I(1), Kawaguchi Y, Kawasaki A, Hasegawa M, Ohashi J, Kawamoto M, Fujimoto M, 
Takehara K, Sato S, Hara M, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: An association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the
FAM167A (previously referred to as C8orf13)-BLK region with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) has been demonstrated in Caucasians and in Asians. Recent
studies have shown that many genes, including IRF5, STAT4, and PTPN22, are shared
susceptibility genes in multiple autoimmune diseases. We undertook the current
study to examine whether the FAM167A-BLK region is also associated with
susceptibility to systemic sclerosis (SSc).
METHODS: Japanese patients with SSc (n = 309) and healthy controls (n = 769) were
enrolled in a 2-tiered case-control association study. In tier 1, 124 patients
and 412 controls were tested to determine association of 16 tag SNPs encompassing
the FAM167A-BLK region with SSc. In tier 2, an additional 185 patients and 357
controls were analyzed for SNP rs13277113.
RESULTS: Two haplotype blocks that correspond approximately to FAM167A and BLK
were observed. In tier 1 of the study, the rs13277113A allele in the BLK block
exhibited the most significant association with SSc after correction for multiple
testing (permutated P = 0.024). Two SNP haplotypes formed by rs13277113 and the
most significant SNP in the FAM167A block did not exhibit stronger association.
When samples from tier 1 and tier 2 were combined, the rs13277113A allele was
significantly associated with SSc (odds ratio 1.45 [95% confidence interval
1.17-1.79], P = 6.1 x 10(-4)). Association or a tendency toward association of
rs13277113A with SSc was observed regardless of a patient's autoantibody profile 
or whether a patient had diffuse cutaneous or limited cutaneous SSc.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that the rs13277113A allele is associated not
only with SLE but also with SSc and that the FAM167A-BLK region is a common
genetic risk factor for both SLE and SSc.

PMID: 20131239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Int J Colorectal Dis. 2010 May;25(5):553-6. doi: 10.1007/s00384-010-0874-0. Epub 
2010 Feb 2.

Assessment of DNA methylation at the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5)
promoter region in inflammatory bowel diseases.

Balasa A(1), Gathungu G, Kisfali P, Smith EO, Cho JH, Melegh B, Kellermayer R.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030-2399, USA.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: A 5-bp insertion-deletion (indel) polymorphism in the
promoter of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) has been associated with
inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD). This polymorphism generates an additional
binding site for the transcription factor SP1 and has been shown to augment the
expression of IRF5. Additionally, it affects a CpG dinucleotide-dense genomic
region. These features of the indel suggested that it may influence the
epigenetic regulation of IRF5. The aim of this study was to investigate the
potential effect of the 5-bp indel on the methylation pattern of four CpG sites
upstream of the polymorphism. Possible CpG site methylation differences in this
region between healthy persons and individuals suffering from IBD were also
tested.
METHODS: Genotype was determined by 4% polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in 33
peripheral blood leukocyte (PBL) DNA samples. DNA methylation correlates of the
genotypes were measured by bisulfite pyrosequencing. IRF5 promoter methylation in
association to disease state was assessed in 87 proband (49 healthy, 18 Crohn's
disease, 20 ulcerative colitis) PBL samples.
RESULTS: The polymorphism did not affect the methylation pattern of the IRF5
promoter nor could we detect significant differences in the average, low
methylation of the locus between healthy persons and individuals with IBD.
CONCLUSIONS: These results implicate that epigenetic dysregulation of the IRF5
promoter is unlikely to be associated with IBD.

PMID: 20127100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Feb;62(2):562-73. doi: 10.1002/art.27223.

Genetic variants and disease-associated factors contribute to enhanced interferon
regulatory factor 5 expression in blood cells of patients with systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Feng D(1), Stone RC, Eloranta ML, Sangster-Guity N, Nordmark G, Sigurdsson S,
Wang C, Alm G, Syvänen AC, Rönnblom L, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic variants of the interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 5 gene
(IRF5) are associated with susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). 
The contribution of these variants to IRF-5 expression in primary blood cells of 
SLE patients has not been addressed, nor has the role of type I IFNs. The aim of 
this study was to determine the association between increased IRF-5 expression
and the IRF5 risk haplotype in SLE patients.
METHODS: IRF-5 transcript and protein levels in 44 Swedish patients with SLE and 
16 healthy controls were measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction, minigene assay, and flow cytometry. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms
rs2004640, rs10954213, and rs10488631 and the CGGGG insertion/deletion were
genotyped in these patients. Genotypes of these polymorphisms defined both a
common risk haplotype and a common protective haplotype.
RESULTS: IRF-5 expression and alternative splicing were significantly
up-regulated in SLE patients compared with healthy donors. Enhanced transcript
and protein levels were associated with the risk haplotype of IRF5; rs10488631
displayed the only significant independent association that correlated with
increased transcription from the noncoding first exon 1C. Minigene experiments
demonstrated an important role for rs2004640 and the CGGGG insertion/deletion,
along with type I IFNs, in regulating IRF5 expression.
CONCLUSION: This study provides the first formal proof that IRF-5 expression and 
alternative splicing are significantly up-regulated in primary blood cells of
patients with SLE. Furthermore, the risk haplotype is associated with enhanced
IRF-5 transcript and protein expression in patients with SLE.

PMCID: PMC3213692
PMID: 20112383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Feb;62(2):574-9. doi: 10.1002/art.27190.

The association of a nonsynonymous single-nucleotide polymorphism in TNFAIP3 with
systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis in the Japanese population.

Shimane K(1), Kochi Y, Horita T, Ikari K, Amano H, Hirakata M, Okamoto A, Yamada 
R, Myouzen K, Suzuki A, Kubo M, Atsumi T, Koike T, Takasaki Y, Momohara S,
Yamanaka H, Nakamura Y, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association (GWA) studies in systemic lupus erythematosus 
(SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in Caucasian populations have independently
identified risk variants in and near the tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha)-induced protein 3 gene (TNFAIP3), which is crucial for the regulation 
of TNF-mediated signaling and Toll-like receptor signaling. The aim of this study
was to assess the role of TNFAIP3 in the development of SLE and RA in Japanese
subjects.
METHODS: We selected 2 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from previous GWA
studies. Rs2230926 is a nonsynonymous SNP in TNFAIP3 and is associated with SLE, 
while rs10499194 is an intergenic SNP associated with RA. We then performed 2
independent sets of SLE case-control comparisons (717 patients and 1,362 control 
subjects) and 3 sets of RA case-control comparisons (3,446 patients and 2,344
control subjects) using Japanese subjects. We genotyped SNPs using TaqMan assays.
RESULTS: We observed a significant association between rs2230926 and an increased
risk of SLE and RA in the Japanese population (for SLE, odds ratio [OR] 1.92, 95%
confidence interval [95% CI] 1.53-2.41, P = 1.9 x 10(-8); for RA, OR 1.35, 95% CI
1.18-1.56, P = 2.6 x 10(-5)). The intergenic SNP rs10499194 was also associated
with SLE and RA, while the risk allele for RA in Caucasians was protective
against the diseases in our population.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrated a significant association between the nonsynonymous
variant in TNFAIP3 and the risk for SLE and RA in the Japanese population.
TNFAIP3, similar to STAT4 and IRF5, may be a common genetic risk factor for SLE
and RA that is shared between the Caucasian and Japanese populations.

PMID: 20112363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Feb;62(2):553-61. doi: 10.1002/art.27182.

Genetic variation at the IRF7/PHRF1 locus is associated with autoantibody profile
and serum interferon-alpha activity in lupus patients.

Salloum R(1), Franek BS, Kariuki SN, Rhee L, Mikolaitis RA, Jolly M, Utset TO,
Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) is a heritable risk factor for systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Genetic variation near IRF7 is implicated in SLE
susceptibility. SLE-associated autoantibodies can stimulate IFNalpha production
through the Toll-like receptor/IRF7 pathway. This study was undertaken to
determine whether variants of IRF7 act as risk factors for SLE by increasing
IFNalpha production and whether autoantibodies are important to this phenomenon.
METHODS: We studied 492 patients with SLE (236 African American, 162 European
American, and 94 Hispanic American subjects). Serum levels of IFNalpha were
measured using a reporter cell assay, and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in the IRF7/PHRF1 locus were genotyped.
RESULTS: In a joint analysis of European American and Hispanic American subjects,
the rs702966 C allele was associated with the presence of anti-double-stranded
DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies (odds ratio [OR] 1.83, P = 0.0069). The rs702966 CC
genotype was only associated with higher serum levels of IFNalpha in European
American and Hispanic American patients with anti-dsDNA antibodies (joint
analysis P = 4.1 x 10(-5) in anti-dsDNA-positive patients and P = 0.99 in
anti-dsDNA-negative patients). In African American subjects, anti-Sm antibodies
were associated with the rs4963128 SNP near IRF7 (OR 1.95, P = 0.0017). The
rs4963128 CT and TT genotypes were associated with higher serum levels of
IFNalpha only in African American patients with anti-Sm antibodies (P = 0.0012). 
In African American patients lacking anti-Sm antibodies, an effect of
anti-dsDNA-rs702966 C allele interaction on serum levels of IFNalpha was
observed, similar to the other patient groups (overall joint analysis P = 1.0 x
10(-6)). In European American and Hispanic American patients, the IRF5 SLE risk
haplotype showed an additive effect with the rs702966 C allele on IFNalpha level 
in anti-dsDNA-positive patients.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that IRF7/PHRF1 variants in combination with
SLE-associated autoantibodies result in higher serum levels of IFNalpha,
providing a biologic relevance for this locus at the protein level in human SLE
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2832192
PMID: 20112359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Mar;22(2):133-8. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3283367c17.

The genetics of scleroderma (systemic sclerosis).

Agarwal SK(1), Reveille JD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston,
Texas 77030, USA. Sandeep.K.Agarwal@uth.tmc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To determine the advances made in the genetics of scleroderma 
in candidate gene association studies.
RECENT FINDINGS: Over the past 18 months, a number of candidate gene studies
using large case-control series in scleroderma have been reported. The studies
have identified multiple genes involved in immune regulation including BANK1,
C8orf13-BLK, IL-23R, IRF5, STAT4, TBX21, and TNFSF4 as susceptibility genes for
the development of SSc. Furthermore, gene-gene interaction studies suggest that
IRF5, STAT4, and BANK1 as well as TBX21 and STAT4 interact with regard to
scleroderma susceptibility. Many of the genetic variants associated with SSc
susceptibility are shared among other autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid
arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus.
SUMMARY: Candidate gene association studies have substantially advanced our
understanding of the pathogenesis of SSc and demonstrate that SSc is a polygenic,
autoimmune disease.

PMID: 20090527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Rheumatol. 2010 Mar;37(3):574-8. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.090440. Epub 2010 Jan 15.

Promoter insertion/deletion in the IRF5 gene is highly associated with
susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus in distinct populations, but
exerts a modest effect on gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells.

Löfgren SE(1), Yin H, Delgado-Vega AM, Sanchez E, Lewén S, Pons-Estel BA, Witte
T, D'Alfonso S, Ortego-Centeno N, Martin J, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Kozyrev SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
75185, Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: We examined the genetic association of the promoter insertion/deletion
(indel) in IRF5 gene with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in distinct
populations and assessed its role in gene expression.
METHODS: Four IRF5 polymorphisms were genotyped in 1488 SLE patients and 1466
controls. Gene expression was analyzed by quantitative real-time PCR using RNA
from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC).
RESULTS: The promoter indel and rs2070197 had independent genetic effects, which 
accounted for the association of rs2004640 and rs10954213. Gene expression
analysis revealed that rs10954213 exerted the greatest influence on IRF5
transcript levels.
CONCLUSION: We corroborated the association of the promoter indel with SLE in 5
different populations and revealed that rs10954213 is the main single-nucleotide 
polymorphism responsible for altered IRF5 expression in PBMC.

PMID: 20080916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Mol Med (Berl). 2010 Apr;88(4):413-21. doi: 10.1007/s00109-009-0580-y. Epub
2010 Jan 5.

A functionally relevant IRF5 haplotype is associated with reduced risk to
Wegener's granulomatosis.

Wieczorek S(1), Holle JU, Müller S, Fricke H, Gross WL, Epplen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr University, MA5/39, 44780, Bochum, Germany.
stefan.wieczorek@rub.de

Wegener's granulomatosis (WG), characterized by systemic vasculitis and
granulomatous inflammation, is a rare chronic rheumatic condition potentially
sharing some etiopathological principles with other autoimmune disorders, e.g.,
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Several large
association studies have identified genetic risk factors for RA and SLE. Thereof,
we have evaluated the relevance of the most promising ones in WG. 22 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within or in the vicinity of CCL21, CD40, CDK6,
IL21, IL2RB, IRF5, KIF5A, KLF12, MMEL1, PRKCQ, STAT4, TNFAIP3, and TRAF1/C5 have 
been genotyped in >600 German WG cases and >800 matched controls. While most
polymorphisms did not show suspicious effects on WG susceptibility, SNPs
representing TNFAIP3 (rs6922466, p = 0.032, odds ratio (OR) 0.83, 95% confidence 
interval (CI) 0.7--0.98) and CDK6 (rs42041, p = 0.0201, OR 1.21, 95% CI
1.03-1.43) revealed nominally significant differences in allele distribution. The
strongest association was detected for a functionally relevant four SNP haplotype
of IRF5, which comprised a protective effect (p = 0.0000897, p (corrected) =
0.0012, OR 0.73, 95% CI 0.62-0.85) similar to those previously seen in RA and
SLE. Thus, we suggest that WG, SLE, and RA share some, but not many, genetic risk
factors, which supports models of partly overlapping etiopathological mechanisms 
in these disorders.

PMID: 20049410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Nihon Rinsho Meneki Gakkai Kaishi. 2009 Dec;32(6):484-91.

[Is rheumatoid arthritis without anti-citrullinated peptide antibody a
genetically distinct subset?].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohmura K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of rheumatology and clinical immunology, Graduate school of
medicine, Kyoto University.

These days, rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is reported to be subclassified into two
subsets by anti-citrullinated peptide antibody (ACPA) positivity. Clinically,
ACPA positive RA tends to develop more severe arthritis than ACPA negative RA. In
addition, a lot of reported susceptibility genes to RA (ie. HLA-DRB1(*)04,
PTPN22, TRAF1/C5, CTLA4) are found to be associated only with ACPA positive RA
but not with ACPA negative RA. It is getting clear that HLA-DRB1(*)04, which was 
believed to be primarily associated with RA, is not a primary risk factor but
ACPA is. Then, a hypothesis for the disease mechanism of ACPA positive RA is set 
as follows; citrullination possibly due to smoking, etc, provokes ACPA production
in individuals who have susceptibility alleles of genes including HLA, followed
by joint inflammation in autoantibody-dependent manner. The search for
susceptibility genes for ACPA negative RA is slowly progressing, but only a few
genes are so far reported: HLA-DRB1(*)03 for Caucasian, HLA-DRB1(*)09 for
Japanese, IRF5 and STAT4. When we investigate the disease mechanisms of RA, we
should manage independently the two disease subsets : ACPA positive and ACPA
negative RA.

PMID: 20046016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Viruses. 2010 Jan;2(1):298-313. doi: 10.3390/v2010298. Epub 2010 Jan 22.

Dual Role of p53 in Innate Antiviral Immunity.

Rivas C(1), Aaronson SA, Munoz-Fontela C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnologia, CSIC, Darwin 3, Campus Universidad Autónoma,
Madrid 28049, Spain; E-Mail: crivas@cnb.csic.es (C.R.).

Tumor suppressor p53 is widely known as 'the guardian of the genome' due to its
ability to prevent the emergence of transformed cells by the induction of cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis. However, recent studies indicate that p53 is also a
direct transcriptional target of type I interferons (IFNs) and thus, it is
activated by these cytokines upon viral infection. p53 has been shown to
contribute to virus-induced apoptosis, therefore dampening the ability of a wide 
range of viruses to replicate and spread. Interestingly, recent studies also
indicate that several IFN-inducible genes such as interferon regulatory factor 9 
(IRF9), IRF5, IFN-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) and toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) are 
in fact, p53 direct transcriptional targets. These findings indicate that p53 may
play a key role in antiviral innate immunity by both inducing apoptosis in
response to viral infection, and enforcing the type I IFN response, and provide a
new insight into the evolutionary reasons why many viruses encode p53
antagonistic proteins.

PMCID: PMC3185551
PMID: 21994612  [PubMed]


313. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2010 Mar;22(2):119-25. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e3283361943.

Genetics research in systemic lupus erythematosus for clinicians: methodology,
progress, and controversies.

Kaiser R(1), Criswell LA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, UCSF Department of Medicine, Rosalind Russell
Medical Research Center for Arthritis, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Clinical journals are reporting genetic associations with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) with increasing frequency. Interpreting these 
studies is difficult for clinicians without rigorous training in epidemiology,
statistics, and genetics. In this review, we discuss basic issues important to
understanding and contextualizing new genetic association studies. We, therefore,
highlight literature related to methodology as well as recent genetic discoveries
in SLE.
RECENT FINDINGS: Functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and/or
haplotypes have now been identified for ITGAM, PTPN22, and IRF5, and several
additional loci have been highlighted in recent genome-wide association studies
in SLE. Recent work also indicates that several regions within the extended major
histocompatibility complex contribute independently to SLE risk. Evidence of
additive statistical interaction has been found between IRF5 and TYK2, IRF5, and 
STAT4, and between NAT2 and exposure to tobacco smoke.
SUMMARY: Many new genes have been associated with SLE susceptibility, revealing
insight into SLE pathophysiology. Current research is focusing on further
refining the initial genetic association results and extending this work to
non-European populations. Research is also expanding beyond SNP associations to
investigate the contribution of copy number variants (CNVs) and DNA methylation
to SLE risk.

PMID: 20035223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Haemophilia. 2010 May;16(3):469-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2516.2009.02150.x. Epub
2009 Dec 14.

Polymorphisms in genes involved in autoimmune disease and the risk of FVIII
inhibitor development in Italian patients with haemophilia A.

Bafunno V(1), Santacroce R, Chetta M, D'Andrea G, Pisanelli D, Sessa F, Trotta T,
Tagariello G, Peyvandi F, Margaglione M.

Author information: 
(1)Genetica Medica, Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche, Università degli Studi di
Foggia, Foggia, Italy. valeria.b@libero.it

One of the most severe and important complication in the treatment of patients
with haemophilia A is the formation of neutralizing antibodies (FVIII inhibitors)
that inhibit the clotting activity of substituted FVIII. Both genetic and
environmental factors influence the susceptibility of patients to develop
inhibitors. The objective of this study was to evaluate whether polymorphisms in 
different genes involved in the regulation of the immune system may confer
susceptibility to inhibitor development in patients with HA. We analysed the
distribution of polymorphisms in the CTLA4, PTPN22, IL10, TNFalpha, FOXP3 and
IRF5 genes that have been reported to be associated with a number of autoimmune
disease. In addition, we evaluated the distribution of IL10 haplotypes in
haemophilic patients and healthy controls to assess whether specific
polymorphisms in IL10 gene were associated to the risk of inhibitor development. 
We focused on a cohort of Italian unrelated haemophilic patients with and without
a history of inhibitors. Genotyping was carried out with standard methods
including RFLP, real time PCR and direct DNA sequencing. Our data show that,
considering single nucleotide variations, genotype frequencies in patients with
inhibitors were not significantly different from those observed in patients
without inhibitors, suggesting a lack of association between these polymorphisms 
and the development of inhibitors. Moreover, no relationship was found between
specific combinations of IL10 alleles and the antibody production. Previous
contradictory association studies may depend on the different genetic background 
of the population examined. Further studies may contribute to a clearer
understanding of this process.

PMID: 20015215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Immunol. 2010 Jan 15;184(2):796-806. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901748. Epub 2009
Dec 9.

IFN regulatory factor 5 is required for disease development in the
FcgammaRIIB-/-Yaa and FcgammaRIIB-/- mouse models of systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Richez C(1), Yasuda K, Bonegio RG, Watkins AA, Aprahamian T, Busto P, Richards
RJ, Liu CL, Cheung R, Utz PJ, Marshak-Rothstein A, Rifkin IR.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Polymorphisms in the transcription factor IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) are
strongly associated in human genetic studies with an increased risk of developing
the autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus. However, the biological role
of IRF5 in lupus pathogenesis has not previously been tested in an animal model. 
In this study, we show that IRF5 is absolutely required for disease development
in the FcgammaRIIB(-/-)Yaa and FcgammaRIIB(-/-) lupus models. In contrast to
IRF5-sufficient FcgammaRIIB(-/-)Yaa mice, IRF5-deficient FcgammaRIIB(-/-)Yaa mice
do not develop lupus manifestations and have a phenotype comparable to wild-type 
mice. Strikingly, full expression of IRF5 is required for the development of
autoimmunity, as IRF5 heterozygotes had dramatically reduced disease. One effect 
of IRF5 is to induce the production of the type I IFN, IFN-alpha, a cytokine
implicated in lupus pathogenesis. To address the mechanism by which IRF5 promotes
disease, we evaluated FcgammaRIIB(-/-)Yaa mice lacking the type I IFN receptor
subunit 1. Unlike the IRF5-deficient and IRF5-heterozygous FcgammaRIIB(-/-)Yaa
mice, type I IFN receptor subunit 1-deficient FcgammaRIIB(-/-)Yaa mice maintained
a substantial level of residual disease. Furthermore, in FcgammaRIIB(-/-) mice
lacking Yaa, IRF5-deficiency also markedly reduced disease manifestations,
indicating that the beneficial effects of IRF5 deficiency in FcgammaRIIB(-/-)Yaa 
mice are not due only to inhibition of the enhanced TLR7 signaling associated
with the Yaa mutation. Overall, we demonstrate that IRF5 plays an essential role 
in lupus pathogenesis in murine models and that this is mediated through pathways
beyond that of type I IFN production.

PMCID: PMC2858062
PMID: 20007534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2010 Feb;49(2):203-10. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/kep368.
Epub 2009 Nov 18.

Genetic background of systemic sclerosis: autoimmune genes take centre stage.

Allanore Y(1), Dieude P, Boileau C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Service de Rhumatologie A, Hôpital Cochin, 27 rue 
du faubourg St Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. yannick.allanore@cch.aphp.fr

SSc is a complex multiorgan disease. The key steps in its pathogenesis include
early endothelial damage, dysregulation of the immune system with abnormal
autoantibody production and fibroblast activation resulting in hyperproduction of
extracellular matrix. The disease is caused by an interaction between
susceptibility genes and environmental triggers since epidemiological data,
including family and twin studies, reveal a genetic component in the pathogenesis
of SSc. The candidate gene approach has mainly been employed to identify SSc
susceptibility genes. We will focus on data obtained through large samples of
well-phenotyped patients and replicated in independent cohorts. These
case-control association studies have enabled the identification of several genes
that are shared with other connective tissue disorders, and for some of these,
putative autoimmune susceptibility genes have been identified. Indeed, we will
mainly focus on IRF5 (rs2004640), STAT4 (rs7574865), PTPN22 (rs2476601) and BANK1
(rs3733197 and rs10516487) data. Some of these genes/loci are common to several
autoimmune diseases, indicating a shared genetic background also contributing to 
SSc. Among connective tissue disorders, similarities for genetic markers with SLE
are noteworthy. Most likely, these immune-modifying genes could interact and
influence both disease phenotype and severity. Less evidence is available yet
with regard to genetic markers relating to the vascular and fibrotic aspects of
the disease.

PMID: 19923204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Rheumatol. 2010 Jan;37(1):136-40. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.090744. Epub 2009 Nov 16.

Lack of association between IRF5 gene polymorphisms and biopsy-proven giant cell 
arteritis.

Torres O(1), Palomino-Morales R, Vazquez-Rodriguez TR, Castañeda S, Morado IC,
Miranda-Filloy JA, Valero F, Callejas-Rubio JL, Fernandez-Gutierrez B, Martin J, 
Gonzalez-Gay MA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López Neyra, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Cientificas, Granada, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRF) are transcriptional
mediators of IFN-induced signaling pathways and are involved in immune response. 
We have analyzed for the first time the association of 2 IRF5 gene variants in
the susceptibility to giant cell arteritis (GCA).
METHODS: Two hundred twenty patients with biopsy-proven GCA and 520 matched
controls were assessed. DNA from patients and controls was obtained from
peripheral blood. Samples were genotyped for the IRF5 rs2004640 and for the IRF5 
CGGGG insertion/deletion polymorphism using a predesigned TaqMan allele
discrimination assay and by polymerase chain reaction amplification, followed by 
an ABI3100 sequencer, respectively.
RESULTS: A genotyping rate of 96% was achieved in this series of GCA patients. No
significant differences were found in the genotype distribution between GCA
patients and controls for both IRF5 gene variants. In this regard, similar
genotype frequencies were found in GCA patients and controls. No significant
differences were observed when GCA patients were stratified according to the
presence of specific clinical features of the disease such as polymyalgia
rheumatica or severe ischemic complications.
CONCLUSION: Our results showed no association of IRF5 rs2004640 and CGGGG
insertion/deletion polymorphisms in the susceptibility to and clinical expression
of GCA.

PMID: 19918036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Infect Immun. 2010 Feb;78(2):793-801. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00573-09. Epub 2009 Nov
16.

Major secretory antigens of the helminth Fasciola hepatica activate a suppressive
dendritic cell phenotype that attenuates Th17 cells but fails to activate Th2
immune responses.

Dowling DJ(1), Hamilton CM, Donnelly S, La Course J, Brophy PM, Dalton J, O'Neill
SM.

Author information: 
(1)Parasite Immune Modulation Group, School of Nursing, Faculty of Science and
Health, Dublin City University, Glasnevin, Dublin 9, Ireland.

Fasciola hepatica is a helminth pathogen that drives Th2/Treg immune responses in
its mammalian host. The parasite releases a large number of molecules that are
critical to inducing this type of immune response. Here we have selected
recombinant forms of two major F. hepatica secreted molecules, the protease
cathepsin L (rFhCL1) and an antioxidant, sigma class glutathione transferase
(rFhGST-si), to examine their interactions with dendritic cells (DCs). Despite
enzymatic and functional differences between these molecules, both induced
interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-12p40, and macrophage inflammatory protein 2 (MIP-2)
secretion from DCs and enhanced CD40 expression. While this induction was
mediated by Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), the subsequent intracellular signaling
pathways differed; rFhCL1 signaled through p38, and rFhGST-si mediated its effect
via c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK), p38, p-NF-kappaBp65, and IRF5. Neither rFhCL1 
nor rFhGST-si enhanced DC phagocytosis or induced Th2 immune responses in vivo.
However, DCs matured in the presence of either enzyme attenuated IL-17 production
from OVA peptide-specific T cells in vivo. In addition, DCs exposed to either
antigen secreted reduced levels of IL-23. Therefore, both F. hepatica FhCL1 and
FhGST-si modulate host immunity by suppressing responses associated with chronic 
inflammation-an immune modulatory mechanism that may benefit the parasite's
survival within the host.

PMCID: PMC2812196
PMID: 19917714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Nov;60(11):3447-54. doi: 10.1002/art.24885.

BANK1 is a genetic risk factor for diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis and has
additive effects with IRF5 and STAT4.

Dieudé P(1), Wipff J, Guedj M, Ruiz B, Melchers I, Hachulla E, Riemekasten G,
Diot E, Hunzelmann N, Sibilia J, Tiev K, Mouthon L, Cracowski JL, Carpentier PH, 
Distler J, Amoura Z, Tarner I, Avouac J, Meyer O, Kahan A, Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris 7 Denis Diderot, Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard, Assistance
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the functional BANK1 variants rs3733197 and
rs10516487 are associated with systemic sclerosis (SSc) in 2 European Caucasian
populations and to investigate the putative gene-gene interactions between BANK1 
and IRF5 as well as STAT4.
METHODS: BANK1 single-nucleotide polymorphisms were genotyped in a total
population of 2,432 individuals. The French cohort consisted of 874 SSc patients 
and 955 controls (previously genotyped for both IRF5 rs2004640 and STAT4
rs7574865). The German cohort consisted of 421 SSc patients and 182 controls.
RESULTS: The BANK1 variants were found to be associated with diffuse cutaneous
SSc (dcSSc) in both cohorts, providing an odds ratio (OR) of 0.77 for the
rs10516487 T rare allele in the combined populations of dcSSc patients as
compared with the combined populations of controls (95% confidence interval [95% 
CI] 0.64-0.93) and an OR of 0.73 (95% CI 0.61-0.87) for the rs3733197 A rare
allele. BANK1 haplotype analysis found the A-T haplotype to be protective in
dcSSc patients (OR 0.70 [95% CI 0.57-0.86], P = 3.39 x 10(-4)) and the G-C
haplotype to be a risk factor (OR 1.25 [95% CI 1.06-1.47], P = 0.008).
Significant differences were also observed when the limited cutaneous subset of
SSc was compared with the dcSSc subset, both for the rare alleles and for the
haplotypes. The BANK1, IRF5, and STAT4 risk alleles displayed a multiplicatively 
increased risk of dcSSc of 1.43-fold.
CONCLUSION: Our results establish BANK1 as a new SSc genetic susceptibility
factor and show that BANK1, IRF5, and STAT4 act with additive effects.

PMID: 19877059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Pol Merkur Lekarski. 2009 Aug;27(158):157-60.

[Influence of genetic factors on development and severity of rheumatoid
arthritis--part I].

[Article in Polish]

Trefler J(1), Paradowska-Gorycka A, Matyska-Piekarska E, Rell-Bakalarska M,
Wojciechowska B, Lacki JK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Rheumatology in Warsaw, Department of Systemic Connective Tissue 
Diseases, Poland. jtrefler@gmail.com

Both genetic and environmental factors affect susceptibility, severity and
probably drugs' efficacy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA). After
initial completion of the Human Genome Project on the 16th February 2001,
significant progress has been made in identifying other than HLA genome regions
linked to the increased RA susceptibility. As an effect several new genes have
been recognized as an HLA-independent genetic risk factors of RA. PTPN22 gene
polymorphism, C5/TRAF1 genes region polymorphism and TNFAIP3-OLIG3 genes region
polymorphism(s) are among newly identified and already confirmed genetic risk
factors, whereas STAT 4, CTLA4, PADI4 and IRF5 genes polymorphisms are listed
among probable RA development genetic risk factors.

PMID: 19856886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 Mar;69(3):611-7. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.118315. Epub 2009 Oct 
23.

Association of IRF5 polymorphisms with activation of the interferon alpha
pathway.

Rullo OJ(1), Woo JM, Wu H, Hoftman AD, Maranian P, Brahn BA, McCurdy D, Cantor
RM, Tsao BP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Rheumatology, Mattel Children's Hospital UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. orullo@mednet.ucla.edu

OBJECTIVE: The genetic association of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) with 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) susceptibility has been convincingly
established. To gain understanding of the effect of IRF5 variation in individuals
without SLE, a study was undertaken to examine whether such genetic variation
predisposes to activation of the interferon alpha (IFNalpha) pathway.
METHODS: Using a computer simulated approach, 14 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) and haplotypes of IRF5 were tested for association with mRNA expression
levels of IRF5, IFNalpha and IFN-inducible genes and chemokines in lymphoblastoid
cell lines (LCLs) from individuals of European (CEU), Han Chinese (CHB), Japanese
(JPT) and Yoruba Nigerian (YRI) backgrounds. IFN-inducible gene expression was
assessed in LCLs from children with SLE in the presence and absence of IFNalpha
stimulation.
RESULTS: The major alleles of IRF5 rs13242262 and rs2280714 were associated with 
increased IRF5 mRNA expression levels in the CEU, CHB+JPT and YRI samples. The
minor allele of IRF5 rs10488631 was associated with increased IRF5, IFNalpha and 
IFN-inducible chemokine expression in CEU (p(c)=0.0005, 0.01 and 0.04,
respectively). A haplotype containing these risk alleles of rs13242262,
rs10488631 and rs2280714 was associated with increased IRF5, IFNalpha and
IFN-inducible chemokine expression in CEU LCLs. In vitro studies showed specific 
activation of IFN-inducible genes in LCLs by IFNalpha.
CONCLUSIONS: SNPs of IRF5 in healthy individuals of a number of ethnic groups
were associated with increased mRNA expression of IRF5. In European-derived
individuals, an IRF5 haplotype was associated with increased IRF5, IFNalpha and
IFN-inducible chemokine expression. Identifying individuals genetically
predisposed to increased IFN-inducible gene and chemokine expression may allow
early detection of risk for SLE.

PMCID: PMC3135414
PMID: 19854706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Nat Genet. 2009 Nov;41(11):1234-7. doi: 10.1038/ng.472. Epub 2009 Oct 18.

Genome-wide association study in a Chinese Han population identifies nine new
susceptibility loci for systemic lupus erythematosus.

Han JW, Zheng HF, Cui Y, Sun LD, Ye DQ, Hu Z, Xu JH, Cai ZM, Huang W, Zhao GP,
Xie HF, Fang H, Lu QJ, Xu JH, Li XP, Pan YF, Deng DQ, Zeng FQ, Ye ZZ, Zhang XY,
Wang QW, Hao F, Ma L, Zuo XB, Zhou FS, Du WH, Cheng YL, Yang JQ, Shen SK, Li J,
Sheng YJ, Zuo XX, Zhu WF, Gao F, Zhang PL, Guo Q, Li B, Gao M, Xiao FL, Quan C,
Zhang C, Zhang Z, Zhu KJ, Li Y, Hu DY, Lu WS, Huang JL, Liu SX, Li H, Ren YQ,
Wang ZX, Yang CJ, Wang PG, Zhou WM, Lv YM, Zhang AP, Zhang SQ, Lin D, Li Y, Low
HQ, Shen M, Zhai ZF, Wang Y, Zhang FY, Yang S, Liu JJ, Zhang XJ.

We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) of systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) in a Chinese Han population by genotyping 1,047 cases and
1,205 controls using Illumina Human610-Quad BeadChips and replicating 78 SNPs in 
two additional cohorts (3,152 cases and 7,050 controls). We identified nine new
susceptibility loci (ETS1, IKZF1, RASGRP3, SLC15A4, TNIP1, 7q11.23, 10q11.22,
11q23.3 and 16p11.2; 1.77 x 10(-25) < or = P(combined) < or = 2.77 x 10(-8)) and 
confirmed seven previously reported loci (BLK, IRF5, STAT4, TNFAIP3, TNFSF4, 6q21
and 22q11.21; 5.17 x 10(-42) < or = P(combined) < or = 5.18 x 10(-12)).
Comparison with previous GWAS findings highlighted the genetic heterogeneity of
SLE susceptibility between Chinese Han and European populations. This study not
only advances our understanding of the genetic basis of SLE but also highlights
the value of performing GWAS in diverse ancestral populations.

PMID: 19838193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Vis. 2009 Oct 7;15:2018-21.

Lack of association of two polymorphisms of IRF5 with Behcet's disease.

Li H(1), Yang P, Jiang Z, Hou S, Xie L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Daping Hospital, The Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, P.R. China.

PURPOSE: Interferon regulation factor 5 (IRF5) is a member of the IRF family of
transcription factors that control the transactivation of type I interferon
system-related genes as well as the expression of several other genes involved in
immune response. Here, we investigated its association with Behcet's disease (BD)
in a well defined group of Chinese Han patients.
METHODS: A total of 152 unrelated Chinese patients with BD and 149 healthy blood 
donors were genotyped for IRF5rs2280714 and rs752637 polymorphisms. Genomic DNA
was isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Genotyping of each single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) was performed by polymerase chain reaction
restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP). Allele and genotype
frequencies of IRF5rs2280714 and rs752637 polymorphisms were compared between
patients and controls using a two-sided chi(2) test.
RESULTS: The results showed no significant difference concerning the frequency of
the allele of rs2280714 and rs752637 polymorphisms between BD patients and the
normal controls (p=0.647 and p=0.105, respectively). The frequencies of the
genotype of rs2280714 and rs752637 were not different between BD patients and the
normal controls (p=0.233 and, p=0.266, respectively). Clinical manifestation
stratification analysis did not show any association of IRF5 polymorphisms with
BD patients (p>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study revealed that the rs2280714 and rs752637 SNPs were not
associated with the susceptibility to BD. There was no association between the
two polymorphisms of IRF5 and any extraocular clinical manifestations in BD.

PMCID: PMC2759328
PMID: 19816589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Autoimmun. 2010 Mar;34(2):155-62. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2009.08.014. Epub 2009
Sep 30.

Association of the C8orf13-BLK region with systemic sclerosis in North-American
and European populations.

Gourh P(1), Agarwal SK, Martin E, Divecha D, Rueda B, Bunting H, Assassi S, Paz
G, Shete S, McNearney T, Draeger H, Reveille JD, Radstake TR, Simeon CP,
Rodriguez L, Vicente E, Gonzalez-Gay MA, Mayes MD, Tan FK, Martin J, Arnett FC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (UTHSC-H),
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic studies in the systemic sclerosis (SSc), an autoimmune disease
that clinically manifests with dermal and internal organ fibrosis and small
vessel vasculopathy, have identified multiple susceptibility genes including
HLA-class II, PTPN22, IRF5, and STAT4 which have also been associated with other 
autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). These data
suggest that there are common autoimmune disease susceptibility genes. The
current report sought to determine if polymorphisms in the C8orf13-BLK region
(chromosome 8p23.1-B lymphoid tyrosine kinase), which is associated with SLE, are
associated also with SSc.
METHODS: Two variants in the C8orf13-BLK region (rs13277113 & rs2736340) were
tested for association with 1050 SSc cases and 694 controls of North Americans of
European descent and replicated in a second series 589 SSc cases and 722 controls
from Spain.
RESULTS: The "T" allele at rs2736340 variant was associated with SSc in both the 
U.S. and Spanish case-control series (P = 6.8 x 10(-5), OR 1.27, 95% CI 1.1-1.4).
The "A" allele at rs13277113 variant was associated with SSc in the U.S. series
only (P = 3.6 x 10(-4), OR 1.32, 95% CI 1.1-1.6) and was significant in the
combined analyses of the two series (P = 2.0 x 10(-3); OR 1.20, 95% CI 1.1-1.3). 
Both variants demonstrated an association with the anti-centromere antibody (P = 
2.2 x 10(-6) and P = 5.5 x 10(-4), respectively) and limited SSc (P = 3.3 x
10(-5) and P = 2.9 x 10(-3), respectively) in the combined analysis. Peripheral
blood gene expression profiles suggest that B-cell receptor and NFkappaB
signaling are dysregulated based on the risk haplotype of these variants.
CONCLUSION: We identify and replicate the association of the C8orf13-BLK region
as a novel susceptibility factor for SSc, placing it in the category of common
autoimmune disease susceptibility genes.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2821978
PMID: 19796918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2009 Sep;45(2):241-7. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.09-42. Epub 2009 Aug
28.

Effects of Lansoprazole on the Lipopolysaccharide-Stimulated Toll-Like Receptor 4
Signal Transduction Systems: A Study Using the 293hTLR4/MD2-CD14 Cells.

Ohara T(1), Kanoh Y, Yoshino K, Kitajima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, International University of Health and Welfare
Hospital, 537-3 Iguchi, Nasushiobara, Tochigi 329-2763, Japan.

The present study was undertaken to evaluate the effects of lansoprazole (LPZ) on
lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-stimulated toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) signal
transduction systems using the 293hTLR4/MD2-CD14 cells. The cells were incubated 
and then divided into the following groups: (a) untreated group, (b) non-LPZ
treated (1h) group, (c) LPZ-treated (1h) plus non LPS-stimulated (1h) group, (d) 
LPZ-treated (1h) plus non LPS-stimulated (6h) group, (e) LPZ-treated (1h) plus
LPS-stimulated (1h) group, (f) LPZ-treated (1h) plus LPS-stimulated (6h) group,
(g) non LPZ-treated (1h) plus LPS-stimulated (1h) group and (h) non LPZ-treated
(1h) plus LPS-stimulated (6h) group. Samples from each group were subjected to
western blotting for analysis of IkB phosphorylation, intranuclear transfer of
NF-kB, phosphorylation of MAP kinase (MAPK), intranuclear transfer of interferon 
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), and expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 
(SOCS1). In the LPZ-treated groups, neither phosphorylation of MAPK nor
intranuclear transfer of IRF5 was suppressed under stimulation with LPS, and
enhanced intranuclear transfer of NF-kB and increased expression of SOCS1 were
noted by comparison with the group treated with LPS alone. These results suggest 
that LPZ stimulates the expression of SOCS1 and regulates protein phosphorylation
through its activity on TLR4 signal transduction under LPS stimulation.

PMCID: PMC2735639
PMID: 19794935  [PubMed]


326. Cell Signal. 2010 Jan;22(1):117-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.09.021. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

IKKalpha negatively regulates IRF-5 function in a MyD88-TRAF6 pathway.

Balkhi MY(1), Fitzgerald KA, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218,
USA.

Transcription factors of IRF family, IRF-3, IRF-5 and IRF-7 play a critical role 
in the innate antiviral response. In infected cells, IRF-3 and IRF-7 are
activated by TBK-1 and IKK epsilon mediated phosphorylation, while the kinase,
phosphorylating IRF-5 in the MyD88 signalling pathway has not yet been
identified. We now show that IKK alpha phosphorylates IRF-5 and induces formation
of IRF-5 dimers, which have been indicative of IRF-5 activation. However, IKK
alpha induced IRF-5 phosphorylation exerts inhibitory effect on the
transcriptional activation of type 1 interferon and promoters of the inflammatory
cytokines. Addressing the molecular mechanism of IKK alpha mediated inhibition of
IRF-5 activity, we show that phosphorylation of IRF-5 by IKK alpha inhibits K63
ubiquitination that is essential for IRF-5 activity. Furthermore, we have
identified interaction of IRF-5 with alkaline phosphatase, which causes its
de-phosphorylation. The observation that MyD88 activated IRF-5 induces expression
of alkaline phosphatase suggests that IRF-5 is under autoregulating loop. Thus
these completely new observations identify IKK alpha kinase and alkaline
phosphatase as negative regulators of IRF-5 activity in MyD88 pathway and
implicate their role in the control of the inflammatory response by attenuation
of IRF-5 activity.

PMID: 19786094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. DNA Cell Biol. 2010 Jan;29(1):19-23. doi: 10.1089/dna.2009.0929.

Association between IRF-5 polymorphisms and risk of acute coronary syndrome.

Fan JH(1), Gao LB, Pan XM, Li C, Liang WB, Liu J, Li Y, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Biology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic 
Medicine, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

Previous studies suggested that genetic polymorphisms in interferon regulatory
factor 5 (IRF-5) are implicated in the susceptibility to a range of autoimmune
diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, and
inflammatory bowel disease. Recently, IRF-5 has been implicated in inflammatory
processes that are associated with excessive remodeling and atherosclerosis. Our 
purpose was to investigate the association between the IRF-5 polymorphisms and
the risk of acute coronary syndrome (ACS) in a Chinese population. The 5 bp indel
(insertion/deletion) (CGGGG) polymorphism, located 64 bp upstream of the
alternative exon 1a of IRF-5 gene, and the deletion of 30 bp in exon 6 of IRF-5
gene were analyzed among 148 patients with ACS and 246 controls in a Chinese
population, using a polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism strategy and direct sequencing. The frequencies of
(CGGGG)(3)(CGGGG)(4) genotype and (CGGGG)(4) allele in ACS patients were
significantly higher than those in control subjects (p = 0.018, odds ratio [OR] =
1.76, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.10-2.81; p = 0.028, OR = 1.62, 95% CI:
1.05-2.50, respectively). However, no significant relationship between the 30 bp 
exon 6 polymorphism of the IRF-5 gene and the risk of ACS was observed (p =
0.770, OR = 0.96, 95% CI: 0.72-1.28). The 5 bp indel (CGGGG) polymorphism of the 
IRF-5 gene may be associated with susceptibility to ACS.

PMID: 19778284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Sep 22;2:62. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-62.

Exon expression in lymphoblastoid cell lines from subjects with schizophrenia
before and after glucose deprivation.

Martin MV(1), Rollins B, Sequeira PA, Mesén A, Byerley W, Stein R, Moon EA, Akil 
H, Jones EG, Watson SJ, Barchas J, DeLisi LE, Myers RM, Schatzberg A, Bunney WE, 
Vawter MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Univ. of California, Irvine, CA, 
USA. martinmv@uci.edu

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to examine the effects of glucose
reduction stress on lymphoblastic cell line (LCL) gene expression in subjects
with schizophrenia compared to non-psychotic relatives.
METHODS: LCLs were grown under two glucose conditions to measure the effects of
glucose reduction stress on exon expression in subjects with schizophrenia
compared to unaffected family member controls. A second aim of this project was
to identify cis-regulated transcripts associated with diagnosis.
RESULTS: There were a total of 122 transcripts with significant diagnosis by
probeset interaction effects and 328 transcripts with glucose deprivation by
probeset interaction probeset effects after corrections for multiple comparisons.
There were 8 transcripts with expression significantly affected by the
interaction between diagnosis and glucose deprivation and probeset after
correction for multiple comparisons. The overall validation rate by qPCR of 13
diagnosis effect genes identified through microarray was 62%, and all genes
tested by qPCR showed concordant up- or down-regulation by qPCR and microarray.
We assessed brain gene expression of five genes found to be altered by diagnosis 
and glucose deprivation in LCLs and found a significant decrease in expression of
one gene, glutaminase, in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC). One SNP
with previously identified regulation by a 3' UTR SNP was found to influence IRF5
expression in both brain and lymphocytes. The relationship between the 3' UTR
rs10954213 genotype and IRF5 expression was significant in LCLs (p = 0.0001),
DLPFC (p = 0.007), and anterior cingulate cortex (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: Experimental manipulation of cells lines from subjects with
schizophrenia may be a useful approach to explore stress related gene expression 
alterations in schizophrenia and to identify SNP variants associated with gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC2760574
PMID: 19772658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Exp Dermatol. 2010 Feb;19(2):123-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2009.00982.x. Epub 
2009 Sep 16.

Tyrosine kinase 2 and interferon regulatory factor 5 polymorphisms are associated
with discoid and subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus.

Järvinen TM(1), Hellquist A, Koskenmies S, Einarsdottir E, Koskinen LL, Jeskanen 
L, Berglind L, Panelius J, Hasan T, Ranki A, Kere J, Saarialho-Kere U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

Lupus erythematosus (LE) is a heterogeneous disease ranging from skin-restricted 
manifestations to a progressive multisystem disease. The specific skin lesions
include chronic cutaneous, subacute cutaneous and acute cutaneous LE. Both
genetic and environmental factors are involved in the development of LE. However,
reports on the genetic background of cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE) forms,
namely discoid (DLE) and subacute cutaneous lupus erythematosus (SCLE), are
sparse. We investigated whether the known systemic LE (SLE) susceptibility genes 
also predispose to CLE. Altogether, 219 Finnish patients with DLE or SCLE and 356
healthy controls were recruited. Single nucleotide polymorphisms tagging reported
risk genes were genotyped. Tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2) rs2304256 was associated with
increased risk of DLE (P = 0.012, OR = 1.47, 95% CI = 1.01-1.98). Expression of
TYK2 was demonstrated by immunohistochemistry in macrophage-like cells and
neutrophils and interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) in macrophage- and
fibroblast-like cells of DLE, SCLE and SLE skin. IRF5 rs10954213 showed
association with DLE (P = 0.017, OR = 1.40, 95% CI = 1.06-1.86) and SCLE (P =
0.022, OR = 1.87, 95% CI = 1.09-3.21). A haplotype of cytotoxic
T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA4) showed association with DLE (P =
0.0065, OR = 2.51, 95% CI = 1.25-5.04). Our results show that the TYK2, IRF5 and 
CTLA4 genes previously associated with SLE also confer risk for DLE and SCLE,
suggesting that different LE subphenotypes may share pathogenetic pathways.

PMID: 19758313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Sep;60(9):2558-64. doi: 10.1002/art.24748.

Rheumatoid arthritis does not share most of the newly identified systemic lupus
erythematosus genetic factors.

Suarez-Gestal M(1), Calaza M, Dieguez-Gonzalez R, Perez-Pampin E, Pablos JL,
Navarro F, Narvaez J, Marenco JL, Herrero-Beaumont G, Fernandez-Gutierrez B,
Lamas JR, de la Serna AR, Ortiz AM, Carreño L, Cañete JD, Caliz R, Blanco FJ,
Balsa A, Gomez-Reino JJ, Gonzalez A.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Travesia de Choupana s/n, Santiago
de Compostela, Spain.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Sep;60(9):2547-9.

OBJECTIVE: Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) share
some genetic factors such as HLA, PTPN22, STAT4, and 6q23. The aim of this study 
was to determine whether 9 other SLE genetic factors are also implicated in RA
susceptibility.
METHODS: A characteristic single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in each of 9
genetic factors, ITGAM (rs1143679), C8orf13-BLK (rs13277113), TYK2 (rs2304256),
1q25.1 (rs10798269), PXK (rs6445975), KIAA1542 (rs4963128), MECP2 (rs17435),
BANK1 (rs17266594), and LY9 (rs509749), was studied in 1,635 patients with RA and
1,906 control subjects from Spain. The rs7574865 SNP in STAT4 was also included. 
Analyses were conducted globally and after stratification by sex and clinical
features (anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide and rheumatoid factor, shared
epitope, rheumatoid nodules, radiographic changes, sicca syndrome, and
pneumonitis).
RESULTS: No association was observed between RA and any of the 9 newly identified
SLE genetic factors. A meta-analysis using previous data was consistent with
these results. In addition, there were no significant differences between
individuals with and those without each of the clinical features analyzed, except
the frequency of the minor allele in the C8orf13-BLK locus that was decreased in 
patients with sicca syndrome (14.6% versus 22.4% in controls; P = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: None of the 9 recently identified SLE risk factors showed association
with RA. Therefore, common genetic factors affecting the pathogenesis of these 2 
disorders seem to be limited, revealing that the genetic component contributes to
the different expression of these diseases.

PMID: 19714582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2009 Sep;29(9):559-67. doi: 10.1089/jir.2009.0072.

Rotavirus and reovirus modulation of the interferon response.

Sherry B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, USA.
barbara_sherry@ncsu.edu

The mammalian reoviruses and rotaviruses have evolved specific mechanisms to
evade the Type I interferon (IFN) antiviral response. Rotavirus likely represses 
the IFN response by at least 4 mechanisms. First, the rotavirus protein NSP1,
most likely functioning as an E3 ligase, can induce proteasome-dependent
degradation of the transcription factors IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 to prevent their
induction of IFN. Second, NSP1 can induce proteasome-dependent degradation of the
ubiquitin ligase complex protein beta-TrCP, resulting in stabilization of I
kappaB and concomitant failure of virus to activate NF-kappaB for induction of
IFN. Third, rotavirus may sequester NF-kappaB in viroplasms. And fourth,
rotavirus can prevent STAT1 and STAT2 nuclear translocation. The predominant
mechanism for rotavirus inhibition of the IFN response is likely both rotavirus
strain-specific and cell type-specific. The mammalian reoviruses also display
strain-specific differences in their modulation of the IFN response. Reovirus
activates RIG-I and IPS-1 for phosphorylation of IRF3. Reovirus-induced
activation of MDA5 also participates in induction if IFN-beta, perhaps through
activation of NF-kappaB. Reovirus likely inhibits the IFN response by at least 3 
virus strain-specific mechanisms. First, the reovirus mu2 protein can induce an
unusual nuclear accumulation of IRF9 and repress IFN-stimulated gene (ISG)
expression, most likely by disrupting IRF9 function as part of the heterotrimeric
transcription factor complex, ISGF3. Second, the reovirus sigma 3 protein can
bind dsRNA and prevent activation of the latent antiviral effector protein PKR.
And third, genetic approaches have identified the reovirus lambda 2 and sigma 2
proteins in virus strain-specific modulation of the IFN response, but the
significance remains unclear. In sum, members of the family Reoviridae have
evolved a variety of mechanisms to subvert the host's innate protective response.

PMCID: PMC2956631
PMID: 19694545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. BMC Genomics. 2009 Aug 10;10:372. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-372.

Combined genome-wide expression profiling and targeted RNA interference in
primary mouse macrophages reveals perturbation of transcriptional networks
associated with interferon signalling.

Lacaze P(1), Raza S, Sing G, Page D, Forster T, Storm P, Craigon M, Awad T,
Ghazal P, Freeman TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathway Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, The Chancellor's
Building, College of Medicine, Edinburgh, UK. Paul.Lacaze@ed.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Interferons (IFNs) are potent antiviral cytokines capable of
reprogramming the macrophage phenotype through the induction of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). Here we have used targeted RNA interference
to suppress the expression of a number of key genes associated with IFN
signalling in murine macrophages prior to stimulation with interferon-gamma.
Genome-wide changes in transcript abundance caused by siRNA activity were
measured using exon-level microarrays in the presence or absence of IFNgamma.
RESULTS: Transfection of murine bone-marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs) with a
non-targeting (control) siRNA and 11 sequence-specific siRNAs was performed using
a cationic lipid transfection reagent (Lipofectamine2000) prior to stimulation
with IFNgamma. Total RNA was harvested from cells and gene expression measured on
Affymetrix GeneChip Mouse Exon 1.0 ST Arrays. Network-based analysis of these
data revealed six siRNAs to cause a marked shift in the macrophage transcriptome 
in the presence or absence IFNgamma. These six siRNAs targeted the Ifnb1, Irf3,
Irf5, Stat1, Stat2 and Nfkb2 transcripts. The perturbation of the transcriptome
by the six siRNAs was highly similar in each case and affected the expression of 
over 600 downstream transcripts. Regulated transcripts were clustered based on
co-expression into five major groups corresponding to transcriptional networks
associated with the type I and II IFN response, cell cycle regulation, and NF-KB 
signalling. In addition we have observed a significant non-specific immune
stimulation of cells transfected with siRNA using Lipofectamine2000, suggesting
use of this reagent in BMDMs, even at low concentrations, is enough to induce a
type I IFN response.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide evidence that the type I IFN response in murine
BMDMs is dependent on Ifnb1, Irf3, Irf5, Stat1, Stat2 and Nfkb2, and that siRNAs 
targeted to these genes results in perturbation of key transcriptional networks
associated with type I and type II IFN signalling and a suppression of macrophage
M1 polarization.

PMCID: PMC2741489
PMID: 19664281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Aug;60(8):2472-9. doi: 10.1002/art.24688.

STAT4 is a genetic risk factor for systemic sclerosis having additive effects
with IRF5 on disease susceptibility and related pulmonary fibrosis.

Dieudé P(1), Guedj M, Wipff J, Ruiz B, Hachulla E, Diot E, Granel B, Sibilia J,
Tiev K, Mouthon L, Cracowski JL, Carpentier PH, Amoura Z, Fajardy I, Avouac J,
Meyer O, Kahan A, Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris 7 and Service de Rhumatologie, Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard,
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. philippe.dieude@bch.aphp.fr

OBJECTIVE: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) belongs to the group of connective tissue
disorders (CTDs), among which are several disorders characterized by a type I
interferon (IFN) signature. The recent identification of an association between
IRF5 and SSc further highlights a key role for IFN. STAT4, which encodes STAT-4, 
contributes to IFN signaling, and its genetic variants were found to be
associated with CTDs. The aim of this study was to determine whether the STAT4
rs7574865 single-nucleotide polymorphism is associated with SSc, and whether it
interacts with IRF5.
METHODS: Both the STAT4 rs7574865 and IRF5 rs2004640 polymorphisms were genotyped
in 1,855 individuals of French Caucasian origin comprising a discovery set of 440
patients with SSc and 485 control subjects and a replication set of 445 patients 
with SSc and an additional 485 control subjects.
RESULTS: STAT4 rs7574865 was shown to be associated with SSc (P=0.001, odds ratio
[OR] 1.29, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] 1.11-1.51). This association was not 
restricted to a particular phenotype. An additive effect of the STAT4 rs7574865 T
allele and the IRF5 rs2004640 T allele was observed, resulting in a multiple
increased 1.28-fold risk of SSc. The OR for SSc was 2.72 (95% CI 1.86-3.99) for
combinations of genotypes with >or=3 risk alleles. An additive effect was also
detected for fibrosing alveolitis: carriage of at least 3 risk alleles appeared
to be an independent risk factor (P=2.2x10(-4), OR 1.97, 95% CI 1.28-3.04).
CONCLUSION: Our results establish STAT4 rs7574865 as a new SSc genetic
susceptibility factor. STAT4 and IRF5 act with additive effects in terms of
susceptibility to both SSc and SSc-related fibrosing alveolitis.

PMID: 19644887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Aug;60(8):2468-71. doi: 10.1002/art.24701.

Association of STAT4 and BLK, but not BANK1 or IRF5, with primary
antiphospholipid syndrome.

Yin H(1), Borghi MO, Delgado-Vega AM, Tincani A, Meroni PL, Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Apr;62(4):1201-2.

OBJECTIVE: Primary antiphospholipid syndrome (APS) is formally classified by the 
presence of antiphospholipid antibodies, recurrent thrombosis, and/or pregnancy
morbidity in the absence of any underlying full-blown systemic autoimmune
disease. However, systemic manifestations in patients with primary APS have been 
recently reported, as has the presence of serologic markers in common with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In spite of similarities between the 2
diseases, only a minority of cases of primary APS evolve into full-blown SLE,
even after a long followup period. The aim of this study was to investigate
whether the analysis of SLE susceptibility genes may provide at least a partial
explanation for such a discrepancy.
METHODS: One hundred thirty-three patients with primary APS classified according 
to the Sydney criteria and 468 healthy control subjects from the same geographic 
area were recruited. We genotyped 3 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
IRF5 (rs2004640, rs2070197, and rs10954213), 4 SNPs in STAT4 (rs1467199,
rs3821236, rs3024866, and rs7574865), 2 SNPs in BANK1 (rs10516487 and rs3733197),
and 1 SNP in BLK (rs2736340).
RESULTS: STAT4 and BLK displayed a strong genetic association with primary APS
(for rs7574865, odds ratio [OR] 2.19, P=5.17x10(-7); for rs2736340, OR 2.06,
P=1.78x10(-6)), while a weak association with IRF5 and no association with BANK1 
were observed.
CONCLUSION: The presence of a strong genetic association with only a few SLE
susceptibility genes and the absence of a more complex gene association may
contribute to the lack of cases of full-blown SLE developing in patients with
primary APS, in spite of the clinical and serologic similarities between SLE and 
primary APS.

PMID: 19644876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Curr Opin Rheumatol. 2009 Sep;21(5):448-53. doi: 10.1097/BOR.0b013e32832f0861.

Genetics of systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjögren's syndrome.

Scofield RH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA. hal-scofield@omrf.ouhsc.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To determine the advances made in the genetics of systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) or Sjögren's syndrome as the era of genome-wide
association and high-throughput single nucleotide typing begins.
RECENT FINDINGS: Several genome-wide association studies have been performed in
SLE but there are no such studies published or in progress for Sjögren's
syndrome. Genetics and the functional significance of risk alleles in the
interferon pathway are being worked out in detail. This is especially true for
STAT4 and IRF5. Gene copy number variation, a major source of genetic
variability, is important for several genes that impart risk for SLE. An X
chromosome copy number dose effect has recently been identified. Genetic
evaluation of Sjögren's syndrome is limited to small studies that have
concentrated on genes already shown to be risk factors in SLE.
SUMMARY: Knowledge of the genetics of SLE is advancing rapidly, whereas that of
Sjögren's syndrome lags behind considerably.

PMID: 19593143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jul;5(7):e1000500. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000500. Epub 2009
Jul 3.

NOD2, RIP2 and IRF5 play a critical role in the type I interferon response to
Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Pandey AK(1), Yang Y, Jiang Z, Fortune SM, Coulombe F, Behr MA, Fitzgerald KA,
Sassetti CM, Kelliher MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

While the recognition of microbial infection often occurs at the cell surface via
Toll-like receptors, the cytosol of the cell is also under surveillance for
microbial products that breach the cell membrane. An important outcome of
cytosolic recognition is the induction of IFNalpha and IFNbeta, which are
critical mediators of immunity against both bacteria and viruses. Like many
intracellular pathogens, a significant fraction of the transcriptional response
to Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection depends on these type I interferons, but 
the recognition pathways responsible remain elusive. In this work, we demonstrate
that intraphagosomal M. tuberculosis stimulates the cytosolic Nod2 pathway that
responds to bacterial peptidoglycan, and this event requires membrane damage that
is actively inflicted by the bacterium. Unexpectedly, this recognition triggers
the expression of type I interferons in a Tbk1- and Irf5-dependent manner. This
response is only partially impaired by the loss of Irf3 and therefore, differs
fundamentally from those stimulated by bacterial DNA, which depend entirely on
this transcription factor. This difference appears to result from the unusual
peptidoglycan produced by mycobacteria, which we show is a uniquely potent
agonist of the Nod2/Rip2/Irf5 pathway. Thus, the Nod2 system is specialized to
recognize bacteria that actively perturb host membranes and is remarkably
sensitive to mycobacteria, perhaps reflecting the strong evolutionary pressure
exerted by these pathogens on the mammalian immune system.

PMCID: PMC2698121
PMID: 19578435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Rheumatol. 2009 Aug;36(8):1631-8. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.081160. Epub 2009 Jun 30.

Evidence for genetic association and interaction between the TYK2 and IRF5 genes 
in systemic lupus erythematosus.

Hellquist A(1), Järvinen TM, Koskenmies S, Zucchelli M, Orsmark-Pietras C,
Berglind L, Panelius J, Hasan T, Julkunen H, D'Amato M, Saarialho-Kere U, Kere J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden.

Comment in
    J Rheumatol. 2010 Mar;37(3):676-7; author reply 678.
    J Rheumatol. 2011 Jan;38(1):177-8.

OBJECTIVE: Several candidate genes have been implicated in susceptibility for
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), a complex autoimmune disease. The proposed
genes include members of the type I interferon (IFN) pathway and genes involved
in immunological defense functions. Our aim was to systematically replicate 6
such genes, TYK2, IRF5, CTLA4, PDCD1, FCGR2A, and NOD2.
METHODS: Single-nucleotide polymorphisms in TYK2, IRF5, CTLA4, PDCD1, FCGR2A, and
NOD2 were genotyped in 277 SLE patients and 356 healthy controls from Finland,
giving a power of 42%-70% for different genes at published allele frequencies.
RESULTS: Significant association was seen for rs2304256 (p = 0.0001) and
rs12720270 (p = 0.0031) in TYK2 and rs10954213 (p = 0.0043) in IRF5 in our
samples, but not for the other genes. We found evidence for genetic interaction
(p = 0.014) between rs2304256 in TYK2 and rs10954213 in IRF5, both members of the
type I IFN pathway, strengthening the role of the type I IFN pathway in the
pathogenesis of SLE.
CONCLUSION: The IFN pathway genes IRF5 and TYK2 may act epistatically in
increasing risk for SLE, but our lack of replication does not exclude effects of 
the other genes studied.

PMID: 19567624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Jul;60(7):1991-7. doi: 10.1002/art.24662.

The CGGGG insertion/deletion polymorphism of the IRF5 promoter is a strong risk
factor for primary Sjögren's syndrome.

Miceli-Richard C(1), Gestermann N, Ittah M, Comets E, Loiseau P, Puechal X,
Hachulla E, Gottenberg JE, Lebon P, Becquemont L, Mariette X.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 802, Université Paris-Sud 11, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.

OBJECTIVE: Interferon regulatory factor 5 is a transcription factor involved in
type I interferon (IFN) secretion. This study was undertaken to investigate
whether a 5-bp (CGGGG insertion/deletion) promoter polymorphism is involved in
genetic predisposition to primary Sjögren's syndrome (SS) and to assess the
functional consequences of this polymorphism.
METHODS: The exploratory cohort consisted of 185 patients with primary SS and 157
healthy controls, and the replication cohort consisted of 200 patients with
primary SS and 282 healthy controls. Levels of IRF5 messenger RNA (mRNA) were
assessed at baseline and after in vitro infection with reovirus in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from 30 patients with primary SS and from
salivary gland epithelial cells that had been cultured for 4 weeks from patients 
with primary SS or sicca symptoms.
RESULTS: Carriage of the IRF5 4R CGGGG allele was associated with a greatly
increased risk of primary SS in both cohorts (odds ratio 2.00 [95% confidence
interval 1.5-2.7], P = 6.6 x 10(-6)). The CGGGG insertion/deletion polymorphism
alone was sufficient to explain the association of primary SS with IRF5. The
level of IRF5 mRNA in PBMCs depended significantly on genotype (P = 0.002) and
was correlated with the levels of mRNA for the IFN-induced genes MX1 and IFITM1. 
Cultured salivary gland epithelial cells from patients carrying the 4R CGGGG IRF5
allele showed a high level of IRF5 mRNA (P = 0.04), which was amplified after
reovirus infection (P = 0.026).
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate an association of the CGGGG insertion/deletion 
polymorphism of the IRF5 promoter with primary SS. Patients carrying the 4R CGGGG
IRF5 allele had a high level of mRNA for IRF5 in PBMCs and salivary gland
epithelial cells, mainly after in vitro viral infection. Patients with high
levels of mRNA for IRF5 also had high levels of mRNA for type I IFN-induced genes
in PBMCs.

PMID: 19565491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Jun;60(6):1845-50. doi: 10.1002/art.24600.

Association of a functional polymorphism in the IRF5 region with systemic
sclerosis in a Japanese population.

Ito I(1), Kawaguchi Y, Kawasaki A, Hasegawa M, Ohashi J, Hikami K, Kawamoto M,
Fujimoto M, Takehara K, Sato S, Hara M, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Interferon regulatory factor 5, an established susceptibility factor
for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), plays a role in type I interferon and
proinflammatory cytokine induction. A recent study showed association of a
functional single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in intron 1 of IRF5, rs2004640,
with systemic sclerosis (SSc) in a European French population. We undertook the
present study to determine whether IRF5 polymorphisms are also associated with a 
predisposition to SSc in Japanese.
METHODS: A case-control association study was performed for rs2004640 as well as 
for rs10954213 and rs2280714, all of which were previously reported to be
associated with SLE, in 281 SSc patients and 477 healthy controls. Patients with 
SSc complicated by SLE or Sjögren's syndrome were excluded. Association of the
rs2280714 genotype with messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of IRF5 and adjacently
located transportin 3 (TNPO3) was examined using the GENEVAR database.
RESULTS: All 3 SNPs were significantly associated with SSc, with the rs2280714 A 
allele having the strongest association (allele frequency P=0.0012, odds ratio
1.42 [95% confidence interval 1.15-1.75]). Association was preferentially
observed in subsets of patients with diffuse cutaneous SSc (dcSSc) and
anti-topoisomerase I antibody positivity. Conditional analysis revealed that
rs2280714 could account for most of the association of these SNPs, while an
additional contribution of rs2004640 was also suggested for dcSSc. The genotype
of rs2280714 was strongly associated with IRF5 mRNA expression, while only
marginal association was detected with TNPO3 mRNA expression.
CONCLUSION: Association of IRF5 with SSc was replicated in a Japanese population.
Whether the causal SNP is different among populations requires further
investigation.

PMID: 19479858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2009;10:89-116. doi:
10.1146/annurev-genom-082908-150013.

The genetics of Crohn's disease.

Van Limbergen J(1), Wilson DC, Satsangi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Royal Hospital for
Sick Children, Edinburgh EH9 1LF, United Kingdom. johanvanlimbergen@hotmail.com

From epidemiological data, based on concordance data in family studies, via
linkage analysis to genome-wide association studies, we and others have
accumulated robust evidence implicating more than 30 distinct genomic loci
involved in the genetic susceptibility to Crohn's disease (CD). These loci encode
genes involved in a number of homeostatic mechanisms: innate pattern recognition 
receptors (NOD2/CARD15, TLR4, CARD9), the differentiation of Th17-lymphocytes
(IL-23R, JAK2, STAT3, CCR6, ICOSLG), autophagy (ATG16L1, IRGM, LRRK2),
maintenance of epithelial barrier integrity (IBD5, DLG5, PTGER4, ITLN1, DMBT1,
XBP1), and the orchestration of the secondary immune response (HLA-region,
TNFSF15/TL1A, IRF5, PTPN2, PTPN22, NKX2-3, IL-12B, IL-18RAP, MST1). While many of
these loci also predispose to pediatric CD, an additional number of
childhood-onset loci have been identified recently (e.g., TNFRSF6B). Not only has
the identification of these loci improved our understanding of the
pathophysiology of CD, this knowledge also holds real promise for clinical
practice.

PMID: 19453248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Genes Immun. 2009 Jul;10(5):446-56. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.38. Epub 2009 May 14.

Identification of new SLE-associated genes with a two-step Bayesian study design.

Armstrong DL(1), Reiff A, Myones BL, Quismorio FP Jr, Klein-Gitelman M, McCurdy
D, Wagner-Weiner L, Silverman E, Ojwang JO, Kaufman KM, Kelly JA, Merrill JT,
Harley JB, Bae SC, Vyse TJ, Gilkeson GS, Gaffney PM, Moser KL, Putterman C,
Edberg JC, Brown EE, Ziegler J, Langefeld CD, Zidovetzki R, Jacob CO.

Author information: 
(1)The Lupus Genetic Group, Department of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

In our earlier study, we utilized a Bayesian design to probe the association of
approximately 1000 genes (approximately 10,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs)) with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) on a moderate number of trios of 
parents and children with SLE. Two genes associated with SLE, with a
multitest-corrected false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.05, were identified, and a
number of noteworthy genes with FDR of <0.8 were also found, pointing out a
future direction for the study. In this report, using a large population of
controls and adult- or childhood-onset SLE cases, we have extended the earlier
investigation to explore the SLE association of 10 of these noteworthy genes (109
SNPs). We have found that seven of these genes exhibit a significant (FDR<0.05)
association with SLE, both confirming some genes that have earlier been found to 
be associated with SLE (PTPN22 and IRF5) and presenting novel findings of genes
(KLRG1, interleukin-16, protein tyrosine phosphatase receptor type T, toll-like
receptor (TLR)8 and CASP10), which have not been reported earlier. The results
signify that the two-step candidate pathway design is an efficient way to study
the genetic foundations of complex diseases. Furthermore, the novel genes
identified in this study point to new directions in both the diagnosis and the
eventual treatment of this debilitating disease.

PMCID: PMC3434884
PMID: 19440200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Genes Immun. 2009 Jul;10(5):373-9. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.39. Epub 2009 May 14.

Recent insights into the genetic basis of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Moser KL(1), Kelly JA, Lessard CJ, Harley JB.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Immunology Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA. moserk@omrf.org

Genetic variation was first shown to be important in systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE or lupus) in the 1970s with associations in the human leukocyte antigen
region. Almost four decades later, and with the help of increasingly powerful
genetic approaches, more than 25 genes are now known to contribute to the
mechanisms that predispose individuals to lupus. Over half of these loci have
been discovered in the past 2 years, underscoring the extraordinary success of
genome-wide association approaches in SLE. Well-established risk factors include 
alleles in the major histocompatibility complex region (multiple genes), IRF5,
ITGAM, STAT4, BLK, BANK1, PDCD1, PTPN22, TNFSF4, TNFAIP3, SPP1, some of the
Fcgamma receptors, and deficiencies in several complement components, including
C1q, C4 and C2. As reviewed here, many susceptibility genes fall into key
pathways that are consistent with previous studies implicating immune complexes, 
host immune signal transduction and interferon pathways in the pathogenesis of
SLE. Other loci have no known function or apparent immunological role and have
the potential to reveal novel disease mechanisms. Certainly, as our understanding
of the genetic etiology of SLE continues to mature, important new opportunities
will emerge for developing more effective diagnostic and clinical management
tools for this complex autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC3144759
PMID: 19440199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. PLoS One. 2009;4(5):e5500. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005500. Epub 2009 May 11.

Functional analysis of a dominant negative mutation of interferon regulatory
factor 5.

Yang L(1), Zhao T, Shi X, Nakhaei P, Wang Y, Sun Q, Hiscott J, Lin R.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family members have been
implicated as critical transcription factors that function in immune response,
hematopoietic differentiation and cell growth regulation. Activation of IRF-5
results in the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFalpha, IL6 and
IL12p40, as well as type I interferons.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we identify a G202C (position
relative to translation start codon) missense-mutation transcript of IRF-5 in
transformed B and T cell lines, which were either infected or non-infected by
viruses, and peripheral blood from ATL or CLL patients. The mutated transcript
encodes a novel protein in which the sixty-eighth amino acid, Alanine, is
substituted by Proline (IRF-5P68) in the DNA binding domain of IRF-5. IRF-5P68
phenotype results in a complete loss of its DNA-binding activity and functions as
a dominant negative molecule through interacting with wild type IRF-5.
Co-expression of IRF-5P68 inhibits MyD88-mediated IRF-5 transactivation.
Moreover, Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent IL6 and IL12P40 production induced
by lipopolysaccharide (LPS), R837 or CpG ODN 1826 was reduced in IRF-5 (P68)
expressing cells as compared to the control cells.
CONCLUSION: IRF-5P68 acts as a dominant negative regulator that interferes with
IRF-5-mediated production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. The functional
characterization of the novel IRF-5 mutant in transformed B and T cell lines and 
in ATL and CLL patients may lead to a better understanding of the role of these
transcriptional regulators in hematopoietic malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2677155
PMID: 19430534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Genes Immun. 2009 Jul;10(5):421-32. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.24. Epub 2009 Apr 9.

Genetic studies of systemic lupus erythematosus in Asia: where are we now?

Kim I(1), Kim YJ, Kim K, Kang C, Choi CB, Sung YK, Lee HS, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, The Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Hanyang
University, Seoul 133-792, Korea.

There have been many genetic studies of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in
Asia, but the status of SLE in Asia remains unclear. Genes that have been
associated with SLE in Caucasians have shown both consistent and inconsistent
results in Asians. This prompted us to review studies of SLE-associated genes and
compare the degree of consistency according to ethnicity in Asia. We searched
PubMed and the national databases in Korea and Japan for SLE genetic studies. A
total of 755 articles were found and after applying various exclusion criteria,
442 studies including 17 linkage studies, 2 genome-wide association studies and
423 candidate-gene analyses were reviewed. Nine linkage loci were confirmed to be
associated with SLE susceptibility in non-Asians, but the risk locus (16q12) has 
been identified in only one Asian study. A total of 156 candidate genes were
analyzed, of which 92 were studied in Asians. Although there were allelic
(HLA-DRB1 and IRF5) or genetic heterogeneity (FCGR gene family), HLA-DRB1, the
FCGR gene family, IRF5, STAT4 and MECP2 showed consistent associations with SLE
susceptibility across ethnicities. In conclusion, genetic associations often vary
with ethnicity, requiring validation in different ethnic groups, and hence future
SLE genetic studies will require strong worldwide collaborations.

PMID: 19357696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Apr;60(4):1065-75. doi: 10.1002/art.24436.

MicroRNA-146A contributes to abnormal activation of the type I interferon pathway
in human lupus by targeting the key signaling proteins.

Tang Y(1), Luo X, Cui H, Ni X, Yuan M, Guo Y, Huang X, Zhou H, de Vries N, Tak
PP, Chen S, Shen N.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Molecular Rheumatology Laboratory of the Institute of Health Sciences
and Shanghai Renji Hospital, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, and Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: MicroRNA have recently been identified as regulators that modulate
target gene expression and are involved in shaping the immune response. This
study was undertaken to investigate the contribution of microRNA-146a (miR-146a),
which was identified in the pilot expression profiling step, to the pathogenesis 
of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
METHODS: TaqMan microRNA assays of peripheral blood leukocytes were used for
comparison of expression levels of microRNA between SLE patients and controls.
Transfection and stimulation of cultured cells were conducted to determine the
biologic function of miR-146a. Bioinformatics prediction and validation by
reporter gene assay and Western blotting were performed to identify miR-146a
targets.
RESULTS: Profiling of 156 miRNA in SLE patients revealed the differential
expression of multiple microRNA, including miR-146a, a negative regulator of
innate immunity. Further analysis showed that underexpression of miR-146a
negatively correlated with clinical disease activity and with interferon (IFN)
scores in patients with SLE. Of note, overexpression of miR-146a reduced, while
inhibition of endogenous miR-146a increased, the induction of type I IFNs in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). Furthermore, miR-146a directly
repressed the transactivation downstream of type I IFN. At the molecular level,
miR-146a could target IFN regulatory factor 5 and STAT-1. More importantly,
introduction of miR-146a into the patients' PBMCs alleviated the coordinate
activation of the type I IFN pathway.
CONCLUSION: The microRNA miR-146a is a negative regulator of the IFN pathway.
Underexpression of miR-146a contributes to alterations in the type I IFN pathway 
in lupus patients by targeting the key signaling proteins. The findings provide
potential novel strategies for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 19333922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Rheumatol. 2009 Apr;36(4):693-7. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.081054. Epub 2009 Feb 17.

Association of polymorphisms in interferon regulatory factor 5 gene with
rheumatoid arthritis: a metaanalysis.

Han SW(1), Lee WK, Kwon KT, Lee BK, Nam EJ, Kim GW.

Author information: 
(1)The Center of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Daegu Fatima
Hospital, and Department of Preventive Medicine, Kyungpook National University
School of Medicine, 576-13, Sinam 4 dong, Donggu, Daegu, 701-010, Republic of
Korea.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated potential associations between rheumatoid arthritis
(RA) and interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) polymorphisms in a metaanalysis.
METHODS: This metaanalysis included 5 case-control studies, which provided a
total of 6582 RA cases and 5375 controls. Odds ratios (OR) were employed to
evaluate the risk of RA according to the 4 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) 
in IRF5 (rs729302, rs2004640, rs752637, and rs2280714) and data were analyzed in 
respect to association between alleles.
RESULTS: Among 4 candidate SNP, rs729302, rs2004640, and rs2280714 were
statistically significant; both allele C of rs729302 and allele G of rs2004640
within the promoter region of IRF5 were associated with a protective effect
[random-effects (RE) OR 0.889, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.803-0.977, p=0.015 
for rs729302; and RE OR 0.905, 95% CI 0.848-0.965, p=0.002 for rs2004640].
Similar results were also obtained in T allele of rs2280714 in the
3'-untranslated region (RE OR 0.927, 95% CI 0.866-0.992, p=0.029). There was no
evidence of publication bias from funnel-plot asymmetry and Egger's regression
test.
CONCLUSION: Our metaanalysis supported the evidence of the significant role of
IRF5 polymorphisms in RA.

PMID: 19228650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jan;5(1):e1000280. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000280. Epub 2009
Jan 30.

Rotavirus NSP1 inhibits NFkappaB activation by inducing proteasome-dependent
degradation of beta-TrCP: a novel mechanism of IFN antagonism.

Graff JW(1), Ettayebi K, Hardy ME.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Molecular Biology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana,
United States of America.

Mechanisms by which viruses counter innate host defense responses generally
involve inhibition of one or more components of the interferon (IFN) system.
Multiple steps in the induction and amplification of IFN signaling are targeted
for inhibition by viral proteins, and many of the IFN antagonists have direct or 
indirect effects on activation of latent cytoplasmic transcription factors.
Rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP1 blocks transcription of type I IFNalpha/beta
by inducing proteasome-dependent degradation of IFN-regulatory factors 3 (IRF3), 
IRF5, and IRF7. In this study, we show that rotavirus NSP1 also inhibits
activation of NFkappaB and does so by a novel mechanism. Proteasome-mediated
degradation of inhibitor of kappaB (IkappaBalpha) is required for NFkappaB
activation. Phosphorylated IkappaBalpha is a substrate for polyubiquitination by 
a multisubunit E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, Skp1/Cul1/F-box, in which the F-box
substrate recognition protein is beta-transducin repeat containing protein
(beta-TrCP). The data presented show that phosphorylated IkappaBalpha is stable
in rotavirus-infected cells because infection induces proteasome-dependent
degradation of beta-TrCP. NSP1 expressed in isolation in transiently transfected 
cells is sufficient to induce this effect. Targeted degradation of an F-box
protein of an E3 ligase complex with a prominent role in modulation of innate
immune signaling and cell proliferation pathways is a unique mechanism of IFN
antagonism and defines a second strategy of immune evasion used by rotaviruses.

PMCID: PMC2627925
PMID: 19180189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 27;284(13):8525-38. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809252200. Epub 2009 
Jan 7.

The Kaposi's Sarcoma-associated Herpesvirus-encoded vIRF-3 Inhibits Cellular
IRF-5.

Wies E(1), Hahn AS, Schmidt K, Viebahn C, Rohland N, Lux A, Schellhorn T, Holzer 
A, Jung JU, Neipel F.

Author information: 
(1)Virologisches Institut, Universitätsklinikum Erlangen, D-91054 Erlangen,
Germany.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus encodes four genes with homology to the
family of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs). At least one of these viral IRFs,
vIRF-3, is expressed in latently Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-infected
primary effusion lymphoma (PEL) cells and is essential for the survival of PEL
cells. We now report that vIRF-3 interacts with cellular IRF-5, thereby
inhibiting binding of IRF-5 to interferon-responsive promoter elements.
Consequently, vIRF-3 blocked IRF-5-mediated promoter activation. A central double
helix motif present in vIRF-3 was sufficient to abrogate both DNA binding and
transcriptional transactivation by IRF-5. Upon DNA damage or activation of the
interferon or Toll-like receptor pathways, cytoplasmic IRF-5 has been reported to
be translocated to the nucleus, which results in induction of both
p53-independent apoptosis and p21-mediated cell cycle arrest. We report here that
IRF-5 is present in the nuclei of PEL cells without interferon stimulation.
Silencing of vIRF-3 expression in PEL cells was accompanied by increased
sensitivity to interferon-mediated apoptosis and up-regulation of IRF-5 target
genes. In addition, vIRF-3 antagonized IRF-5-mediated activation of the p21
promoter. The data presented here indicate that vIRF-3 contributes to immune
evasion and sustained proliferation of PEL cells by releasing IRF-5 from
transcription complexes.

PMCID: PMC2659211
PMID: 19129183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):820-8.

TLR4 ligands induce IFN-alpha production by mouse conventional dendritic cells
and human monocytes after IFN-beta priming.

Richez C(1), Yasuda K, Watkins AA, Akira S, Lafyatis R, van Seventer JM, Rifkin
IR.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Exacerbation of disease in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is associated with 
bacterial infection. In conventional dendritic cells (cDCs), the TLR4 ligand
bacterial LPS induces IFN-beta gene expression but does not induce IFN-alpha. We 
hypothesized that when cDCs are primed by cytokines, as may frequently be the
case in SLE, LPS would then induce the production of IFN-alpha, a cytokine
believed to be important in lupus pathogenesis. In this study we show that mouse 
cDCs and human monocytes produce abundant IFN-alpha following TLR4 engagement
whether the cells have been pretreated either with IFN-beta or with a supernatant
from DCs activated by RNA-containing immune complexes from lupus patients. This
TLR4-induced IFN-alpha induction is mediated by both an initial TRIF-dependent
pathway and a subsequent MyD88-dependent pathway, in contrast to TLR3-induced
IFN-alpha production, which is entirely TRIF-dependent. There is also a distinct 
requirement for IFN regulatory factors (IRFs), with LPS-induced IFN-alpha
induction being entirely IRF7- and partially IRF5-dependent, in contrast to
LPS-induced IFN-beta gene induction which is known to be IRF3-dependent but
largely IRF7-independent. This data demonstrates a novel pathway for IFN-alpha
production by cDCs and provides one possible explanation for how bacterial
infection might precipitate disease flares in SLE.

PMCID: PMC2858919
PMID: 19124725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Jan;60(1):225-33. doi: 10.1002/art.24183.

Association between the IRF5 rs2004640 functional polymorphism and systemic
sclerosis: a new perspective for pulmonary fibrosis.

Dieudé P(1), Guedj M, Wipff J, Avouac J, Fajardy I, Diot E, Granel B, Sibilia J, 
Cabane J, Mouthon L, Cracowski JL, Carpentier PH, Hachulla E, Meyer O, Kahan A,
Boileau C, Allanore Y.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris 7, and Hôpital Bichat Claude Bernard, Assistance Publique
Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. philippe.dieude@bch.aphp.fr

OBJECTIVE: There is now growing evidence that connective tissue diseases,
including systemic sclerosis (SSc), share a common genetic background. Microarray
studies support a pivotal role of type I interferon (IFN) in the pathophysiology 
of connective tissue diseases. Interferon regulatory factors coordinate the
expression of type I IFNs, and the IRF5 gene has been identified as a
susceptibility gene of systemic lupus and Sjögren's syndrome. The aim of this
study was to determine whether the IRF5 rs2004640 single-nucleotide polymorphism 
is associated with SSc.
METHODS: The IRF5 rs2004640 (GT) functional polymorphism was genotyped in 1,641
subjects of French European Caucasian origin: a discovery set comprising 427
patients with SSc and 380 control subjects and a replication set comprising 454
patients with SSc and 380 control subjects.
RESULTS: In both the discovery set and the replication set, the TT genotype was
significantly more common in patients with SSc than in control subjects, with an 
odds ratio (OR) for the combined populations of 1.58 (95% confidence interval
[95% CI] 1.18-2.11 [P for trend 0.002]). Analyses of the whole SSc population
showed a significant association between homozygosity for the T allele and the
presence of antinuclear antibodies (corrected P [Pcorr]=0.04, OR 1.59, 95% CI
1.16-2.17) and fibrosing alveolitis (Pcorr=0.001, OR 2.07, 95% CI 1.38-3.11). In 
a multivariate analysis model including the diffuse cutaneous subtype of SSc and 
positivity for anti-topoisomerase I antibodies, the IRF5 rs2004640 TT genotype
remained associated with fibrosing alveolitis (P=0.029, OR 1.92, 95% CI
1.07-3.44).
CONCLUSION: The IRF5 rs2004640 GT substitution is associated with susceptibility 
to SSc. These data provide new insight into the pathogenesis of SSc, including
clues to the mechanisms leading to fibrosing alveolitis.

PMID: 19116937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 1;182(1):34-8.

Cutting edge: autoimmune disease risk variant of STAT4 confers increased
sensitivity to IFN-alpha in lupus patients in vivo.

Kariuki SN(1), Kirou KA, MacDermott EJ, Barillas-Arias L, Crow MK, Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Increased IFN-alpha signaling is a primary pathogenic factor in systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). STAT4 is a transcription factor that is activated by
IFN-alpha signaling, and genetic variation of STAT4 has been associated with risk
of SLE and rheumatoid arthritis. We measured serum IFN-alpha activity and
simultaneous IFN-alpha-induced gene expression in PBMC in a large SLE cohort. The
risk variant of STAT4 (T allele; rs7574865) was simultaneously associated with
both lower serum IFN-alpha activity and greater IFN-alpha-induced gene expression
in PBMC in SLE patients in vivo. Regression analyses confirmed that the risk
allele of STAT4 was associated with increased sensitivity to IFN-alpha signaling.
The IFN regulatory factor 5 SLE risk genotype was associated with higher serum
IFN-alpha activity; however, STAT4 showed dominant influence on the sensitivity
of PBMC to serum IFN-alpha. These data provide biologic relevance for the risk
variant of STAT4 in the IFN-alpha pathway in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2716754
PMID: 19109131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Yonsei Med J. 2008 Dec 31;49(6):1023-31. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2008.49.6.1023.

Development of monoclonal antibodies against human IRF-5 and their use in
identifying the binding of IRF-5 to nuclear import proteins karyopherin-alpha1
and -beta1.

Yeon SI(1), Youn JH, Lim MH, Lee HJ, Kim YM, Choi JE, Lee JM, Shin JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 250
Seongsanno, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-752, Korea.

PURPOSE: IRF-5 is a direct transducer of virus-mediated and TLR-mediated
signaling pathways for the expression of cytokines and chemokines which form
homodimers or heterodimers with IRF-7. However, direct IRF-5-specific monoclonal 
antibodies (mAbs) are not available at present. These could be used to further
evaluate the functions of IRF-5. In this study, we produced and characterized
three mouse mAbs to human IRF-5. The binding of IRF-5 to nuclear import proteins 
was first identified using a mAb.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: His-tagged human IRF-5 protein spanning amino acid
residues 193-257 was used as an antigen and three mAbs were produced. The mAbs
were tested with ELISA, Western blot analysis (WB), immunofluorescent staining
(IF), and immunoprecipitation (IP). In addition, the nuclear import protein which
carried phosphorylated IRF-5 was identified using one of these mAbs.
RESULTS: MAbs 5IRF8, 5IRF10 and 5IRF24 which reacted with the recombinant
His-IRF-5(193-257) protein were produced. All mAbs bound to human IRF-5, but not 
to IRF-3 or IRF-7. They could be used for WB, IF, and IP studies. The binding of 
phosphorylated IRF-5 to karyopherin-alpha1 and -beta1 was also identified.
CONCLUSION: Human IRF-5-specific mAbs are produced for studying the immunologic
roles related to IRF-5. Phosphorylated IRF-5 is transported to the nucleus by
binding to nuclear import proteins karyopherin-alpha1 and -beta1.

PMCID: PMC2628014
PMID: 19108028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Exp Eye Res. 2009 Mar;88(3):398-409. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2008.10.006. Epub 2008
Oct 18.

Differential gene expressions in the lacrimal gland during development and onset 
of keratoconjunctivitis sicca in Sjögren's syndrome (SJS)-like disease of the
C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse.

Nguyen CQ(1), Sharma A, She JX, McIndoe RA, Peck AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. Nguyen@pathology.ufl.edu

Recently, we reported development of the C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse carrying two 
genetic intervals derived from the NOD mouse. These two genetic regions confer
Sjögren's syndrome (SjS)-like disease in SjS-non-susceptible C57BL/6 mice. In an 
attempt to define the molecular bases underlying onset of dacryoadenitis and
subsequently keratoconjunctivitis sicca (or xerophthalmia) in the
C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 mouse model, we have carried out a study utilizing
microarray technology. Using oligonucleotide microarrays, gene expression
profiles of lacrimal glands at 4, 8, 12, 16 and 20weeks of age were generated for
C57BL/6.NOD-Aec1Aec2 male mice. Analyses using Linear Models for Microarray
Analysis package and B-statistics, 552 genes were identified as being
differentially expressed (adjusted p-value <0.01 and B <1.5) during the
development of SjS-like disease. These 552 genes could be arranged into four
clusters, with each cluster defining a unique pattern of temporal expression,
while the individual genes within each cluster could be grouped according to
related function. Using a pair-wise analysis, temporal changes in gene
expressions provided profiles indicating that individual genes were
differentially expressed at specific time points during development of SjS. In
addition, multiple genes that have been reported to show, either in humans or
mouse models, an association with autoimmunity and/or SjS, e.g., ApoE, Baff, Clu,
Ctla4, Fas/Fasl, Irf5, Lyzs, Nfkb, Socs3, Stat4, Tap2, Tgfbeta1, Tnfa, and Vcam1 
were also found to exhibit differential expressions, both quantitatively and
temporally. Selecting a few families of genes, e.g., cystatins, cathepsins,
metalloproteinases, lipocalins, complement, kallikreins, carbonic anhydrases and 
tumor necrosis factors, it was noted that only a limited number of family members
showed differential expressions, suggesting a restricted glandular expression.
Utilizing these genes, pathways of inter-reactive genes have been constructed for
apoptosis and fatty acid homeostasis, leading to modeling of possible underlying 
events inducing disease. Thus, these different approaches to analyze microarray
data permit identification of multiple sets of genes of interest whose
expressions and expression profiles may correlate with molecular mechanisms,
signaling pathways and/or immunological processes involved in the development and
onset of SjS in this mouse model, thereby providing new insight into the
underlying cause or regulation of this disease.

PMCID: PMC2699904
PMID: 19103199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Genes Immun. 2009 Jan;10(1):68-76. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.94. Epub 2008 Dec 18.

Additive effects of the major risk alleles of IRF5 and STAT4 in primary Sjögren's
syndrome.

Nordmark G(1), Kristjansdottir G, Theander E, Eriksson P, Brun JG, Wang C,
Padyukov L, Truedsson L, Alm G, Eloranta ML, Jonsson R, Rönnblom L, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
Gunnel.Nordmark@medsci.uu.se

Primary Sjögren's syndrome (SS) shares many features with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE). Here we investigated the association of the three major
polymorphisms in IRF5 and STAT4 found to be associated with SLE, in patients from
Sweden and Norway with primary SS. These polymorphisms are a 5-bp CGGGG indel in 
the promoter of IRF5, the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs10488631
downstream of IRF5 and the STAT4 SNP rs7582694, which tags the major risk
haplotype of STAT4. We observed strong signals for association between all three 
polymorphisms and primary SS, with odds ratios (ORs) >1.4 and P-values <0.01. We 
also found a strong additive effect of the three risk alleles of IRF5 and STAT4
with an overall significance between the number of risk alleles and primary SS of
P=2.5 x 10(-9). The OR for primary SS increased in an additive manner, with an
average increase in OR of 1.78. For carriers of two risk alleles, the OR for
primary SS is 1.43, whereas carriers of five risk alleles have an OR of 6.78.
IRF5 and STAT4 are components of the type I IFN system, and our findings
emphasize the importance of this system in the etiopathogenesis of primary SS.

PMID: 19092842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Rheumatol Int. 2009 Aug;29(10):1137-42. doi: 10.1007/s00296-008-0801-7. Epub 2008
Nov 29.

Association between the rs2004640 functional polymorphism of interferon
regulatory factor 5 and systemic lupus erythematosus: a meta-analysis.

Lee YH(1), Song GG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University
College of Medicine, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul, 136-705, South Korea. lyhcgh@korea.ac.kr

The aim of this study is to determine whether the functional interferon
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) polymorphism, rs2004640, confers susceptibility to
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in multiple ethic populations. A meta-analysis
was conducted on the T allele of the IRF5 rs2004640 polymorphism and 12 studies
were included in the meta-analysis. Meta-analysis revealed an association between
SLE and the IRF5 rs2004640 T allele in all subjects without inter-study
heterogeneity (OR 1.429, 95% CI 1.359-1.503, P < 0.001). The IRF5 rs2004640 T
allele was significantly associated with SLE in European and Asians. The Asian
population had a much lower prevalence of the T allele (34.4%) than any other
population studied. and Europeans had the highest frequency of the IRF5 rs2004640
T allele (51.8%). In conclusion, this meta-analysis confirms that the IRF5
rs2004640 polymorphism is associated with SLE susceptibility in different ethnic 
groups, and that its prevalence is ethnicity dependent.

PMID: 19043711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 30;284(5):2767-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804744200. Epub 2008
Nov 20.

IRF-5 is a mediator of the death receptor-induced apoptotic signaling pathway.

Hu G(1), Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

The efficient and regulated response to cellular stress is coordinated by a
genetic regulatory network in which a given transcription factor controls the
expression of diverse target genes depending on the cell type and/or nature of
the stimuli. The tumor suppressor p53 is thought to preferentially regulate the
balance between cell survival and death. The interferon regulatory factor 5
(IRF-5), known to be involved in the innate immune response to pathogens, is also
a critical regulator of DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Here, we provide direct
evidence that IRF-5 promotes apoptosis upon signaling through tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) death receptors (DR). We report 
that IRF-5 sensitizes tumor cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis and cell death that 
is further enhanced by type I interferons. Cells deficient of IRF-5 gave a
significantly diminished response to these agents. IRF-5 is involved in DR
signaling upstream of caspase 8, in part because of an IRF-5-dependent increase
in caspase 8 activation. We provide evidence that TRAIL induces a signaling
cascade that leads to the phosphorylation and nuclear localization of IRF-5,
resulting in transactivation of key DR signaling components. The results
presented here identify IRF-5 as a new mediator of DR signaling and provides
molecular insight into the mechanism of TRAIL-induced IRF-5 signaling.

PMID: 19028697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009 Nov;68(11):1746-53. doi: 10.1136/ard.2008.097642. Epub 2008
Nov 19.

STAT4 associates with systemic lupus erythematosus through two independent
effects that correlate with gene expression and act additively with IRF5 to
increase risk.

Abelson AK(1), Delgado-Vega AM, Kozyrev SV, Sánchez E, Velázquez-Cruz R, Eriksson
N, Wojcik J, Linga Reddy MV, Lima G, D'Alfonso S, Migliaresi S, Baca V, Orozco L,
Witte T, Ortego-Centeno N; AADEA group, Abderrahim H, Pons-Estel BA, Gutiérrez C,
Suárez A, González-Escribano MF, Martin J, Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Collaborators: Callejas-Rubio JL, Jiménez-Alonso J, Sabio M, Sánchez-Román J,
García-Hernández FJ, De-Ramon E, Camps M, García-Portales R, López-Nevot MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, University of
Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: To confirm and define the genetic association of STAT4 and systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE), investigate the possibility of correlations with
differential splicing and/or expression levels, and genetic interaction with
IRF5.
METHODS: 30 tag SNPs were genotyped in an independent set of Spanish cases and
controls. SNPs surviving correction for multiple tests were genotyped in five new
sets of cases and controls for replication. STAT4 cDNA was analysed by 5'-RACE
PCR and sequencing. Expression levels were measured by quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: In the fine mapping, four SNPs were significant after correction for
multiple testing, with rs3821236 and rs3024866 as the strongest signals, followed
by the previously associated rs7574865, and by rs1467199. Association was
replicated in all cohorts. After conditional regression analyses, two major
independent signals, represented by SNPs rs3821236 and rs7574865, remained
significant across the sets. These SNPs belong to separate haplotype blocks. High
levels of STAT4 expression correlated with SNPs rs3821236, rs3024866 (both in the
same haplotype block) and rs7574865 but not with other SNPs. Transcription of
alternative tissue-specific exons 1, indicating the presence of tissue-specific
promoters of potential importance in the expression of STAT4, was also detected. 
No interaction with associated SNPs of IRF5 was observed using regression
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: These data confirm STAT4 as a susceptibility gene for SLE and
suggest the presence of at least two functional variants affecting levels of
STAT4. The results also indicate that the genes STAT4 and IRF5 act additively to 
increase the risk for SLE.

PMCID: PMC3878433
PMID: 19019891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cell Mol Immunol. 2008 Oct;5(5):357-64. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2008.44.

17beta-estradiol suppresses cytotoxicity and proliferative capacity of murine
splenic NK1.1+ cells.

Hao S(1), Li P, Zhao J, Hu Y, Hou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Reproductive Biology Lab of Medical School & State Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093,
China.

In order to clarify the effects of 17beta-estradiol (E2) on natural killer (NK)
cells and the possibly regulatory mechanisms, we obtained highly purified and
viable NK cells from C57BL/6J mouse spleen by a magnetic cell sorter (MACS).
These cells were treated with E2 and then their cytotoxicity and proliferative
capacity were examined. To further investigate the mechanisms on the effect of E2
on NK cells, expressions of activation-associated markers (CD69, CD122) and
inhibitory receptors (CD94, Ly49), and intracellular cytokine production were
analyzed. At last, we performed the cDNA microarray to explore the possible
involved genes. We found that E2 could suppress NK cell cytotoxicity and
proliferative capacity in vitro. E2 reduced NK cell cytotoxicity and
proliferative capacity, which may be through influencing the phenotypes and
cytokine expression of NK cells, mainly involving CD94 and IFN-gamma.
Furthermore, regulation of Stat4, Fyn, Sh2d1a, Eat2, Cd244, Irf1, Runx1, Irf7,
Irf5, Esrra and Nr5a1 genes may be related to the cytotoxicity, proliferation and
cytokine production of E2-mediated purified NK cells.

PMCID: PMC4073696
PMID: 18954559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Bull NYU Hosp Jt Dis. 2008;66(3):176-83.

The genetic contribution to systemic lupus erythematosus.

Criswell LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
lindsey.criswell@ucsf.edu

We are currently witnessing an explosion of information about the genetic
contribution to complex human diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE). These genetic discoveries have profound implications for efforts to more
fully characterize etiologic pathways and mechanisms. Further, these etiologic
insights should lead to improved diagnostic and prognostic tools and inform the
development of more specific therapies for SLE and related conditions. The
article summarizes the evidence supporting a role for genetic factors in SLE,
highlights the clinical and genetic complexity of the disease, reviews the genes 
that have established contributions to the risk of SLE and specific disease
manifestations, and discusses the recent data emerging from genomewide
association studies of SLE.

PMID: 18937628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Rheumatol. 2008 Nov;35(11):2106-18. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Putative role of functional interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) polymorphism in
rheumatoid arthritis in a Korean population.

Kim YJ(1), Park JH, Kim I, Kim JO, Bae JS, Shin HD, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Hanyang University 
College of Medicine and the Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases, Hanyang University, 
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: .Recent studies suggest that polymorphisms of interferon regulatory
factor 5 (IRF5) are significantly associated with systemic lupus erythematosus in
several populations. The effect of IRF5 polymorphism on susceptibility to
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) has been investigated, and the results were
inconsistent. We analyzed the genetic effects of IRF5 polymorphisms on RA in a
Korean population.
METHODS: Eight single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) and 2 insertion-deletion
polymorphisms in IRF5 were genotyped in 2183 subjects (1204 RA cases and 979
controls) using the TaqMan(R) method. The genetic effects of SNP on the risk of
RA were evaluated using chi-square tests and multivariate logistic regression,
controlling for age, sex, and shared epitope (SE), and we then performed
conditional analysis by SE status and anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide
(anti-CCP) antibody (Ab) status. Data from a Mantel-Haenszel metaanalysis of odds
ratios (OR) were subsequently combined in a separate analysis with the results of
the association of rs2004640 with RA from a previous study.
RESULTS: Two of the IRF5 polymorphisms, CGGGGindel (OR 1.38, 95% CI 1.09-1.76,
pcorr = 0.04) and rs2004640 (OR 1.36, 95% CI 1.09-1.68, pcorr = 0.03), and one
haplotype, including the rs2004640 and the CGGGGindel, ht3 (A-Del-T-C-del-A-T)
(OR 1.39, 95% CI 1.09-1.79, pcorr = 0.04) were significantly associated with an
increased risk of RA. After stratification according to anti-CCP Ab and SE
status, rs2004640 SNP was associated with the anti-CCP Ab-positive (OR 1.47, 95% 
CI 1.15-1.88, pcorr = 0.01) or SE-positive group (OR 1.54, 95% CI 1.14-2.09,
pcorr = 0.03). A combined analysis including all 3 independent cohorts from the
previous study revealed an association of the rs2004640 with RA (pooled OR 1.21, 
95% CI 1.07-1.38, pooled p = 0.0031 in dominant model).
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the IRF5 polymorphism is associated with
genetic susceptibility to RA at least in a Korean population, and that it may
contribute to disease susceptibility in SE-positive or anti-CCP Ab-positive
patients with RA.

PMID: 18843785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Rheumatol. 2008 Nov;35(11):2148-51. Epub 2008 Oct 1.

Different genetic effects of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) polymorphisms 
on systemic lupus erythematosus in a Korean population.

Shin HD(1), Kim I, Choi CB, Lee SO, Lee HW, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genomic Diversity, Department of Life Science, Sogang
University, Seoul, Korea.

OBJECTIVE: .In an effort to replicate additional associations of interferon
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) polymorphisms with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 
in an Asian population, we examined those genetic effects in a Korean SLE cohort.
METHODS: Each IRF5 polymorphism was genotyped in 1565 subjects using the TaqMan
method and examined to determine whether it could explain the association with
SLE.
RESULTS: Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms (IRF5-15-1, rs2070197, and
rs10488631), which showed strong and/or independent association in Caucasian
populations, were not polymorphic in our Korean population. Association analysis 
revealed different genetic effects in Koreans compared with Caucasian
populations. In addition, conditional analysis suggested independent genetic
effects of 3 variant groups in the Korean population.
CONCLUSION: We demonstrate different genetic effects of IRF5 polymorphisms on the
risk of SLE according to ethnicity.

PMID: 18843782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2008 Nov;15(11):1213-20. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1496. Epub 2008
Oct 5.

Insights into interferon regulatory factor activation from the crystal structure 
of dimeric IRF5.

Chen W(1), Lam SS, Srinath H, Jiang Z, Correia JJ, Schiffer CA, Fitzgerald KA,
Lin K, Royer WE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, 364 Plantation Street, 
Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are essential in the innate immune response 
and other physiological processes. Activation of these proteins in the cytoplasm 
is triggered by phosphorylation of serine and threonine residues in a C-terminal 
autoinhibitory region, which stimulates dimerization, transport into the nucleus,
assembly with the coactivator CBP/p300 and initiation of transcription. The
crystal structure of the transactivation domain of pseudophosphorylated human
IRF5 strikingly reveals a dimer in which the bulk of intersubunit interactions
involve a highly extended C-terminal region. The corresponding region has
previously been shown to block CBP/p300 binding to unphosphorylated IRF3.
Mutation of key interface residues supports the observed dimer as the
physiologically activated state of IRF5 and IRF3. Thus, phosphorylation is likely
to activate IRF5 and other family members by triggering conformational
rearrangements that switch the C-terminal segment from an autoinihibitory to a
dimerization role.

PMCID: PMC2757928
PMID: 18836453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Dec;28(24):7296-308. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00662-08. Epub 2008 Sep
29.

Functional regulation of MyD88-activated interferon regulatory factor 5 by
K63-linked polyubiquitination.

Balkhi MY(1), Fitzgerald KA, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) plays an important role in the innate
antiviral and inflammatory response. Specific IRF-5 haplotypes are associated
with dysregulated expression of type I interferons and predisposition to
autoimmune disorders. IRF-5 is activated by Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) and TLR9 
via the MyD88 pathway, where it interacts with both MyD88 and the E3 ubiquitin
ligase, TRAF6. To understand the role of these interactions in the regulation of 
IRF-5, we examined the role of ubiquitination and showed that IRF-5 is subjected 
to TRAF6-mediated K63-linked ubiquitination, which is important for IRF-5 nuclear
translocation and target gene regulation. We show that while the murine IRF-5 and
human IRF-5 variant 4 (HuIRF-5v4) and HuIRF-5v5 are ubiquitinated, an IRF-5 bone 
marrow variant mutant containing an internal deletion of 288 nucleotides is not
ubiquitinated. Lysine residues at positions 410 and 411 in a putative TRAF6
consensus binding domain of IRF-5 are the targets of K63-linked ubiquitination.
Mutagenesis of these two lysines abolished IRF-5 ubiquitination, nuclear
translocation, and the IFNA promoter-inducing activity but not the IRF-5-TRAF6
interaction. Finally, we show that IRAK1 associates with IRF-5 and that this
interaction precedes and is required for IRF-5 ubiquitination and activation.
Thus, our findings offer a new mechanistic insight into IRF-5 gene induction
program through hitherto unknown processes of IRF-5 ubiquitination.

PMCID: PMC2593423
PMID: 18824541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Curr Mol Med. 2008 Sep;8(6):551-61.

Genetic susceptibility to autoimmune disorders: clues from gene association and
gene expression studies.

Gutierrez-Roelens I(1), Lauwerys BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Université
Catholique de Louvain, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Susceptibility to autoimmune disorders results from the interaction of multiple
genetic factors that regulate the threshold of autoreactivity. Genome-wide
microsatellite screens and large-scale single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)
association studies have identified chromosomal loci that are associated with
specific disorders including systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, 
juvenile arthritis, multiple sclerosis, and diabetes. Numerous candidate gene
association studies have in turn investigated the association of specific genes
within these chromosomal regions, with susceptibility to autoimmune diseases
(e.g. FcgammaReceptors, TYK2 and systemic lupus). More recently, large-scale
differential gene expression studies performed on selected tissues from patients 
with autoimmune disorders, have led to the identification of gene signatures
associated with the activation of specific pathways in these diseases (e.g.
interferon signature in lupus). In the future, integrated analyses of gene (and
protein) expression together with SNP data will allow us to sketch an
intelligible picture of the genesis of autoimmunity in humans. This review sets
out to illustrate how the most recent advances in the field of systemic lupus
erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis and juvenile arthritis have led to a better
understanding of these disorders.

PMID: 18781962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Scand J Rheumatol. 2008 Nov-Dec;37(6):414-8. doi: 10.1080/03009740802256327.

Association of IRF5 gene polymorphisms with rheumatoid arthritis in a Tunisian
population.

Maalej A(1), Hamad MB, Rebaï A, Teixeira VH, Bahloul Z, Marzouk S, Farid NR,
Ayadi H, Cornelis F, Petit-Teixeira E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Molecular Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Center of
Biotechnology, Sfax, Tunisia. abdellatifmaalej@yahoo.fr

OBJECTIVE: A strong genetic association of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) with the
interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene has been described previously in a
Swedish population, although this result was not confirmed in a French
population. We undertook an association study between IRF5 and the RA phenotype, 
as well as a study with serological markers of RA, in a Tunisian population.
METHODS: A single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP; rs2004640) was genotyped using a 
Taqman 5' allelic discrimination assay on an ABI 7500 real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR) instrument in 140 RA patients and 185 controls. Rheumatoid factor 
(RF) and anti-citrullinated protein/peptide antibodies (ACPA) were determined by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Association was assessed based on the 
chi(2) test and odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs).
RESULTS: The frequency of the TT genotype of the IRF5 SNP rs2004640 differed
significantly between patients and controls (p = 0.01). This difference was
greater when a subgroup of patients with another 'autoimmune' disorder was
considered (p = 0.007). A weak but significant association was also found in a
subgroup of patients who were positive for ACPA (p = 0.04) or erosion (p = 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the TT genotype of the IRF5 (rs2004640)
dimorphism is associated with RA in a Tunisian population.

PMID: 18752149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Aug;58(8):2481-7. doi: 10.1002/art.23613.

Association of the IRF5 risk haplotype with high serum interferon-alpha activity 
in systemic lupus erythematosus patients.

Niewold TB(1), Kelly JA, Flesch MH, Espinoza LR, Harley JB, Crow MK.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, Section of Rheumatology, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
tniewold@medicine.bsd.uchicago <tniewold@medicine.bsd.uchicago>

OBJECTIVE: A haplotype of the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene has been
associated with the risk of developing systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and
our previous studies have demonstrated that high levels of serum interferon-alpha
(IFNalpha) activity are a heritable risk factor for SLE. The aim of this study
was to determine whether the IRF5 SLE risk haplotype mediates the risk of SLE by 
predisposing patients to the development of high levels of serum IFNalpha
activity.
METHODS: IFNalpha levels in 199 SLE patients of European and Hispanic ancestry
were measured with a sensitive functional reporter cell assay. The rs2004640,
rs3807306, rs10488631, and rs2280714 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
IRF5 were genotyped in these patients. Haplotypes were categorized as SLE risk,
neutral, or protective based on published data.
RESULTS: SLE patients with risk/risk and risk/neutral IRF5 genotypes had higher
serum IFNalpha activity than did those with protective/protective and
neutral/protective genotypes (P = 0.025). This differential effect of IRF5
genotype on serum IFNalpha levels was driven largely by SLE patients who were
positive for either anti-RNA binding protein (anti-RBP) or anti-double-stranded
DNA (anti-dsDNA) autoantibodies (P = 0.012 for risk/risk or risk/neutral versus
protective/protective or neutral/protective). The rs3807306 genotype was
independently associated with high serum IFNalpha in this autoantibody group. We 
found no difference in IFNalpha activity according to IRF5 genotype in patients
lacking either type of autoantibody or in patients positive for both classes of
autoantibody.
CONCLUSION: The IRF5 SLE risk haplotype is associated with higher serum IFNalpha 
activity in SLE patients, and this effect is most prominent in patients positive 
for either anti-RBP or anti-dsDNA autoantibodies. This study demonstrates the
biologic relevance of the SLE risk haplotype of IRF5 at the protein level.

PMCID: PMC2621107
PMID: 18668568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Sep 15;17(18):2868-76. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn184. Epub 2008 Jun
25.

A risk haplotype of STAT4 for systemic lupus erythematosus is over-expressed,
correlates with anti-dsDNA and shows additive effects with two risk alleles of
IRF5.

Sigurdsson S(1), Nordmark G, Garnier S, Grundberg E, Kwan T, Nilsson O, Eloranta 
ML, Gunnarsson I, Svenungsson E, Sturfelt G, Bengtsson AA, Jönsen A, Truedsson L,
Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Eriksson C, Alm G, Göring HH, Pastinen T, Syvänen AC,
Rönnblom L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is the prototype autoimmune disease where
genes regulated by type I interferon (IFN) are over-expressed and contribute to
the disease pathogenesis. Because signal transducer and activator of
transcription 4 (STAT4) plays a key role in the type I IFN receptor signaling, we
performed a candidate gene study of a comprehensive set of single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNPs) in STAT4 in Swedish patients with SLE. We found that 10 out
of 53 analyzed SNPs in STAT4 were associated with SLE, with the strongest signal 
of association (P = 7.1 x 10(-8)) for two perfectly linked SNPs rs10181656 and
rs7582694. The risk alleles of these 10 SNPs form a common risk haplotype for SLE
(P = 1.7 x 10(-5)). According to conditional logistic regression analysis the SNP
rs10181656 or rs7582694 accounts for all of the observed association signal. By
quantitative analysis of the allelic expression of STAT4 we found that the risk
allele of STAT4 was over-expressed in primary human cells of mesenchymal origin, 
but not in B-cells, and that the risk allele of STAT4 was over-expressed (P = 8.4
x 10(-5)) in cells carrying the risk haplotype for SLE compared with cells with a
non-risk haplotype. The risk allele of the SNP rs7582694 in STAT4 correlated to
production of anti-dsDNA (double-stranded DNA) antibodies and displayed a
multiplicatively increased, 1.82-fold risk of SLE with two independent risk
alleles of the IRF5 (interferon regulatory factor 5) gene.

PMCID: PMC2525501
PMID: 18579578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Aug;36(13):e82. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn373. Epub 2008 Jun
18.

Long-range, high-throughput haplotype determination via haplotype-fusion PCR and 
ligation haplotyping.

Turner DJ(1), Tyler-Smith C, Hurles ME.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Cambridge, UK. 
djt@sanger.ac.uk

Ligation Haplotyping is a robust, novel method for experimental determination of 
haplotypes over long distances, which can be applied to assaying both sequence
and structural variation. The simplicity and efficacy of the method for
genotyping large chromosomal rearrangements and haplotyping SNPs over long
distances make it a valuable and powerful addition to the methodological
repertoire, which will be beneficial to studies of population genetics and
evolution, disease association and inheritance, and genomic variation. We
illustrate the versatility of the method both by genotyping a Yp paracentric
inversion, found in approximately 60% of Northwest European males, that strongly 
influences the germline rate of infertility-causing XY translocations and by
haplotyping two autosomal SNPs that lie 16.4 kb apart on chromosome 7, and which 
influence an individual's susceptibility to systemic lupus erythematosus.

PMCID: PMC2490767
PMID: 18562465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 May;6(5):770-84. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0114.

Interferon regulatory factors IRF5 and IRF7 inhibit growth and induce senescence 
in immortal Li-Fraumeni fibroblasts.

Li Q(1), Tang L, Roberts PC, Kraniak JM, Fridman AL, Kulaeva OI, Tehrani OS,
Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Genetics, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 110 East Warren, Detroit,
MI 48201, USA.

Cellular immortalization is one of the prerequisite steps in carcinogenesis. By
gene expression profiling, we have found that genes in the interferon (IFN)
pathway were dysregulated during the spontaneous cellular immortalization of
fibroblasts from Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) patients with germ-line mutations in 
p53. IFN signaling pathway genes were down-regulated by epigenetic silencing
during immortalization, and some of these same IFN-regulated genes were activated
during replicative senescence. Bisulfite sequencing of the promoter regions of
two IFN regulatory transcription factors (IRF5 and IRF7) revealed that IRF7, but 
not IRF5, was epigenetically silenced by methylation of CpG islands in immortal
LFS cells. The induction of IRF7 gene by IFNalpha in immortal LFS cells was
potentiated by pretreatment with the demethylation agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. 
Overexpression of IRF5 and IRF7 revealed that they can act either alone or in
tandem to activate other IFN-regulated genes. In addition, they serve to inhibit 
the proliferation rate and induce a senescence-related phenotype in immortal LFS 
cells. Furthermore, polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid treatment of the
IRF-overexpressing cells showed a more rapid induction of several IFN-regulated
genes. We conclude that the epigenetic inactivation of the IFN pathway plays a
critical role in cellular immortalization, and the reactivation of IFN-regulated 
genes by transcription factors IRF5 and/or IRF7 is sufficient to induce cellular 
senescence. The IFN pathway may provide valuable molecular targets for
therapeutic interventions at early stages of cancer development.

PMCID: PMC3842195
PMID: 18505922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Autoimmun Rev. 2008 May;7(5):345-51. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2008.01.001. Epub 2008
Feb 1.

The complex immunogenetic basis of systemic lupus erythematosus.

Castro J(1), Balada E, Ordi-Ros J, Vilardell-Tarrés M.

Author information: 
(1)Autoimmune Diseases Research Laboratory, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute,
Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129, Barcelona, Spain.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a systemic autoimmune disease of unknown
etiology with a complex genetic basis that includes many susceptibility genes on 
multiple chromosomes. As complex human diseases like SLE involve multiple,
interacting genetic and environmental determinants, identifying genes for complex
traits is challenging and has had limited success so far. Several key approaches 
that are necessary to identify disease susceptibility genes in common diseases
such as SLE are now available. Collectively, these approaches will allow the
prioritization of candidate genes based on available knowledge of map position
and biologic relevance. They will also allow us to obtain the genomic structure
of these genes as well as to study sequence variants that will facilitate the
identification of genes that are important in the development and expression
(severity) of lupus and associated phenotypes. Although it is still a
labor-intensive and expensive project to identify susceptibility genes in common 
diseases such as SLE, the new techniques that are now being used will undoubtedly
improve gene mapping in such a kind of diseases. In this review we highlight the 
current findings in the genetics of human SLE after using these approaches.

PMID: 18486920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 May;58(5):1264-74. doi: 10.1002/art.23426.

Association of interferon regulatory factor 5 haplotypes, similar to that found
in systemic lupus erythematosus, in a large subgroup of patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis.

Dieguez-Gonzalez R(1), Calaza M, Perez-Pampin E, de la Serna AR,
Fernandez-Gutierrez B, Castañeda S, Largo R, Joven B, Narvaez J, Navarro F,
Marenco JL, Vicario JL, Blanco FJ, Fernandez-Lopez JC, Caliz R, Collado-Escobar
MD, Carreño L, Lopez-Longo J, Cañete JD, Gomez-Reino JJ, Gonzalez A.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Clinico Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Previous studies have shown either a lack of effect of IRF5
polymorphisms or an association of the IRF5 gene in only a minor subset of
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) patients in whom anti-citrullinated protein antibodies 
(ACPAs) are absent. The present study was undertaken to investigate the role of
genetic variation in IRF5 in susceptibility to RA.
METHODS: Nine IRF5 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were studied in 1,338
patients with RA and 1,342 control subjects in analyses of exploratory and
replication sample collections, with stratification according to sex and by the
presence or absence of ACPAs, rheumatoid factor, the shared epitope, the 620W
PTPN22 allele, and erosions. A meta-analysis that included results from previous 
studies was also carried out.
RESULTS: Our findings together with those from previous studies, in a total of
4,620 RA patients and 3,741 controls, showed a significant association of the
rs2004640 IRF5 SNP in RA patients as a whole (odds ratio [OR] 0.88, 95%
confidence interval [95% CI] 0.83-0.94; P = 6.5 x 10(-5) versus controls). This
association was stronger in ACPA- patients, but was also present in ACPA+
patients (from 3 sample collections). Further analysis of our exploratory sample 
collection showed that only patients in the ACPA+ and SE- group lacked an
association with IRF5 SNPs. All of the remaining RA patients (ACPA- or SE+)
showed a strong association with IRF5 SNPs, which followed a complex pattern of
opposing effects mediated by independent haplotypes. The susceptibility haplotype
showed an OR of 1.8 (95% CI 1.4-2.3; P = 1.2 x 10(-6) versus controls), whereas
the protective haplotype showed an OR of 0.76 (95% CI 0.6-0.98; P = 0.046 versus 
controls).
CONCLUSION: IRF5 polymorphisms seem to influence RA susceptibility in a large
subgroup of patients, following a pattern of association very similar to that
described in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus.

PMID: 18438842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Ann Rheum Dis. 2009 Mar;68(3):377-83. doi: 10.1136/ard.2007.085704. Epub 2008 Apr
13.

A single nucleotide polymorphism in the IRF5 promoter region is associated with
susceptibility to rheumatoid arthritis in the Japanese population.

Shimane K(1), Kochi Y, Yamada R, Okada Y, Suzuki A, Miyatake A, Kubo M, Nakamura 
Y, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Allergy and Rheumatology, Graduate School of Medicine, the
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is a member of the IRF family
of transcription factors, which regulate the production of proinflammatory
cytokines. Polymorphisms in the IRF5 gene have been associated with
susceptibility to systemic lupus erythaematosus (SLE) in Caucasian and Asian
populations, but their involvement in other autoimmune diseases is still
uncertain. Here, we assessed the genetic role of IRF5 in susceptibility to
rheumatoid arthritis (RA) in Japanese subjects.
METHODS: We selected 13 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and a CGGGG
insertion-deletion polymorphism in the IRF5 gene. We performed 2 sets of
case-control comparisons using Japanese subjects (first set: 830 patients with RA
and 658 controls; second set: 1112 patients with RA and 940 controls), and then
performed a stratified analysis using human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DRB1 shared
epitope (SE) status. We genotyped the SNPs using TaqMan assays.
RESULTS: A significant association of the rs729302 A allele with RA
susceptibility was found in both sets (odds ratio (OR) 1.22, 95% CI 1.09 to 1.35,
p<0.001 in the combined analysis). When the patients were stratified by the SE,
the rs729302 A allele was found to confer increased risk to RA in patients that
were SE negative (OR 1.50, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.92, p = 0.001) as compared with
patients carrying the SE (OR 1.11, 95% CI 0.93 to 1.33, p = 0.24). In both sets, 
no genotyped polymorphisms were significantly associated with RA susceptibility, 
but rs729302 was significantly associated.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that the promoter polymorphism of IRF5 is a 
genetic factor conferring predisposition to RA, and that it contributes
considerably to disease pathogenesis in patients that were SE negative.

PMID: 18408250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 23;283(21):14295-308. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800501200. Epub
2008 Mar 10.

Functional characterization of murine interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) and 
its role in the innate antiviral response.

Paun A(1), Reinert JT, Jiang Z, Medin C, Balkhi MY, Fitzgerald KA, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Although the role of human IRF-5 in antiviral and inflammatory responses in vitro
has been well characterized, much remains to be elucidated about murine IRF-5.
Murine IRF-5, unlike the heavily spliced human gene, is primarily expressed as a 
full-length transcript, with only a single splice variant that was detected in
very low levels in the bone marrow of C57BL/6J mice. This bone marrow variant
contains a 288-nucleotide deletion from exons 4-6 and exhibits impaired
transcriptional activity. The murine IRF-5 can be activated by both TBK1 and
MyD88 to form homodimers and bind to and activate transcription of type I
interferon and inflammatory cytokine genes. The importance of IRF-5 in the
antiviral and inflammatory response in vivo is highlighted by marked reductions
in serum levels of type I interferon and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha)
in Newcastle disease virus-infected Irf5(-)(/)(-) mice. IRF-5 is critical for
TLR3-, TLR4-, and TLR9-dependent induction of TNFalpha in CD11c(+) dendritic
cells. In contrast, TLR9, but not TLR3/4-mediated induction of type I IFN
transcription, is dependent on IRF-5 in these cells. In addition, IRF-5 regulates
TNFalpha but not type I interferon gene transcription in Newcastle disease
virus-infected peritoneal macrophages. Altogether, these data reveal the cell
type-specific importance of IRF-5 in MyD88-mediated antiviral pathways and the
widespread role of IRF-5 in the regulation of inflammatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC2386920
PMID: 18332133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 May;28(5):975-82. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.108.163733. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Variants of the interferon regulatory factor 5 gene regulate expression of IRF5
mRNA in atherosclerotic tissue but are not associated with myocardial infarction.

Mälarstig A(1), Sigurdsson S, Eriksson P, Paulsson-Berne G, Hedin U, Wallentin L,
Siegbahn A, Hamsten A, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Atherosclerosis Research Unit, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
anders.malarstig@ki.se

BACKGROUND: Signaling events after activation of toll-like receptors (TLRs) are
important mechanisms promoting inflammation in the atherosclerotic plaque. INF
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) is one of the mediators of downstream effects of TLRs.
Several single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IRF5 gene have been found
to be associated with systemic lupus erythematosus.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We examined IRF5 mRNA expression in carotid atherosclerotic 
tissue (n=99) and the case-control association between SNPs in the IRF5 gene with
myocardial infarction (MI) (n=376+387) and unstable coronary artery disease (CAD)
(n=3101+445). Among unstable CAD patients, association of IRF5 SNPs with
recurrent coronary events (n=401) was also investigated. The IRF5 mRNA expression
was increased in atherosclerotic tissue compared with control tissue (P<0.001).
Significant associations with IRF5 expression was observed for 6 of 10 SNPs in
the study. However, the IRF5 SNPs examined were neither associated with the risk 
of precocious MI, nor with unstable CAD or risk of recurrent cardiovascular
events in unstable CAD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: IRF5 mRNA is expressed in cells in atherosclerotic tissue and its
expression is modified by SNPs in the IRF5 gene. Genetic variation at the IRF5
locus was, however, not associated with CAD or related phenotypes.

PMID: 18323517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Arthritis Rheum. 2008 Mar;58(3):826-34. doi: 10.1002/art.23216.

Association of IRF5 polymorphisms with systemic lupus erythematosus in a Japanese
population: support for a crucial role of intron 1 polymorphisms.

Kawasaki A(1), Kyogoku C, Ohashi J, Miyashita R, Hikami K, Kusaoi M, Tokunaga K, 
Takasaki Y, Hashimoto H, Behrens TW, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the IRF5 gene, which encodes interferon
regulatory factor 5, is associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in a
Japanese population.
METHODS: A case-control study was performed in 277 SLE patients and 201 healthy
controls. Associations between the IRF5 genotype and levels of messenger RNA
(mRNA) for interferon (IFN) pathway genes were examined using an mRNA expression 
database of HapMap samples.
RESULTS: Carriers of the rs2004640T single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) were
slightly increased among SLE patients (58.8%) as compared with controls (50.2%). 
When data from our Japanese population were combined with previously published
data from a Korean population, the T allele frequency was found to be
significantly increased in SLE patients (P = 8.3 x 10(-5)). While no association 
was observed for the rs10954213 SNP or the exon 6 insertion/deletion, significant
associations with 3 intron 1 SNPs (-4001, rs6953165, and rs41298401) were found. 
The allele frequency of rs41298401G was significantly decreased in SLE patients
(13.0% versus 18.7% in controls; P = 0.017), and the allele frequency of
rs6953165G, which was in absolute linkage disequilibrium with -4001A, was
increased in SLE patients (8.8% versus 5.2% in controls; P = 0.034). The
Caucasian risk haplotype was not present; instead, a protective haplotype
carrying rs2004640G, rs41298401G, the deletion in exon 6, and rs10954213A was
identified. SNP rs10954213, but not intron 1 SNPs, was associated with IRF5 at
the mRNA level; nevertheless, intron 1 SNPs were also associated with levels of
mRNA for several IFN pathway genes, suggesting a functional role.
CONCLUSION: IRF5 was found to be associated with SLE in Asian populations. Intron
1 SNPs, rather than exon 6 and 3'-untranslated region polymorphisms, appeared to 
play a crucial role.

PMID: 18311811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Viral Hepat. 2008 Apr;15(4):261-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2007.00940.x.

Methamphetamine enhances Hepatitis C virus replication in human hepatocytes.

Ye L(1), Peng JS, Wang X, Wang YJ, Luo GX, Ho WZ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy & Immunology, Joseph Stokes, Jr. Research Institute at The
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Very little is known about the interactions between hepatitis C virus (HCV) and
methamphetamine, which is a highly abused psychostimulant and a known risk factor
for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)/HCV infection. This study examined whether
methamphetamine has the ability to inhibit innate immunity in the host cells,
facilitating HCV replication in human hepatocytes. Methamphetamine inhibited
intracellular interferon alpha expression in human hepatocytes, which was
associated with the increase in HCV replication. In addition, methamphetamine
also compromised the anti-HCV effect of recombinant interferon alpha. Further
investigation of mechanism(s) responsible for the methamphetamine action revealed
that methamphetamine was able to inhibit the expression of the signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 1, a key modulator in interferon-mediated immune
and biological responses. Methamphetamine also down-regulated the expression of
interferon regulatory factor-5, a crucial transcriptional factor that activates
the interferon pathway. These in vitro findings that methamphetamine compromises 
interferon alpha-mediated innate immunity against HCV infection indicate that
methamphetamine may have a cofactor role in the immunopathogenesis of HCV
disease.

PMCID: PMC2675873
PMID: 18307590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Reumatol Clin. 2008 Mar;4 Suppl 1:1-4. doi: 10.1016/S1699-258X(08)76131-X. Epub
2009 Feb 3.

[Common genetic factors in autoimmunity].

[Article in Spanish]

Rueda B(1), Orozco G, Sánchez E, Oliver J, Martín J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra. CSIC. Granada. España.

Autoimmune diseases (AIDs), including rheumatoid arthritis (RA) and systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) among others, are characterized by a complex etiology
in which the combination of several genetic and environmental factors leads to an
altered immune response. Several lines of evidence, such as the presence of
chromosomal regions associated with several AIDs and the existence of similar
gene expression patterns in autoimmune disorders, suggest that different AIDs
share common genetic factors. The identification of common genetic factors
associated with autoimmunity is of great relevance, since it will allow a better 
understanding of disease pathogenesis and could help for the development of
molecular diagnosis tools and new therapeutic targets. In the past few years, a
great progress has been made in the knowledge of the common genetic factors
associated with autoimmunity. The PTPN22 gene, an important regulator of T cell
response, has been identified as a relevant genetic marker for AIDs. This gene is
implicated in the susceptibility to autoimmune disorders such as, RA, SLE, and
type 1 diabetes (T1D). In the case of RA the association with the PTPN22 gene is 
the most replicated after association with HLA genes. In addition, genes
implicated in the altered balance between cytokines, such as MIF and IRF5, have
been identified as genetic factors predisposing to AIDs.

Copyright © 2008 Elsevier España S.L. Barcelona. Published by Elsevier Espana.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21794545  [PubMed]


378. Genes Immun. 2008 Apr;9(3):187-94. doi: 10.1038/gene.2008.4. Epub 2008 Feb 21.

Interferon regulatory factor-5 is genetically associated with systemic lupus
erythematosus in African Americans.

Kelly JA(1), Kelley JM, Kaufman KM, Kilpatrick J, Bruner GR, Merrill JT, James
JA, Frank SG, Reams E, Brown EE, Gibson AW, Marion MC, Langefeld CD, Li QZ, Karp 
DR, Wakeland EK, Petri M, Ramsey-Goldman R, Reveille JD, Vilá LM, Alarcón GS,
Kimberly RP, Harley JB, Edberg JC.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Increased expression of interferon (IFN)-inducible genes is implicated in the
pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). One transcription factor
responsible for regulating IFN, interferon regulatory factor-5 (IRF5), has been
associated with SLE in genetic studies of Asian, Caucasian and Hispanic
populations. We genotyped up to seven polymorphic loci in or near IRF5 in a total
of 4870 African-American and Caucasian subjects (1829 SLE sporadic cases and 3041
controls) from two independent studies. Population-based case-control comparisons
were performed using the Pearson's chi(2)-test statistics and haplotypes were
inferred using HaploView. We observed significant novel associations with the
IRF5 variants rs2004640 and rs3807306 in African Americans and replicated
previously reported associations in Caucasians. While we identified risk
haplotypes, the majority of haplotypic effects were accounted for by one SNP
(rs3807306) in conditional analyses. We conclude that genetic variants of IRF5
associate with SLE in multiple populations, providing evidence that IRF5 is
likely to be a crucial component in SLE pathogenesis among multiple ethnic
groups.

PMID: 18288123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Med Genet. 2008 Jun;45(6):362-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2007.055012. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene variants are associated with multiple 
sclerosis in three distinct populations.

Kristjansdottir G(1), Sandling JK, Bonetti A, Roos IM, Milani L, Wang C,
Gustafsdottir SM, Sigurdsson S, Lundmark A, Tienari PJ, Koivisto K, Elovaara I,
Pirttilä T, Reunanen M, Peltonen L, Saarela J, Hillert J, Olsson T, Landegren U, 
Alcina A, Fernández O, Leyva L, Guerrero M, Lucas M, Izquierdo G, Matesanz F,
Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: IRF5 is a transcription factor involved both in the type I interferon
and the toll-like receptor signalling pathways. Previously, IRF5 has been found
to be associated with systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis and
inflammatory bowel diseases. Here we investigated whether polymorphisms in the
IRF5 gene would be associated with yet another disease with features of
autoimmunity, multiple sclerosis (MS).
METHODS: We genotyped nine single nucleotide polymorphisms and one
insertion-deletion polymorphism in the IRF5 gene in a collection of 2337 patients
with MS and 2813 controls from three populations: two case-control cohorts from
Spain and Sweden, and a set of MS trio families from Finland.
RESULTS: Two single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) (rs4728142, rs3807306), and a 
5 bp insertion-deletion polymorphism located in the promoter and first intron of 
the IRF5 gene, showed association signals with values of p<0.001 when the data
from all cohorts were combined. The predisposing alleles were present on the same
common haplotype in all populations. Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
we observed allele specific differences in protein binding for the SNP rs4728142 
and the 5 bp indel, and by a proximity ligation assay we demonstrated increased
binding of the transcription factor SP1 to the risk allele of the 5 bp indel.
CONCLUSION: These findings add IRF5 to the short list of genes shown to be
associated with MS in more than one population. Our study adds to the evidence
that there might be genes or pathways that are common in multiple autoimmune
diseases, and that the type I interferon system is likely to be involved in the
development of these diseases.

PMCID: PMC2564860
PMID: 18285424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 19;105(7):2556-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0712295105. Epub 2008 Feb 11.

A cell-type-specific requirement for IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) in
Fas-induced apoptosis.

Couzinet A(1), Tamura K, Chen HM, Nishimura K, Wang Z, Morishita Y, Takeda K,
Yagita H, Yanai H, Taniguchi T, Tamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Immunology and Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine
and Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0033, Japan.

Apoptosis is a highly regulated process of cell suicide that occurs during
development, host defense, and pathophysiology. The transcription factor IFN
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), known to be involved in the activation of innate
immune responses, recently has been shown to be critical for DNA damage-induced
apoptosis and tumor suppression. Here, we report on a cell-type-specific role of 
IRF5 in promoting apoptosis upon signaling through the death receptor Fas
(CD95/APO-1/TNFRSF6). In particular, we show that mice deficient in the Irf5 gene
are resistant to hepatic apoptosis and lethality in response to the in vivo
administration of a Fas-activating monoclonal antibody, and that IRF5 is involved
in a stage of Fas signaling that precedes the activation of caspase 8 and c-Jun
N-terminal kinase (JNK). In addition to hepatocytes, IRF5 is also required for
apoptosis in dendritic cells activated by hypomethylated CpG but not in
thymocytes and embryonic fibroblasts in vitro. Thus, these findings reveal a
cell-type-specific function for IRF5 in the complex regulatory mechanism of
death-receptor-induced apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2268175
PMID: 18268344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Rheumatol. 2008 Feb;35(2):360-2.

Association of a haplotype of IRF5 gene with systemic lupus erythematosus in
Chinese.

Siu HO, Yang W, Lau CS, Chan TM, Wong RW, Wong WH, Lau YL, Alarcon-Riquelme ME.

PMID: 18260169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Nat Genet. 2008 Feb;40(2):204-10. doi: 10.1038/ng.81. Epub 2008 Jan 20.

Genome-wide association scan in women with systemic lupus erythematosus
identifies susceptibility variants in ITGAM, PXK, KIAA1542 and other loci.

International Consortium for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus Genetics (SLEGEN)(1),
Harley JB, Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Criswell LA, Jacob CO, Kimberly RP, Moser KL,
Tsao BP, Vyse TJ, Langefeld CD, Nath SK, Guthridge JM, Cobb BL, Mirel DB, Marion 
MC, Williams AH, Divers J, Wang W, Frank SG, Namjou B, Gabriel SB, Lee AT,
Gregersen PK, Behrens TW, Taylor KE, Fernando M, Zidovetzki R, Gaffney PM, Edberg
JC, Rioux JD, Ojwang JO, James JA, Merrill JT, Gilkeson GS, Seldin MF, Yin H,
Baechler EC, Li QZ, Wakeland EK, Bruner GR, Kaufman KM, Kelly JA.

Author information: 
(1)Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, 825 NE 13th Street, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma 73104, USA. SLEGEN@wfubmc.edu

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Feb;40(2):131-2.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a common systemic autoimmune disease with
complex etiology but strong clustering in families (lambda(S) = approximately
30). We performed a genome-wide association scan using 317,501 SNPs in 720 women 
of European ancestry with SLE and in 2,337 controls, and we genotyped
consistently associated SNPs in two additional independent sample sets totaling
1,846 affected women and 1,825 controls. Aside from the expected strong
association between SLE and the HLA region on chromosome 6p21 and the previously 
confirmed non-HLA locus IRF5 on chromosome 7q32, we found evidence of association
with replication (1.1 x 10(-7) < P(overall) < 1.6 x 10(-23); odds ratio =
0.82-1.62) in four regions: 16p11.2 (ITGAM), 11p15.5 (KIAA1542), 3p14.3 (PXK) and
1q25.1 (rs10798269). We also found evidence for association (P < 1 x 10(-5)) at
FCGR2A, PTPN22 and STAT4, regions previously associated with SLE and other
autoimmune diseases, as well as at > or =9 other loci (P < 2 x 10(-7)). Our
results show that numerous genes, some with known immune-related functions,
predispose to SLE.

PMCID: PMC3712260
PMID: 18204446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. N Engl J Med. 2008 Feb 28;358(9):900-9. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0707865. Epub 2008 Jan
20.

Association of systemic lupus erythematosus with C8orf13-BLK and ITGAM-ITGAX.

Hom G(1), Graham RR, Modrek B, Taylor KE, Ortmann W, Garnier S, Lee AT, Chung SA,
Ferreira RC, Pant PV, Ballinger DG, Kosoy R, Demirci FY, Kamboh MI, Kao AH, Tian 
C, Gunnarsson I, Bengtsson AA, Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Petri M, Manzi S, Seldin MF,
Rönnblom L, Syvänen AC, Criswell LA, Gregersen PK, Behrens TW.

Author information: 
(1)Genentech, South San Francisco, CA 94080, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Feb 28;358(9):956-61.

BACKGROUND: Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a clinically heterogeneous
disease in which the risk of disease is influenced by complex genetic and
environmental contributions. Alleles of HLA-DRB1, IRF5, and STAT4 are established
susceptibility genes; there is strong evidence for the existence of additional
risk loci.
METHODS: We genotyped more than 500,000 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
DNA samples from 1311 case subjects with SLE and 1783 control subjects; all
subjects were North Americans of European descent. Genotypes from 1557 additional
control subjects were obtained from public data repositories. We measured the
association between the SNPs and SLE after applying strict quality-control
filters to reduce technical artifacts and to correct for the presence of
population stratification. Replication of the top loci was performed in 793 case 
subjects and 857 control subjects from Sweden.
RESULTS: Genetic variation in the region upstream from the transcription
initiation site of the gene encoding B lymphoid tyrosine kinase (BLK) and C8orf13
(chromosome 8p23.1) was associated with disease risk in both the U.S. and Swedish
case-control series (rs13277113; odds ratio, 1.39; P=1x10(-10)) and also with
altered levels of messenger RNA in B-cell lines. In addition, variants on
chromosome 16p11.22, near the genes encoding integrin alpha M (ITGAM, or CD11b)
and integrin alpha X (ITGAX), were associated with SLE in the combined sample
(rs11574637; odds ratio, 1.33; P=3x10(-11)).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified and then confirmed through replication two new genetic
loci for SLE: a promoter-region allele associated with reduced expression of BLK 
and increased expression of C8orf13 and variants in the ITGAM-ITGAX region.

Copyright 2008 Massachusetts Medical Society.

PMID: 18204098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Invest Dermatol. 2008 Jul;128(7):1704-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.jid.5701254. Epub 2008
Jan 17.

IFN-regulatory factor 5 gene variants interact with the class I MHC locus in the 
Swedish psoriasis population.

Sánchez FO(1), Linga Reddy MV, Mallbris L, Sakuraba K, Ståhle M, Alarcón-Riquelme
ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Unit of Dermatology and Venereology,
Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
Fabio.Sanchez@ki.se

Erratum in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2008 Oct;128(10):2546. Mallbris, Lotus [added].

Psoriasis is a multifactorial disease of the skin with significant comorbidities 
of the musculoskeletal and cardiovascular system, which affects 2-3% of the
Caucasian population. Failure to regulate prolonged T-helper 1-mediated
inflammation is central to psoriasis and is a feature shared with other
inflammatory diseases. IFNs are important initiators/regulators of inflammation
that among other things can affect the expression of the main genetic determinant
in psoriasis, namely HLA-C. Externally administered IFN-alpha, as in patients
treated for viral infections, and IFN-alpha produced by plasmacytoid dendritic
cells is a known trigger of psoriasis. IFNgamma is characteristically increased
in psoriasis lesions. Expression of IFNs is controlled by factors such as
IFN-regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) whose polymorphic haplotypes were recently found
to associate with increased risk of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The
hypothesis underlying this study was that polymorphisms in the IRF5 gene
contribute to inadequate control of inflammation in psoriasis. This hypothesis
was tested by comparing the distribution of genotypes and haplotypes at IRF5
derived from genotyping single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs2004640,
rs2070197, rs10954213, and rs2280714 in psoriasis patients and population-matched
controls from the Stockholm Psoriasis Cohort. Polymorphisms at IRF5 did not
associate with psoriasis per se; however, an interaction with class I major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes was found.

PMID: 18200047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Autoimmunity. 2007 Dec;40(8):591-601.

The genetics and biology of Irf5-mediated signaling in lupus.

Kozyrev SV(1), Alarcon-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Rudbeck Laboratory, Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala, Sweden.
sergey.kozyrev@genpat.uu.se

Recently much attention was attracted to the importance of the type I interferon 
pathway in the initiation and development of the autoimmune disease systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Many SLE patients have increased serum levels of
IFN-alpha and display an IFN gene expression "signature" characterized by strong 
overexpression of IFN-responsive genes in leukocytes and target tissues.
Moreover, about 20% of cancer patients treated with IFN-alpha therapy manifest
symptoms resembling SLE and some later develop the disease. One of the key genes 
of the IFN-alpha pathway, IRF5, was found to be strongly associated with SLE. Two
functional SNPs lead to alternative splicing and altered steady-state level of
IRF5 gene expression. Besides, the gene has a polymorphic inserion/deletion in
exon 6, which contributes to the diversity in the isoform pattern of IRF5.
Interestingly, recent studies have not found association of IRF5 with the other
autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis or psoriasis, suggesting the
unique role for IRF5 in the development of lupus. Here, we present the current
knowledge on IRF5 genetics and its biological function and discuss the possible
ways in which IRF5 contributes to susceptibility to SLE.

PMID: 18075793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Mar 15;17(6):872-81. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

Comprehensive evaluation of the genetic variants of interferon regulatory factor 
5 (IRF5) reveals a novel 5 bp length polymorphism as strong risk factor for
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Sigurdsson S(1), Göring HH, Kristjansdottir G, Milani L, Nordmark G, Sandling JK,
Eloranta ML, Feng D, Sangster-Guity N, Gunnarsson I, Svenungsson E, Sturfelt G,
Jönsen A, Truedsson L, Barnes BJ, Alm G, Rönnblom L, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

We analyzed a comprehensive set of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
length polymorphisms in the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene for their 
association with the autoimmune disease systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in 485
Swedish patients and 563 controls. We found 16 SNPs and two length polymorphisms 
that display association with SLE (P < 0.0005, OR > 1.4). Using a Bayesian model 
selection and averaging approach we identified parsimonious models with exactly
two variants of IRF5 that are independently associated with SLE. The variants of 
IRF5 with the highest posterior probabilities (1.00 and 0.71, respectively) of
being causal in SLE are a SNP (rs10488631) located 3' of IRF5, and a novel CGGGG 
insertion-deletion (indel) polymorphism located 64 bp upstream of the first
untranslated exon (exon 1A) of IRF5. The CGGGG indel explains the association
signal from multiple SNPs in the IRF5 gene, including rs2004640, rs10954213 and
rs729302 previously considered to be causal variants in SLE. The CGGGG indel
contains three or four repeats of the sequence CGGGG with the longer allele
containing an additional SP1 binding site as the risk allele for SLE. Using
electrophoretic mobility shift assays we show increased binding of protein to the
risk allele of the CGGGG indel and using a minigene reporter assay we show
increased expression of IRF5 mRNA from a promoter containing this allele.
Increased expression of IRF5 protein was observed in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells from SLE patients carrying the risk allele of the CGGGG indel. We have
found that the same IRF5 allele also confers risk for inflammatory bowel diseases
and multiple sclerosis, suggesting a general role for IRF5 in autoimmune
diseases.

PMID: 18063667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Nat Genet. 2008 Jan;40(1):83-9. Epub 2007 Dec 2.

Polymorphism at the TNF superfamily gene TNFSF4 confers susceptibility to
systemic lupus erythematosus.

Cunninghame Graham DS(1), Graham RR, Manku H, Wong AK, Whittaker JC, Gaffney PM, 
Moser KL, Rioux JD, Altshuler D, Behrens TW, Vyse TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Genetics and Rheumatology, Imperial College Faculty of
Medicine, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multisystem complex autoimmune disease of
uncertain etiology (OMIM 152700). Over recent years a genetic component to SLE
susceptibility has been established. Recent successes with association studies in
SLE have identified genes including IRF5 (refs. 4,5) and FCGR3B. Two tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) superfamily members located within intervals showing
genetic linkage with SLE are TNFSF4 (also known as OX40L; 1q25), which is
expressed on activated antigen-presenting cells (APCs) and vascular endothelial
cells, and also its unique receptor, TNFRSF4 (also known as OX40; 1p36), which is
primarily expressed on activated CD4+ T cells. TNFSF4 produces a potent
co-stimulatory signal for activated CD4+ T cells after engagement of TNFRSF4
(ref. 11). Using both a family-based and a case-control study design, we show
that the upstream region of TNFSF4 contains a single risk haplotype for SLE,
which is correlated with increased expression of both cell-surface TNFSF4 and the
TNFSF4 transcript. We hypothesize that increased expression of TNFSF4 predisposes
to SLE either by quantitatively augmenting T cell-APC interaction or by
influencing the functional consequences of T cell activation via TNFRSF4.

PMCID: PMC3705866
PMID: 18059267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Dec;56(12):4164-73.

Identification of novel susceptibility genes in childhood-onset systemic lupus
erythematosus using a uniquely designed candidate gene pathway platform.

Jacob CO(1), Reiff A, Armstrong DL, Myones BL, Silverman E, Klein-Gitelman M,
McCurdy D, Wagner-Weiner L, Nocton JJ, Solomon A, Zidovetzki R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Southern California School of Medicine, 
2011 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. Jacob@usc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Childhood-onset systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) presents a unique
subgroup of patients for genetic study. The present study was undertaken to
identify susceptibility genes contributing to SLE, using a novel candidate gene
pathway microarray platform to investigate gene expression in patients with
childhood-onset SLE and both of their parents.
METHODS: Utilizing bioinformatic tools, a platform of 9,412 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) from 1,204 genes was designed and validated. Molecular
inversion probes and high-throughput SNP technologies were used for assay
development. Seven hundred fifty three subjects, corresponding to 251 full trios 
of childhood-onset SLE families, were genotyped and analyzed using transmission
disequilibrium testing (TDT) and multitest corrections.
RESULTS: Family-based TDT showed a significant association of SLE with a N673S
polymorphism in the P-selectin gene (SELP) (P = 5.74 x 10(-6)) and a C203S
polymorphism in the interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 gene (IRAK1) (P = 
9.58 x 10(-6)). These 2 SNPs had a false discovery rate for multitest correction 
of <0.05, and therefore a >95% probability of being considered as proven.
Furthermore, 7 additional SNPs showed q values of <0.5, suggesting association
with SLE and providing a direction for followup studies. These additional genes
notably included TNFRSF6 (Fas) and IRF5, supporting previous findings of their
association with SLE pathogenesis.
CONCLUSION: SELP and IRAK1 were identified as novel SLE-associated genes with a
high degree of significance, suggesting new directions in understanding the
pathogenesis of SLE. The overall design and results of this study demonstrate
that the candidate gene pathway microarray platform used provides a novel and
powerful approach that is generally applicable in identifying genetic foundations
of complex diseases.

PMID: 18050247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Dec;56(12):3989-94.

Association of an IRF5 gene functional polymorphism with Sjögren's syndrome.

Miceli-Richard C(1), Comets E, Loiseau P, Puechal X, Hachulla E, Mariette X.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U802, Université Paris-Sud 11, Hôpital Bicêtre, 78 rue du Général
Leclerc, 94275 Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.

OBJECTIVE: Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) is a transcription factor
involved in the regulation of the host defense. Previous studies have
demonstrated a significant association of various IRF5 gene polymorphisms with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in Caucasians. The purpose of this
case-control study was to investigate whether IRF5 polymorphisms are involved in 
the genetic predisposition to primary Sjögren's syndrome (SS), an autoimmune
disease closely related to SLE.
METHODS: We analyzed IRF5 rs2004640, rs2070197, rs10954213, and rs2280714
polymorphisms in a cohort of 212 primary SS patients and 162 healthy blood
donors, all of whom were of Caucasian origin. The 4 polymorphisms examined were
genotyped by competitive allele-specific polymerase chain reaction using
fluorescence resonance energy transfer technology.
RESULTS: The IRF5 rs2004640 GT or TT genotype (T allele carriers) was identified 
in 87% of primary SS patients compared with 77% of controls (P = 0.01, odds ratio
[OR] 1.93 [95% confidence interval (95% CI) 1.15-3.42]). The IRF5 rs2004640 T
allele was found on 59% of chromosomes from primary SS patients compared with 52%
of chromosomes from controls (P = 0.04, OR 1.36 [95% CI 1.01-1.83]). No
significant association of primary SS with rs2070197, rs10954213, or rs2280714
was seen when they were analyzed independently. Nevertheless, haplotype
reconstructions based on the 4 polymorphisms examined suggest that various allele
combinations of rs2004640 and rs2070197 could define susceptibility or protective
haplotypes.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first to demonstrate a significant association
between primary SS and the IRF5 rs2004640 T allele. These results, which require 
further replication on larger populations, suggest that besides their association
with identical major histocompatibility complex gene polymorphisms, primary SS
and SLE share IRF gene polymorphisms as a common genetic susceptibility factor.

PMCID: PMC3184606
PMID: 18050197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Nov 28;8:71.

The candidate genes TAF5L, TCF7, PDCD1, IL6 and ICAM1 cannot be excluded from
having effects in type 1 diabetes.

Cooper JD(1), Smyth DJ, Bailey R, Payne F, Downes K, Godfrey LM, Masters J,
Zeitels LR, Vella A, Walker NM, Todd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust Diabetes and Inflammation
Laboratory, Department of Medical Genetics, Cambridge Institute for Medical
Research, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
jason.cooper@cimr.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: As genes associated with immune-mediated diseases have an increased
prior probability of being associated with other immune-mediated diseases, we
tested three such genes, IL23R, IRF5 and CD40, for an association with type 1
diabetes. In addition, we tested seven genes, TAF5L, PDCD1, TCF7, IL12B, IL6,
ICAM1 and TBX21, with published marginal or inconsistent evidence of an
association with type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: We genotyped reported polymorphisms of the ten genes, nonsynonymous SNPs
(nsSNPs) and, for the IL12B and IL6 regions, tag SNPs in up to 7,888 case, 8,858 
control and 3,142 parent-child trio samples. In addition, we analysed data from
the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium genome-wide association study to
determine whether there was any further evidence of an association in each gene
region.
RESULTS: We found some evidence of associations between type 1 diabetes and
TAF5L, PDCD1, TCF7 and IL6 (ORs = 1.05 - 1.13; P = 0.0291 - 4.16 x 10-4). No
evidence of an association was obtained for IL12B, IRF5, IL23R, ICAM1, TBX21 and 
CD40, although there was some evidence of an association (OR = 1.10; P = 0.0257) 
from the genome-wide association study for the ICAM1 region.
CONCLUSION: We failed to exclude the possibility of some effect in type 1
diabetes for TAF5L, PDCD1, TCF7, IL6 and ICAM1. Additional studies, of these and 
other candidate genes, employing much larger sample sizes and analysis of
additional polymorphisms in each gene and its flanking region will be required to
ascertain their contributions to type 1 diabetes susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2217539
PMID: 18045485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Dec 15;16(24):3008-16. Epub 2007 Sep 19.

An insertion-deletion polymorphism in the interferon regulatory Factor 5 (IRF5)
gene confers risk of inflammatory bowel diseases.

Dideberg V(1), Kristjansdottir G, Milani L, Libioulle C, Sigurdsson S, Louis E,
Wiman AC, Vermeire S, Rutgeerts P, Belaiche J, Franchimont D, Van Gossum A, Bours
V, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, CHU de Liège, Belgium.

The interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene encodes a transcription factor
that plays an important role in the innate as well as in the cell-mediated immune
responses. The IRF5 gene has been shown to be associated with systemic lupus
erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis. We studied whether the IRF5 gene is also 
associated with inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD), Crohn disease (CD) and
ulcerative colitis (UC). Twelve polymorphisms in the IRF5 gene were genotyped in 
a cohort of 1007 IBD patients (748 CD and 254 UC) and 241 controls from Wallonia,
Belgium. The same polymorphisms were genotyped in a confirmatory cohort of 311
controls and 687 IBD patients (488 CD and 192 UC) from Leuven, Belgium. A strong 
signal of association [P = 1.9 x 10(-5), odds ratio (OR) 1.81 (1.37-2.39)] with
IBD was observed for a 5 bp indel (CGGGG) polymorphism in the promoter region of 
the IRF5 gene. The association was detectable also in CD patients (P = 6.8 x
10(-4)) and was particularly strong among the UC patients [P = 5.3 x 10(-8), OR =
2.42 (1.76-3.34)]. The association of the CGGGG indel was confirmed in the second
cohort [P = 3.2 x 10(-5), OR = 1.59 (1.28-1.98)]. The insertion of one CGGGG unit
is predicted to create an additional binding site for the transcription factor
SP1. Using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay, we show allele-specific
differences in protein binding to this repetitive DNA-stretch, which suggest a
potential function role for the CGGGG indel.

PMID: 17881657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Infect Dis. 2007 Sep 1;196(5):719-30. Epub 2007 Jul 18.

Morphine inhibits intrahepatic interferon- alpha expression and enhances complete
hepatitis C virus replication.

Li Y(1), Ye L, Peng JS, Wang CQ, Luo GX, Zhang T, Wan Q, Ho WZ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy and Immunology, Joseph Stokes, Jr., Research Institute,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Heroin addicts are a high-risk group for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection and
the development of chronic HCV disease. We thus examined whether morphine, the
active metabolite of heroin, has the ability to inhibit intrahepatic interferon
(IFN)- alpha expression, facilitating HCV replication in human hepatocytes.
Morphine inhibited intrahepatic IFN- alpha expression, which was associated with 
an increase in HCV replication in hepatocytes. Moreover, morphine compromised the
anti-HCV effect of recombinant IFN- alpha . Investigation of the mechanism
responsible for the morphine action revealed that morphine inhibited expression
of IFN regulatory factor 5 in the hepatocytes. In addition, morphine suppressed
the expression of p38, an important signal-transducing molecule involved in IFN- 
alpha -mediated anti-HCV activity. These findings indicate that morphine plays a 
cofactor role in facilitating HCV persistence in human hepatocytes.

PMID: 17674315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Virol. 2007 Sep;81(18):9748-58. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Manipulation of the toll-like receptor 7 signaling pathway by Epstein-Barr virus.

Martin HJ(1), Lee JM, Walls D, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Bunting-Blaustein Building CRB308, 1650
Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection of primary B cells causes B-cell activation
and proliferation. Activation of B cells requires binding of antigen to the
B-cell receptor and a survival signal from ligand-bound CD40, signals that are
provided by the EBV LMP1 and LMP2A latency proteins. Recently, Toll-like receptor
(TLR) signaling has been reported to provide a third B-cell activation stimulus. 
The interaction between the EBV and TLR pathways was therefore investigated. Both
UV-inactivated and untreated EBV upregulated the expression of TLR7 and
downregulated the expression of TLR9 in naive B cells. UV-inactivated virus
transiently stimulated naive B-cell proliferation in the presence of the TLR7
ligand R837, while addition of the TLR7 antagonist IRS 661 impaired cell growth
induced by untreated EBV. Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) is a downstream 
mediator of TLR7 signaling. IRF-5 was induced following EBV infection, and IRF-5 
was expressed in B-cell lines with type III latency. Expression of IRF-5 in this 
setting is surprising since IRF-5 has tumor suppressor and antiviral properties. 
B-cell proliferation assays provided evidence that EBV modulates TLR7 signaling
responses. Examination of IRF-5 transcripts identified a novel splice variant,
V12, that was induced by EBV infection, was constitutively nuclear, and acted as 
a dominant negative form in IRF-5 reporter assays. IRF-4 negatively regulates
IRF-5 activation, and IRF-4 was also present in type III latently infected cells.
EBV therefore initially uses TLR7 signaling to enhance B-cell proliferation and
subsequently modifies the pathway to regulate IRF-5 activity.

PMCID: PMC2045431
PMID: 17609264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Jul;56(7):2202-10.

Association of a haplotype in the promoter region of the interferon regulatory
factor 5 gene with rheumatoid arthritis.

Sigurdsson S(1), Padyukov L, Kurreeman FA, Liljedahl U, Wiman AC, Alfredsson L,
Toes R, Rönnelid J, Klareskog L, Huizinga TW, Alm G, Syvänen AC, Rönnblom L.

Author information: 
(1)Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether genetic variants of the interferon regulatory
factor 5 (IRF-5) and Tyk-2 genes are associated with rheumatoid arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Five single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in IRF5 and 3 SNPs in Tyk2
were analyzed in a Swedish cohort of 1,530 patients with RA and 881 controls. A
replication study was performed in a Dutch cohort of 387 patients with RA and 181
controls. All patient sera were tested for the presence of autoantibodies against
cyclic citrullinated peptides (anti-CCP).
RESULTS: Four of the 5 SNPs located in the 5' region of IRF5 were associated with
RA, while no association was observed with the Tyk2 SNPs. The minor alleles of 3 
of the IRF5 SNPs, which were in linkage disequilibrium and formed a relatively
common haplotype with a frequency of approximately 0.33, appeared to confer
protection against RA. Although these disease associations were seen in the
entire patient group, they were mainly found in RA patients who were negative for
anti-CCP. A suggestive association of IRF5 SNPs with anti-CCP-negative RA was
also observed in the Dutch cohort.
CONCLUSION: Given the fact that anti-CCP-negative RA differs from
anti-CCP-positive RA with respect to genetic and environmental risk factor
profiles, our results indicate that genetic variants of IRF5 contribute to a
unique disease etiology and pathogenesis in anti-CCP-negative RA.

PMID: 17599733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Genes Immun. 2007 Sep;8(6):445-55. Epub 2007 Jun 21.

A compass that points to lupus: genetic studies on type I interferon pathway.

Kyogoku C(1), Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatic and Autoimmune Diseases, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN, USA.

It was more than 20 years ago that patients with systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE) were first reported to display elevated serum levels of type I interferon
(IFN). Since then, extensive studies revealed a crucial role for type I IFN in
SLE pathogenesis. The current model proposes that small increase of type I IFN
production by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) is sufficient to induce
unabated activation of immature peripheral DCs. IFN-matured DCs select and
activate autoreactive T cells and B cells, rather than deleting them, resulting
in peripheral tolerance breakdown, a characteristic feature of SLE. Furthermore, 
immune complexes provide an amplification loop to pDCs for further IFN
production. In the past 5 years, high-throughput technologies such as expression 
profiling and single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) typing established the role of
altered type I IFN system in SLE, and a detailed picture of its molecular
mechanisms is beginning to emerge. In this review, we discuss two major lines of 
genetics studies on type I IFN pathway related to human SLE: (1) expression
profiling of IFN-responsive genes and (2) disease-associated SNPs of IFN-related 
genes, especially IRF5 (IFN-regulatory factor 5). Lastly, we discuss how such
genetic alterations in type I IFN pathway fit in the current model of SLE
pathogenesis.

PMID: 17581625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Genes Immun. 2007 Jul;8(5):429-38. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Opposed independent effects and epistasis in the complex association of IRF5 to
SLE.

Ferreiro-Neira I(1), Calaza M, Alonso-Perez E, Marchini M, Scorza R, Sebastiani
GD, Blanco FJ, Rego I, Pullmann R Jr, Pullmann R, Kallenberg CG, Bijl M, Skopouli
FN, Mavromati M, Migliaresi S, Barizzone N, Ruzickova S, Dostal C, Schmidt RE,
Witte T, Papasteriades C, Kappou-Rigatou I, Endreffy E, Kovacs A, Ordi-Ros J,
Balada E, Carreira P, Gomez-Reino JJ, Gonzalez A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio Investigacion 2 and Rheumatology Unit, Hospital Clinico
Universitario de Santiago, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Genetic variation in the interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) gene affects
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) susceptibility. However, association is
complex and incompletely defined. We obtained fourteen European sample
collections with a total of 1383 SLE patients and 1614 controls to better define 
the role of the different IRF5 variants. Eleven polymorphisms were studied,
including nine tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and two extra
functional polymorphisms. Two tag SNPs showed independent and opposed
associations: susceptibility (rs10488631, P<10(-17)) and protection (rs729302,
P<10(-6)). Haplotype analyses showed that the susceptibility haplotype,
identified by the minor allele of rs10488631, can be due to epistasis between
three IRF5 functional polymorphisms. These polymorphisms determine increased mRNA
expression, a splice variant with a different exon 1 and a longer proline-rich
region in exon 6. This result is striking as none of the three polymorphisms had 
an independent effect on their own. Protection was independent of these
polymorphisms and seemed to reside in the 5' side of the gene. In conclusion, our
results help to understand the role of the IRF5 locus in SLE susceptibility by
clearly separating protection from susceptibility as caused by independent
polymorphisms. In addition, we have found evidence for epistasis between known
functional polymorphisms for the susceptibility effect.

PMID: 17568788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Med Genet. 2007 Oct;44(10):670-2. Epub 2007 Jun 8.

The IRF5 polymorphism in type 1 diabetes.

Qu HQ, Marchand L, Grabs R, Polychronakos C.

The interferon regulatory factor 5 gene (IRF5) has been shown to play a crucial
role in harmful immune responses by induction of proinflammatory cytokines.
Functional genetic variants associated with increased IRF5 expression of specific
isoforms are associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and it is
possible that they may also predispose to other autoimmune disorders. We tested
the association of two IRF5 SNPs, correlated with IRF5 expression and SLE risk,
in 947 nuclear family trios type 1 diabetes (T1D) using the transmission
disequilibrium test. Our results suggest that the functional IRF5 variations do
not confer an obvious risk for T1D.

PMCID: PMC2597969
PMID: 17557928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):6876-85.

Murine dendritic cell type I IFN production induced by human IgG-RNA immune
complexes is IFN regulatory factor (IRF)5 and IRF7 dependent and is required for 
IL-6 production.

Yasuda K(1), Richez C, Maciaszek JW, Agrawal N, Akira S, Marshak-Rothstein A,
Rifkin IR.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Dendritic cell (DC) activation by nucleic acid-containing IgG complexes is
implicated in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) pathogenesis. However, it has
been difficult to definitively examine the receptors and signaling pathways by
which this activation is mediated. Because mouse FcgammaRs recognize human IgG,
we hypothesized that IgG from lupus patients might stimulate mouse DCs, thereby
facilitating this analysis. In this study, we show that sera and purified IgG
from lupus patients activate mouse DCs to produce IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, and IL-6
and up-regulate costimulatory molecules in a FcgammaR-dependent manner. This
activation is only seen in sera with reactivity against ribonucleoproteins and is
completely dependent on TLR7 and the presence of RNA. As anticipated, IFN
regulatory factor (IRF)7 is required for IFN-alpha and IFN-beta production.
Unexpectedly, however, IRF5 plays a critical role in IFN-alpha and IFN-beta
production induced not only by RNA-containing immune complexes but also by
conventional TLR7 and TLR9 ligands. Moreover, DC production of IL-6 induced by
these stimuli is dependent on a functional type I IFNR, indicating the need for a
type I IFN-dependent feedback loop in the production of inflammatory cytokines.
This system may also prove useful for the study of receptors and signaling
pathways used by immune complexes in other human diseases.

PMID: 17513736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Hum Genet. 2007 Jul;121(6):721-7. Epub 2007 May 3.

Genetic association of IRF5 with SLE in Mexicans: higher frequency of the risk
haplotype and its homozygozity than Europeans.

Reddy MV(1), Velázquez-Cruz R, Baca V, Lima G, Granados J, Orozco L,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Dag Hammarsjkölds
väg 20, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

The IRF5 gene was found to be strongly associated with SLE. We identified two
functional polymorphisms and recently an insertion/deletion together with a tag
SNP defining the risk haplotype in individuals of European ancestry. We now
analyzed sets of Mexican patients with SLE. Three polymorphisms in the IRF5 gene 
were genotyped in two sets of Mexican individuals with SLE and controls as well
as in families including a set of pediatric SLE patients. A set of healthy
Mexican Indians was also typed. Genetic association with SLE was found for all
three polymorphisms. The genetic association was very strong in the case-control 
analysis in both sets (for SNP rs2070197, combined P = 1.26 x 10(-21)) and in
families (combined P = 0.000004). Compared to healthy individuals with European
ancestry, the frequency of the risk haplotype in healthy Mexican individuals was 
significantly higher and even higher in the healthy Mexican Indian group.
Further, a much higher frequency of the risk haplotype and of individual
homozygote for it was found among Mexican SLE patients. The significantly higher 
frequency of homozygote individuals for the risk haplotype among Mexican SLE
patients could be the result of genetic admixture, and suggests the possibility
that IRF5 could be involved in the more active disease and organ involvement
known to occur among Mexican SLE patients.

PMID: 17476532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007 May;7(5):353-64.

The family of five: TIR-domain-containing adaptors in Toll-like receptor
signalling.

O'Neill LA(1), Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2,
Ireland. laoneill@tcd.ie agbowie@tcd.ie

Signalling by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) involves five adaptor proteins known as 
MyD88, MAL, TRIF, TRAM and SARM. Recent insights have revealed additional
functions for MyD88 apart from NF-kappaB activation, including activation of the 
transcription factors IRF1, IRF5 and IRF7, and also a role outside the TLRs in
interferon-gamma signalling. Biochemical information on MAL and TRAM has shown
that both act as bridging adaptors, with MAL recruiting MyD88 to TLR2 and TLR4,
and TRAM recruiting TRIF to TLR4 to allow for IRF3 activation. Finally, the
function of the fifth adaptor, SARM, has been revealed, which negatively
regulates TRIF. These new insights allow for a detailed description of the
function of the five TIR-domain-containing adaptors in the initiation of TLR
signalling.

PMID: 17457343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 17;104(16):6758-63. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Three functional variants of IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) define risk and
protective haplotypes for human lupus.

Graham RR(1), Kyogoku C, Sigurdsson S, Vlasova IA, Davies LR, Baechler EC, Plenge
RM, Koeuth T, Ortmann WA, Hom G, Bauer JW, Gillett C, Burtt N, Cunninghame Graham
DS, Onofrio R, Petri M, Gunnarsson I, Svenungsson E, Rönnblom L, Nordmark G,
Gregersen PK, Moser K, Gaffney PM, Criswell LA, Vyse TJ, Syvänen AC, Bohjanen PR,
Daly MJ, Behrens TW, Altshuler D.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Systematic genome-wide studies to map genomic regions associated with human
diseases are becoming more practical. Increasingly, efforts will be focused on
the identification of the specific functional variants responsible for the
disease. The challenges of identifying causal variants include the need for
complete ascertainment of genetic variants and the need to consider the
possibility of multiple causal alleles. We recently reported that risk of
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is strongly associated with a common SNP in
IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5), and that this variant altered spicing in a way
that might provide a functional explanation for the reproducible association to
SLE risk. Here, by resequencing and genotyping in patients with SLE, we find
evidence for three functional alleles of IRF5: the previously described exon 1B
splice site variant, a 30-bp in-frame insertion/deletion variant of exon 6 that
alters a proline-, glutamic acid-, serine- and threonine-rich domain region, and 
a variant in a conserved polyA+ signal sequence that alters the length of the 3' 
UTR and stability of IRF5 mRNAs. Haplotypes of these three variants define at
least three distinct levels of risk to SLE. Understanding how combinations of
variants influence IRF5 function may offer etiological and therapeutic insights
in SLE; more generally, IRF5 and SLE illustrates how multiple common variants of 
the same gene can together influence risk of common disease.

PMCID: PMC1847749
PMID: 17412832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Arthritis Rheum. 2007 Apr;56(4):1234-41.

Structural insertion/deletion variation in IRF5 is associated with a risk
haplotype and defines the precise IRF5 isoforms expressed in systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Kozyrev SV(1), Lewén S, Reddy PM, Pons-Estel B; Argentine Collaborative Group,
Witte T; German Collaborative Group, Junker P, Laustrup H, Gutiérrez C, Suárez A,
Francisca González-Escribano M, Martín J; Spanish Collaborative Group,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
Uppsala, Sweden, and Odense University Hospital, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether specific isoforms of IRF5 are transcribed in
patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) who have risk genotypes in the
exon 1B donor splice site at single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) no. rs2004640.
METHODS: Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were obtained from SLE patients and
healthy controls from Argentina, Spain, and Germany and from trio families from
Spain and Denmark. A reporter assay was used to investigate the role of SNP no.
rs2004640. IRF5 expression in relation to the genotypes of functional SNPs was
analyzed using quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Sequencing and genotyping 
of the IRF5 gene was performed.
RESULTS: Sequencing of complementary DNA from individuals with different
genotypes showed 4 basic isoforms transcribed from all 5'-untranslated regions
(5'-UTRs), suggesting no preferential isoform transcription based on rs2004640
genotypes. Analysis of translation efficiency showed that exon 1A was the most
efficient in initiating protein synthesis. We identified a novel polymorphic
insertion/deletion that defines the pattern of expression of isoforms of IRF5.
The insertion consists of 4 repeats in exon 6 affecting the protein interaction
domain. The insertion segregates in the risk haplotype with the high expression
allele of a poly(A) site SNP no. rs10954213 and the exon 1B donor splice allele
of the 5'-UTR SNP no. rs2004640. The poly(A) polymorphism correlated with levels 
of IRF5 in cells stimulated with interferon-alpha. The SNP most strongly
associated with SLE was SNP no. rs2070197 (P=5.2x10(-11)), which is a proxy of
the risk haplotype, but does not appear to be functional.
CONCLUSION: None of the functional variants investigated in this study is
strongly associated with SLE, with the exception of the exon 1B donor splice
site, and its functional importance appears to be small. Our results suggest that
there may be other functional polymorphisms, yet to be identified, in IRF5. We
did not observe evidence of epistatic interaction between the functional SNPs.

PMID: 17393452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9(2):R32.

Replication of the genetic effects of IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) on systemic 
lupus erythematosus in a Korean population.

Shin HD(1), Sung YK, Choi CB, Lee SO, Lee HW, Bae SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Epidemiology, SNP Genetics Inc, Rm 1407, 14th floor,
Complex B, WooLim Lion's Valley, 371-28, Gasan-Dong, Geumcheon-Gu, Seoul 153-801,
Korea. hdshin@snp-genetics.com

Recently, two studies provided convincing evidence that IFN regulatory factor 5
(IRF5) gene polymorphisms are significantly associated with systemic lupus
erythematosus (SLE) in several white populations. To replicate the association
with SLE in an Asian population, we examined the genetic effects in our SLE
cohort from a Korean population. A total of 1,565 subjects, composed of 593 cases
and 972 controls, were genotyped using the TaqMan (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA, USA) method. The genetic effects of polymorphisms on the risk of SLE
were evaluated using chi2 tests and a Mantel-Haenszel meta-analysis. Statistical 
analysis revealed results in the Korean population were similar to the previous
reports from white populations. The rs2004640 T allele had a higher frequency in 
SLE cases (0.385) than controls (0.321; odds ratio (OR) = 1.32, P = 0.0003). In
combined analysis, including all seven independent cohorts from the three studies
so far, robust and consistent associations of the rs2004640 T allele with SLE
were observed. The estimate of risk was OR = 1.44 (range, 1.34-1.55), with an
overall P = 1.85 x 10(-23) for the rs2004640 T allele. The haplotype
(rs2004640T-rs2280714T) involved in both the alternative splice donor site and
the elevated expression of IRF5 also had a highly significant association with
SLE (pooled, P = 2.11 x 10(-16)). Our results indicate that the genetic effect on
the risk of SLE mediated by IRF5 variants can be generally accepted in both white
and Asian populations.

PMCID: PMC1906810
PMID: 17389033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 27;104(9):3402-7. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Role of IFN regulatory factor 5 transcription factor in antiviral immunity and
tumor suppression.

Yanai H(1), Chen HM, Inuzuka T, Kondo S, Mak TW, Takaoka A, Honda K, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Host defense consists of two main aspects, namely, immune response to invading
pathogens and suppression of tumor development. A family of transcription
factors, IFN regulatory factors (IRFs), has recently gained much attention in
terms of its critical role in linking these two aspects of host defense, wherein 
IRF5 was previously shown to play a critical role in the induction of
proinflammatory cytokines by activation of Toll-like receptors. In the present
study, using IRF5 gene-targeted mice (Irf5(-/-) mice), we demonstrate another
facet of the IRF5 function in the regulation of immune response and tumor
suppression. We show that IRF5 is critical for antiviral immunity by showing that
Irf5(-/-) mice are highly vulnerable to viral infections, accompanied by a
decrease in type I IFN induction in the sera. Furthermore, we show that Irf5(-/-)
fibroblasts are resistant to apoptosis upon viral infection, resulting in an
enhanced viral propagation. Finally, we provide evidence that IRF5 is critical
for the induction of apoptosis, but not in cell cycle arrest, in response to DNA 
damage and that IRF5 functions as a tumor suppressor by acting on a pathway that 
may be distinct from that for p53. These results, together with the dual
regulation of IRF5 gene expression by IFN signaling and p53, may provide a new
link in the transcriptional network underlying antiviral immunity and tumor
suppression.

PMCID: PMC1805533
PMID: 17360658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Virol. 2007 May;81(9):4473-81. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Rotavirus NSP1 inhibits expression of type I interferon by antagonizing the
function of interferon regulatory factors IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7.

Barro M(1), Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Disease, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, Bethesda, MD
20892-8026, USA.

Secretion of interferon (IFN) by virus-infected cells is essential for activating
autocrine and paracrine pathways that promote cellular transition to an antiviral
state. In most mammalian cells, IFN production is initiated by the activation of 
constitutively expressed IFN regulatory factor 3, IRF3, which in turn leads to
the induction of IRF7, the "master regulator" of IFN type I synthesis (alpha/beta
IFN). Previous studies established that rotavirus NSP1 antagonizes IFN signaling 
by inducing IRF3 degradation. In the present study, we have determined that, in
comparison to wild-type rotaviruses, rotaviruses encoding defective NSP1 grow to 
lower titers in some cell lines and that this poor growth phenotype is due to
their failure to suppress IFN expression. Furthermore, we provide evidence that
rotaviruses encoding wild-type NSP1 subvert IFN signaling by inducing the
degradation of not only IRF3, but also IRF7, with both events occurring through
proteasome-dependent processes that proceed with similar efficiencies. The
capacity of NSP1 to induce IRF7 degradation may allow rotavirus to move across
the gut barrier by enabling the virus to replicate in specialized trafficking
cells (dendritic cells and macrophages) that constitutively express IRF7. Along
with IRF3 and IRF7, NSP1 was found to induce the degradation of IRF5, a factor
that upregulates IFN expression and that is involved in triggering apoptosis
during viral infection. Our analysis suggests that NSP1 mediates the degradation 
of IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 by recognizing a common element of IRF proteins, thereby 
allowing NSP1 to act as a broad-spectrum antagonist of IRF function.

PMCID: PMC1900170
PMID: 17301153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Mar 23;354(4):1045-51. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Cooperation between MyD88 and TRIF pathways in TLR synergy via IRF5 activation.

Ouyang X(1), Negishi H, Takeda R, Fujita Y, Taniguchi T, Honda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Tokyo, Japan.

Signaling by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) is central to evoking innate immunity,
wherein each TLR is activated by distinct pathogen-derived agonists. It has been 
shown previously that TLR signaling occurs in synergy when certain TLR agonist
combinations simultaneously activate immune cells. This synergism may constitute 
a mechanism critical to ensuring the effective activation of the immune system by
multiple TLR activating molecules associated with a given pathogen; however, its 
underlying mechanism(s) remain unclarified. Here, we provide evidence that TLRs
utilizing the MyD88 adaptor selectively cooperate with those utilizing the TRIF
adaptor for synergistic induction of a set of target genes, and that this
synergism is abrogated in cells lacking either MyD88 or TRIF. Moreover, we also
provide evidence that this TLR synergy is mediated, at least in part, by
activation of the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5).
Thus, our findings offer a mechanistic insight into TLR synergy, revealing the
hitherto unknown cross talk between the MyD88 and TRIF pathways for a robust
TLR-mediated activation of the immune system.

PMID: 17275788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Mar 15;16(6):579-91. Epub 2006 Dec 22.

Association of IRF5 in UK SLE families identifies a variant involved in
polyadenylation.

Cunninghame Graham DS(1), Manku H, Wagner S, Reid J, Timms K, Gutin A, Lanchbury 
JS, Vyse TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial College, Faculty of Medicine, Molecular Genetics and Rheumatology
Section, Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK.

Results from two studies have implicated the interferon regulatory gene IRF5 as a
susceptibility gene in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In this study, we
conducted a family-based association analysis in 380 UK SLE nuclear families.
Using a higher density of markers than has hitherto been screened, we show that
there is association with two SNPs in the first intron, rs2004640 (P = 3.4 x
10(-4)) and rs3807306 (P = 4.9 x 10(-4)), and the association extends into the
3'-untranslated region (UTR). There is a single haplotype block encompassing IRF5
and we show for the first time that the gene comprises two over-transmitted
haplotypes and a single under-transmitted haplotype. The strongest association is
with a TCTAACT haplotype (T:U = 1.92, P = 5.8 x 10(-5)), which carries all the
over-transmitted alleles from this study. Haplotypes carrying the T alleles of
rs2004640 and rs2280714 and the A allele of rs10954213 are over-transmitted in
SLE families. The TAT haplotype shows a dose-dependent relationship with mRNA
expression. A differential expression pattern was seen between two expression
probes located each side of rs10954213 in the 3'-UTR. rs10954213 shows the
strongest association with RNA expression levels (P = 1 x 10(-14)). The A allele 
of rs10954213 creates a functional polyadenylation site and the A genotype
correlates with increased expression of a transcript variant containing a shorter
3'-UTR. Expression levels of transcript variants with the shorter or longer
3'-UTRs are inversely correlated. Our data support a new mechanism by which an
IRF5 polymorphism controls the expression of alternate transcript variants which 
may have different effects on interferon signalling.

PMCID: PMC3706933
PMID: 17189288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Ann Hum Genet. 2007 May;71(Pt 3):308-11. Epub 2006 Dec 12.

Association of a common interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) variant with
increased risk of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).

Demirci FY(1), Manzi S, Ramsey-Goldman R, Minster RL, Kenney M, Shaw PS,
Dunlop-Thomas CM, Kao AH, Rhew E, Bontempo F, Kammerer C, Kamboh MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) belongs to a family of transcription
factors that control the transactivation of type I interferon system-related
genes, as well as the expression of several other genes involved in immune
response, cell signalling, cell cycle control and apoptosis. Two recent studies
reported a significant association between the IRF5/rs2004640 T allele and
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The purpose of this study was to determine
whether the reported rs2004640 T allele association could be replicated in our
independent SLE case-control sample. We genotyped DNA samples from 370 white
SLE-affected female subjects and 462 white healthy female controls using the
TaqMan Assay-on-Demand for rs2004640, and performed a case-control genetic
association analysis. Frequency of the rs2004640 T allele was significantly
higher in cases than in controls (56.5% vs. 50%; P= 0.008). The odds ratio for T 
allele carriers was 1.68 (95% CI: 1.20 - 2.34; P= 0.003). Our results in an
independent case-control sample confirm the robust association of the
IRF5/rs2004640 T allele with SLE risk, and further support the relevance of the
type I interferon system in the pathogenesis of SLE and autoimmunity.

PMID: 17166181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Ann Rheum Dis. 2007 Jun;66(6):828-31. Epub 2006 Dec 7.

IRF5 rs2004640-T allele, the new genetic factor for systemic lupus erythematosus,
is not associated with rheumatoid arthritis.

Garnier S(1), Dieudé P, Michou L, Barbet S, Tan A, Lasbleiz S, Bardin T, Prum B, 
Cornélis F.

Author information: 
(1)GenHotel-EA3886, Laboratoire Européen de Recherche pour la Polyarthrite
Rhumatoïde, 2 rue Gaston Crémieux, 91057 Evry-Genopole Cedex, France.
garniersophie@wanadoo.fr

BACKGROUND: Recently, a new genetic factor within the interferon regulatory
factor 5 (IRF5) gene was demonstrated for systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
through linkage and association: the rs2004640-T allele. IRF5 is involved in the 
production of rheumatoid arthritis (RA) cytokines, and SLE already shares with RA
one genetic factor within the tyrosine phosphatase PTPN22 gene.
AIM: To test the hypothesis that the SLE IRF5 genetic factor could also be shared
with RA.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 100 French Caucasian trio families with RA were genotyped
and analysed with the transmission disequilibrium test, the frequency comparison 
of the transmitted and untransmitted alleles, and the genotype relative risk. 97%
power was available to detect at least a trend in favour of a factor similar to
that reported for SLE.
RESULTS: The analysis showed the absence of linkage and association globally and 
in "autoimmune" RA subsets, with a weak non-significant trend against the IRF5
rs20046470-T allele. Given the robustness of familial-based analysis, this slight
negative trend provided strong evidence against even a weaker factor than that
reported for SLE.
CONCLUSION: Our results exclude the IRF5 rs2004640-T allele as a major genetic
factor for RA in this French Caucasian population.

PMCID: PMC1954661
PMID: 17158136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Arthritis Rheum. 2006 Dec;54(12):3815-9.

Analysis of IRF5 gene functional polymorphisms in rheumatoid arthritis.

Rueda B(1), Reddy MV, González-Gay MA, Balsa A, Pascual-Salcedo D, Petersson IF, 
Eimon A, Paira S, Scherbarth HR, Pons-Estel BA, González-Escribano MF,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME, Martín J.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina López-Neyra, Granada, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Recent findings suggest that interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5)
may play a crucial role in several cellular processes, including the
transcription of genes for inflammatory cytokines. Two genetic variants of the
IRF5 gene (rs2004640 in exon 1 and rs2280714 in the 3'-untranslated region) have 
been shown to exert functional modifications affecting IRF5 messenger RNA
splicing and expression, and have been associated with genetic predisposition to 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). The aim of this study was to analyze the
possible contribution of the IRF5 gene to the predisposition to rheumatoid
arthritis (RA).
METHODS: Three case-control cohorts from Spain (724 RA patients and 542 healthy
controls), Sweden (281 RA patients 474 healthy controls), and Argentina (284 RA
patients and 286 healthy controls) were independently analyzed. Genotyping for
IRF5 rs2004640 and rs2280714 was performed using a TaqMan 5'
allele-discrimination assay.
RESULTS: In the 3 cohorts studied, no statistically significant differences in
allele or genotype frequencies of the rs2004640 and rs2280714 IRF5 polymorphisms 
were observed between RA patients and controls. Accordingly, haplotype analysis
revealed that none of the IRF5 haplotypes was associated with genetic
predisposition to RA.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the IRF5 functional polymorphisms analyzed
do not seem to be implicated in genetic susceptibility to RA.

PMID: 17133578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Nat Genet. 2006 Nov;38(11):1335-40. Epub 2006 Oct 15.

Abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial morphogenesis in mice deficient for
interferon regulatory factor 6 (Irf6).

Ingraham CR(1), Kinoshita A, Kondo S, Yang B, Sajan S, Trout KJ, Malik MI,
Dunnwald M, Goudy SL, Lovett M, Murray JC, Schutte BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Transcription factor paralogs may share a common role in staged or overlapping
expression in specific tissues, as in the Hox family. In other cases, family
members have distinct roles in a range of embryologic, differentiation or
response pathways (as in the Tbx and Pax families). For the interferon regulatory
factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, mice deficient in Irf1, Irf2, Irf3,
Irf4, Irf5, Irf7, Irf8 or Irf9 have defects in the immune response but show no
embryologic abnormalities. Mice deficient for Irf6 have not been reported, but in
humans, mutations in IRF6 cause two mendelian orofacial clefting syndromes, and
genetic variation in IRF6 confers risk for isolated cleft lip and palate. Here we
report that mice deficient for Irf6 have abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial
development. Histological and gene expression analyses indicate that the primary 
defect is in keratinocyte differentiation and proliferation. This study describes
a new role for an IRF family member in epidermal development.

PMCID: PMC2082114
PMID: 17041601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 10;103(41):15136-41. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Evidence for licensing of IFN-gamma-induced IFN regulatory factor 1 transcription
factor by MyD88 in Toll-like receptor-dependent gene induction program.

Negishi H(1), Fujita Y, Yanai H, Sakaguchi S, Ouyang X, Shinohara M, Takayanagi
H, Ohba Y, Taniguchi T, Honda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The recognition of microbial components by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) initiates
signal transduction pathways, which trigger the expression of a series of target 
genes. It has been reported that TLR signaling is enhanced by cytokines such as
IFN-gamma, but the mechanisms underlying this enhancement remain unclear. The
MyD88 adaptor, which is essential for signaling by many TLRs, recruits members of
the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, such as IRF5 and
IRF7, to evoke the activation of TLR target genes. In this study we demonstrate
that IRF1, which is induced by IFN-gamma, also interacts with and is activated by
MyD88 upon TLR activation. We provide evidence that MyD88-associated IRF1
migrates into the nucleus more efficiently than non-MyD88-associated IRF1 and
that this IRF1 selectively participates in the TLR-dependent gene induction
program. The critical role of MyD88-dependent "IRF1 licensing" is underscored by 
the observation that the induction of a specific gene subset downstream of the
TLR-MyD88 pathway, such as IFN-beta, inducible NO synthase, and IL-12p35, are
impaired in Irf1-deficient cells. Thus, our present study places IRF1 as an
additional member participating in MyD88 signaling and provides a mechanistic
insight into the enhancement of the TLR-dependent gene induction program by
IFN-gamma.

PMCID: PMC1586247
PMID: 17018642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Curr Opin Immunol. 2006 Dec;18(6):676-82. Epub 2006 Oct 2.

Systemic lupus erythematosus: all roads lead to type I interferons.

Pascual V(1), Farkas L, Banchereau J.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, 3434 Live Oak Street, Suite 205,
Dallas, TX 75204, USA. virginip@baylorhealth.edu

In recent years, the study of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) patients has
revealed a central role for type I interferon (IFN) in disease pathogenesis. IFN 
induces the unabated activation of peripheral dendritic cells, which select and
activate autoreactive T cells rather than deleting them, thus failing to induce
peripheral tolerance. IFN also directly affects T cells and B cells. Furthermore,
immune complexes binding to FcgammaR and Toll-like receptors provide an
amplification loop for IFN production and B-cell activation in SLE. Polymorphisms
in genes that control IFN production or its downstream signaling pathway, such as
IRF5, might be responsible for some of these alterations. This novel information 
is leading to the development of IFN antagonists as a potential therapeutic
intervention in SLE, thus bringing hope to SLE patients.

PMID: 17011763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Springer Semin Immunopathol. 2006 Oct;28(2):109-17. Epub 2006 Sep 9.

The genetics of systemic lupus erythematosus: understanding how SNPs confer
disease susceptibility.

Alarcón-Riquelme ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
Dag Hammarskjölds väg 20, 751 85, Uppsala, Sweden. marta.Alarcon@genpat.uu.se

The identification of genes for autoimmune diseases is just the first step
towards our understanding of disease pathogenesis. In investigating how
mutations, deletions or other types of polymorphic defects occur, it is important
to determine the pathways and the mechanisms through which susceptibility leads
to disease. In this review I touch on three examples of studies that have
attempted to understand the mechanisms of genetic susceptibility in three genes
identified recently for systemic lupus erythematosus: PDCD1, PTPN22 and IRF5. We 
are just beginning to comprehend and much needs to be done.

PMID: 16964481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):731-3.

Statistical false positive or true disease pathway?

Todd JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Cambridge, Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation/Wellcome Trust 
Diabetes and Inflammation Laboratory, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
Addenbrooke's Hospital Cambridge, Cambridgeshire CB2 2XY, UK.
john.todd@cimr.cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2007 Mar;39(3):281-2.

Three very recent reports provide convincing statistical evidence (P < 10(-8)),
at a genome-wide level, of the association of common polymorphisms with three
different common diseases: systemic lupus erythematosus (IRF5), prostate cancer
and type 1 diabetes (IFIH1 region). This adds to the trickle--soon to be a
flood--of disease association results that are highly unlikely to be false
positives. There are other convincing examples in the last 12 months: age-related
macular degeneration (CFH), type 1 diabetes (IL2RA, also known as CD25) and type 
2 diabetes (TCF7L2). Given 20 years of a literature full of irreproducible
results, what has changed?

PMID: 16804532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Arch Virol. 2006 Dec;151(12):2461-73. Epub 2006 Jun 19.

Interferon regulatory factor 5.2 acts as a transcription repressor of
Epidermodysplasia verruciformis-associated human papillomaviruses.

Akgül B(1), Cürten M, Haigis H, Rogosz I, Pfister H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
baki.akguel@web.de

Human papillomavirus type 8 (HPV8) poses a high risk for malignant conversion of 
skin lesions in patients with Epidermodysplasia verruciformis (Ev). Its oncogene 
promoter P(175) contains the conserved sequence motifs CCAAC, M29, and an
A/T-rich region, which are common in many Ev-associated viruses. In human
keratinocytes P(175) shows very weak activity. We used the M29 sequence as bait
in a yeast-one-hybrid screen of a HaCaT cDNA library to identify interacting
proteins regulating P(175). We report the identification of a cDNA encoding the
interferon regulatory factor IRF5.2. In band shift assays the physical
interaction of IRF5.2 and M29 was confirmed, and also its binding to the negative
regulatory element (NRE) of HPV8 could be demonstrated. In transient reporter
gene assays, overexpressed IRF5.2 acts as a transcriptional repressor of HPV8 and
the Ev-associated HPV types 5, 14, and 25. These results indicate that the
cellular transcription factor IRF5.2 is a general transcription repressor of
Ev-associated HPV.

PMID: 16773233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2006 May;6(5):775-84.

Interferon regulatory factor-5-regulated pathways as a target for colorectal
cancer therapeutics.

Hu G(1), Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Colorectal cancer is the second most common cause of cancer-related death. A
significant obstacle to successful management of patients with colorectal cancer 
is intrinsic drug resistance or, in patients who initially responded to
chemotherapy, acquired drug resistance. Failure in normal apoptotic pathways
often contributes to resistance to anticancer drugs or radiotherapy. As a result,
the identification of genes that control cell death and apoptosis has come to the
forefront of cancer research, leading to new targets and novel therapeutic
strategies in the treatment of colorectal cancer. To this effect, the authors
have recently identified a new apoptotic signaling pathway that occurs through
the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor-5. Here, the different
strategies for targeting the interferon regulatory factor-5 signaling pathway in 
colorectal cancer are discussed. These strategies can be applied to a new
generation of cytotoxic agents, as well as to novel biological compounds that are
directed at inducing and/or activating interferon regulatory factor-5 or key
components of this pathway.

PMID: 16759167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. J Immunol. 2006 Jun 15;176(12):7462-70.

Differential activation of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF-5 transcription 
factors during viral infection.

Cheng TF(1), Brzostek S, Ando O, Van Scoy S, Kumar KP, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University, NY 
11794, USA.

Members of the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family regulate gene expression
critical to immune response, hemopoiesis, and proliferation. Although related by 
homology at their N-terminal DNA-binding domain, they display individual
functional properties. The distinct properties result from differences in
regulated expression, response to activating signals, and interaction with DNA
regulatory elements. IRF-3 is expressed ubiquitously and is activated by serine
phosphorylation in response to viral infection or TLR signaling. Evidence
indicates that the kinases TANK-binding kinase 1 and inhibitor of NF-kappaB
kinase-epsilon specifically phosphorylate and thereby activate IRF-3. We
evaluated the contribution of another member of the IRF family, IRF-5, during
viral infection since prior studies provided varied results. Analysis of
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, dimerization, binding to CREB-binding
protein, recognition of DNA, and induction of gene expression were used
comparatively with IRF-3 as a measure of IRF-5 activation. IRF-5 was not
activated by viral infection; however, expression of TANK-binding kinase 1 or
inhibitor of NF-kappaB kinase-epsilon did provide clear activation of IRF-5.
IRF-5 is therefore distinct in its activation profile from IRF-3. However,
similar to the biological effects of IRF-3 activation, a constitutively active
mutation of IRF-5 promoted apoptosis. The apoptosis was inhibited by expression
of Bcl-x(L) but not a dominant-negative mutation of the Fas-associated death
domain. These studies support the distinct activation profiles of IRF-3 in
comparison to IRF-5, but reveal a potential shared biological effect.

PMID: 16751392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Nat Genet. 2006 May;38(5):550-5. Epub 2006 Apr 16.

A common haplotype of interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) regulates splicing
and expression and is associated with increased risk of systemic lupus
erythematosus.

Graham RR(1), Kozyrev SV, Baechler EC, Reddy MV, Plenge RM, Bauer JW, Ortmann WA,
Koeuth T, González Escribano MF; Argentine and Spanish Collaborative Groups,
Pons-Estel B, Petri M, Daly M, Gregersen PK, Martín J, Altshuler D, Behrens TW,
Alarcón-Riquelme ME.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex autoimmune disease characterized 
by activation of the type I interferon (IFN) pathway. Here we convincingly
replicate association of the IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) rs2004640 T allele
with SLE in four independent case-control cohorts (P = 4.4 x 10(-16)) and by
family-based transmission disequilibrium test analysis (P = 0.0006). The
rs2004640 T allele creates a 5' donor splice site in an alternate exon 1 of IRF5,
allowing expression of several unique IRF5 isoforms. We also identify an
independent cis-acting variant associated with elevated expression of IRF5 and
linked to the exon 1B splice site. Haplotypes carrying the variant associated
with elevated expression and lacking the exon 1B donor site do not confer risk of
SLE. Thus, a common IRF5 haplotype driving elevated expression of multiple unique
isoforms of IRF5 is an important genetic risk factor for SLE, establishing a
causal role for type I IFN pathway genes in human autoimmunity.

PMID: 16642019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Curr Opin Immunol. 2006 Feb;18(1):3-9. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

How Toll-like receptors signal: what we know and what we don't know.

O'Neill LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.
laoneill@tcd.ie

Signal transduction pathways activated by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have
continued to be a major focus of research for investigators interested in the
initiation of innate immune responses and the induction of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and type I interferons during infection. Biochemical details of the
major signalling pathways have now been obtained, and the specific signalling
pathways activated by different TLRs are being elucidated. New insights into the 
activation of IRF family members, notably IRF3, IRF5 and IRF7, have been
obtained, and interesting spatiotemporal aspects of signalling by MyD88 leading
to IRF7 activation revealed. Adapters in TLR signalling are targets for
inhibition, both by endogenous regulators and by virally derived proteins.
Selective targeting of pathways by anti-inflammatory glucocorticoids also
indicates the potential for modulating TLR signalling therapeutically.

PMID: 16343886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Nov 1;102(44):15989-94. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

Negative regulation of Toll-like-receptor signaling by IRF-4.

Negishi H(1), Ohba Y, Yanai H, Takaoka A, Honma K, Yui K, Matsuyama T, Taniguchi 
T, Honda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The recognition of microbial components by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) is an event
central to the activation of innate and adaptive immune systems. TLR activation
triggers the induction of downstream target genes, wherein the TLR-interacting
adaptor molecule MyD88 recruits various signaling molecules and transcription
factors. Two members of the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family of transcription
factors, IRF-5 and IRF-7, interact with MyD88 and induce proinflammatory
cytokines and type I IFNs, respectively. Here, we show that IRF-4 also interacts 
with MyD88 and acts as a negative regulator of TLR signaling. IRF-4 mRNA is
induced by TLR activation, and IRF-4 competes with IRF-5, but not with IRF-7, for
MyD88 interaction. The TLR-dependent induction of proinflammatory cytokines is
markedly enhanced in peritoneal macrophages from mice deficient in the Irf4 gene,
whereas the induction is inhibited by the ectopic expression of IRF-4 in a
macrophage cell line. The critical function of IRF-4 in TLR signaling in vivo is 
underscored by the observation that Irf4-deficient mice show hypersensitivity to 
DNA-induced shock, with elevated serum proinflammatory cytokine levels. This
study may provide an insight into the complex regulatory mechanisms of MyD88
signaling by IRFs.

PMCID: PMC1257749
PMID: 16236719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Virol. 2005 Sep;79(18):11671-6.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 represses expression of the Epstein-Barr virus
oncoprotein LMP1: braking of the IRF7/LMP1 regulatory circuit.

Ning S(1), Huye LE, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, School
of Medicine, Campus Box 7295, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

We have reported evidence for a positive regulatory circuit between interferon
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) and the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) oncoprotein 1 (LMP1) 
(S. Ning, A. M. Hahn, and J. S. Pagano, J. Virol. 77:9359-9368, 2003). To explore
a possible braking mechanism for this circuit, several type II EBV-infected cell 
lines that express different levels of LMP1 and IRF7 proteins and therefore are
convenient for studying modulation of expression of LMP1 were analyzed.
Endogenous levels of IRF7 and LMP1 were directly correlated. Transient expression
of an IRF7 dominant-negative mutant decreased LMP1 levels. Endogenous IRF5 and
IRF7 proteins were shown to physically associate in EBV-positive cells. Transient
expression of IRF5 decreased activation of the LMP1 promoter by IRF7 in a
dose-dependent manner. Finally, transfection of either an IRF5 dominant-negative 
construct or IRF5 small interfering RNA in these cells resulted in increases in
endogenous levels of LMP1. These results indicate that IRF5 can downregulate
IRF7's induction of expression of LMP1 most likely by interacting with IRF7 and
provide a means of modulating a regulatory circuit between IRF7 and LMP1.

PMCID: PMC1212628
PMID: 16140744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 15;65(16):7403-12.

Signaling through IFN regulatory factor-5 sensitizes p53-deficient tumors to DNA 
damage-induced apoptosis and cell death.

Hu G(1), Mancl ME, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Human IFN regulatory factor-5 (IRF-5) is a candidate tumor suppressor gene that
mediates cell arrest, apoptosis, and immune activation. Here we show that ectopic
IRF-5 sensitizes p53-proficient and p53-deficient colon cancer cells to DNA
damage-induced apoptosis. The combination IFN-beta and irinotecan (CPT-11)
cooperatively inhibits cell growth and IRF-5 synergizes with it to further
promote apoptosis. The synergism is due to IRF-5 signaling since a striking
defect in apoptosis and cell death was observed in IRF-5-deficient cells, which
correlated well with a reduction in DNA damage-induced cellular events.
Components of this IRF-5 signaling pathway are investigated including a mechanism
for DNA damage-induced IRF-5 activation. Thus, IRF-5-regulated pathways may serve
as a target for cancer therapeutics.

PMID: 16103093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 3;280(22):21078-90. Epub 2005 Mar 31.

Two discrete promoters regulate the alternatively spliced human interferon
regulatory factor-5 isoforms. Multiple isoforms with distinct cell type-specific 
expression, localization, regulation, and function.

Mancl ME(1), Hu G, Sangster-Guity N, Olshalsky SL, Hoops K, Fitzgerald-Bocarsly
P, Pitha PM, Pinder K, Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Viral Oncology, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor-5 (IRF-5) is a mediator of virus-induced immune
activation and type I interferon (IFN) gene regulation. In human primary
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC), IRF-5 is transcribed into four distinct
alternatively spliced isoforms (V1, V2, V3, and V4), whereas in human primary
peripheral blood mononuclear cells two additional new isoforms (V5 and V6) were
identified. The IRF-5 V1, V2, and V3 transcripts have different noncoding first
exons and distinct insertion/deletion patterns in exon 6. Here we showed that V1 
and V3 have distinct transcription start sites and are regulated by two discrete 
promoters. The V1 promoter (P-V1) is constitutively active, contains an IRF-E
consensus-binding site, and is further stimulated in virus-infected cells by IRF 
family members. In contrast, endogenous V3 transcripts were up-regulated by type 
I IFNs, and the V3 promoter (P-V3) contains an IFN-stimulated responsive
element-binding site that confers responsiveness to IFN through binding of the
ISGF3 complex. In addition to V5 and V6, we have identified three more
alternatively spliced IRF-5 isoforms (V7, V8, and V9); V5 and V6 were expressed
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy donors and in immortalized B
and T cell malignancies, whereas expression of V7, V8, and V9 transcripts were
detected only in human cancers. The results of this study demonstrated the
existence of multiple IRF-5 spliced isoforms with distinct cell type-specific
expression, cellular localization, differential regulation, and dissimilar
functions in virus-mediated type I IFN gene induction.

PMID: 15805103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):17005-12. Epub 2005 Jan 28.

The interferon regulatory factor, IRF5, is a central mediator of toll-like
receptor 7 signaling.

Schoenemeyer A(1), Barnes BJ, Mancl ME, Latz E, Goutagny N, Pitha PM, Fitzgerald 
KA, Golenbock DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are critical components of virus-induced
immune activation and type I interferon regulation. IRF3 and IRF7 are activated
in response to a variety of viruses or after engagement of Toll-like receptor
(TLR) 3 and TLR4 by double-stranded RNA and lipopolysaccharide, respectively. The
activation of IRF5, is much more restricted. Here we show that in contrast to
IRF3 and IRF7, IRF5 is not a target of the TLR3 signaling pathway but is
activated by TLR7 or TLR8 signaling. We also demonstrate that MyD88, interleukin 
1 receptor-associated kinase 1, and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor 6 are required for the activation of IRF5 and IRF7 in the TLR7 signaling
pathway. Moreover, ectopic expression of IRF5 enabled type I interferon
production in response to TLR7 signaling, whereas knockdown of IRF5 by small
interfering RNA reduced type I interferon induction in response to the TLR7
ligand, R-848. IRF5 and IRF7, therefore, emerge from these studies as critical
mediators of TLR7 signaling.

PMID: 15695821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Nature. 2005 Mar 10;434(7030):243-9. Epub 2005 Jan 23.

Integral role of IRF-5 in the gene induction programme activated by Toll-like
receptors.

Takaoka A(1), Yanai H, Kondo S, Duncan G, Negishi H, Mizutani T, Kano S, Honda K,
Ohba Y, Mak TW, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) is central to innate and adaptive
immunity. All TLRs use the adaptor MyD88 for signalling, but the mechanisms
underlying the MyD88-mediated gene induction programme are as yet not fully
understood. Here, we demonstrate that the transcription factor IRF-5 is generally
involved downstream of the TLR-MyD88 signalling pathway for gene induction of
proinflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-6 (IL-6), IL-12 and
tumour-necrosis factor-alpha. In haematopoietic cells from mice deficient in the 
Irf5 gene (Irf5-/- mice), the induction of these cytokines by various TLR ligands
is severely impaired, whereas interferon-alpha induction is normal. We also
provide evidence that IRF-5 interacts with and is activated by MyD88 and TRAF6,
and that TLR activation results in the nuclear translocation of IRF-5 to activate
cytokine gene transcription. Consistently, Irf5-/- mice show resistance to lethal
shock induced by either unmethylated DNA or lipopolysaccharide, which correlates 
with a marked decrease in the serum levels of proinflammatory cytokines. Thus,
our study identifies IRF-5 as a new, principal downstream regulator of the
TLR-MyD88 signalling pathway and a potential target of therapeutic intervention
to control harmful immune responses.

PMID: 15665823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Mar;76(3):528-37. Epub 2005 Jan 18.

Polymorphisms in the tyrosine kinase 2 and interferon regulatory factor 5 genes
are associated with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Sigurdsson S(1), Nordmark G, Göring HH, Lindroos K, Wiman AC, Sturfelt G, Jönsen 
A, Rantapää-Dahlqvist S, Möller B, Kere J, Koskenmies S, Widén E, Eloranta ML,
Julkunen H, Kristjansdottir H, Steinsson K, Alm G, Rönnblom L, Syvänen AC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine, Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a complex systemic autoimmune disease
caused by both genetic and environmental factors. Genome scans in families with
SLE point to multiple potential chromosomal regions that harbor SLE
susceptibility genes, and association studies in different populations have
suggested several susceptibility alleles for SLE. Increased production of type I 
interferon (IFN) and expression of IFN-inducible genes is commonly observed in
SLE and may be pivotal in the molecular pathogenesis of the disease. We analyzed 
44 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 13 genes from the type I IFN pathway
in 679 Swedish, Finnish, and Icelandic patients with SLE, in 798 unaffected
family members, and in 438 unrelated control individuals for joint linkage and
association with SLE. In two of the genes--the tyrosine kinase 2 (TYK2) and IFN
regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) genes--we identified SNPs that displayed strong
signals in joint analysis of linkage and association (unadjusted P<10(-7)) with
SLE. TYK2 binds to the type I IFN receptor complex and IRF5 is a regulator of
type I IFN gene expression. Thus, our results support a disease mechanism in SLE 
that involves key components of the type I IFN system.

PMCID: PMC1196404
PMID: 15657875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Virol. 2005 Feb;79(3):1724-33.

Regulation of expression of the Epstein-Barr virus BamHI-A rightward transcripts.

Chen H(1), Huang J, Wu FY, Liao G, Hutt-Fletcher L, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) BamHI-A rightward transcripts, or BARTs, are a
family of mRNAs expressed in all EBV latency programs, including EBV-infected B
cells in healthy carriers. Despite their ubiquitous expression, the regulation
and biological function of BARTs are still unclear. In this study, the BART 5'
termini were characterized by using a procedure that selects capped, full-length 
mRNAs. Two TATA-less promoter regions, designated P1 and P2, were mapped. P1 had 
relatively high basal activity in both epithelial and B cells, whereas P2
exhibited higher activity in epithelial cells. Upon EBV infection of B cells,
transcription from P1 was detected soon after infection, while expression from P2
was delayed. Promoter-reporter assays in transiently transfected cells revealed
that P1 and P2 were differentially regulated. Interferon regulatory factor 7
(IRF7) and IRF5 negatively regulated P1 activity. c-Myc and C/EBP family members 
positively regulated P2. Regulation of P2 by C/EBPs was characterized by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter
assays. More-abundant BART expression in epithelial cells correlated with the
relative expression of positive and negative regulators in these cells.

PMCID: PMC544122
PMID: 15650197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 28;280(4):3088-95. Epub 2004 Nov 19.

A CRM1-dependent nuclear export pathway is involved in the regulation of IRF-5
subcellular localization.

Lin R(1), Yang L, Arguello M, Penafuerte C, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1E2, Canada. rongtuan.lin@mcgill.ca

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are involved in gene regulation in many
biological processes including the antiviral, growth regulatory, and immune
modulatory functions of the interferon system. Several studies have demonstrated 
that IRF-3, IRF-5, and IRF-7 specifically contribute to the innate antiviral
response to virus infection. It has been reported that virus-specific
phosphorylation leads to IRF-5 nuclear localization and up-regulation of
interferon, cytokine, and chemokine gene expression. Two nuclear localization
signals have been identified in IRF-5, both of which are sufficient for nuclear
translocation and retention in virus-infected cells. In the present study, we
demonstrate that a CRM1-dependent nuclear export pathway is involved in the
regulation of IRF-5 subcellular localization. IRF-5 possesses a functional
nuclear export signal (NES) that controls dynamic shuttling between the cytoplasm
and the nucleus. The NES element is dominant in unstimulated cells and results in
the predominant cytoplasmic localization of IRF-5. Mutation of two leucine
residues in the NES motif to alanine, or three adjacent Ser/Thr residues to the
phosphomimetic Asp, results in constitutively nuclear IRF-5 and suggests that
phosphorylation of adjacent Ser/Thr residues may contribute to IRF-5 nuclear
accumulation in virus-induced cells. IKK-related kinases TBK1 and IKKepsilon have
been shown to phosphorylate and activate IRF-3 and IRF-7, leading to the
production of type 1 interferons and the development of a cellular antiviral
state. We examined the phosphorylation and activation of IRF-5 by TBK1 and
IKKepsilon kinases. Although IRF-5 is phosphorylated by IKKepsilon and TBK1 in
co-transfected cells, the phosphorylation of IRF-5 did not lead to IRF-5 nuclear 
localization or activation.

PMID: 15556946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 15;64(20):7513-25.

Modulation of gene expression in human central nervous system tumors under
methionine deprivation-induced stress.

Kokkinakis DM(1), Liu X, Chada S, Ahmed MM, Shareef MM, Singha UK, Yang S, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and the Department of Pathology,
Hillman Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Methionine deprivation imposes a metabolic stress, termed methionine stress, that
inhibits mitosis and induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. The
methionine-dependent central nervous system tumor cell lines DAOY
(medulloblastoma), SWB61 (anaplastic oligodendroglioma), SWB40 (anaplastic
astrocytoma), and SWB39 (glioblastoma multiforme) were compared with
methionine-stress resistant SWB77 (glioblastoma multiforme). The cDNA-oligoarray 
analysis and reverse transcription-PCR verification indicated common changes in
gene expression in methionine-dependent cell lines to include
up-regulation/induction of cyclin D1, mitotic arrest deficient (MAD)1, p21,
growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible (GADD)45 alpha, GADD45 gamma, GADD34,
breast cancer (BRCA)1, 14-3-3sigma, B-cell CLL/lymphoma (BCL)1, transforming
growth factor (TGF)-beta, TGF-beta-induced early response (TIEG), SMAD5, SMAD7,
SMAD2, insulin-like growth factor binding protein (IGFBP7), IGF-R2, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), 
TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE), TRAIL receptor (TRAIL-R)2, TNFR-related death
receptor (DR)6, TRAF interacting protein (I-TRAF), IL-6, MDA7, IL-1B convertase
(ICE)-gamma, delta and epsilon, IRF1, IRF5, IRF7, interferon (IFN)-gamma and
receptor components, ISG15, p65-NF-kappaB, JUN-B, positive cofactor (PC)4,
C/ERB-beta, inositol triphosphate receptor I, and methionine adenosyltransferase 
II. On the other hand, cyclins A1, A2, B1 and B2, cell division cycle (CDC)2 and 
its kinase, CDC25 A and B, budding uninhibited by benzimidazoles (BUB)1 and 3,
MAD2, CDC28 protein kinase (CKS)1 and 2, neuroepithelial cell transforming gene
(NET)1, activator of S-phase kinase (ASK), CDC14B phosphatase, BCL2, TGF-beta
activated kinase (TAK)1, TAB1, c-FOS, DNA topoisomerase II, DNA polymerase alpha,
dihydrofolate reductase, thymidine kinase, stathmin, and MAP4 were
down-regulated. In the methionine stress-resistant SWB77, only 20% of the above
genes were affected, and then only to a lesser extent. In addition, some of the
changes observed in SWB77 were opposite to those seen in methionine-dependent
tumors, including expression of p21, TRAIL-R2, and TIEG. Despite similarities,
differences between methionine-dependent tumors were substantial, especially in
regard to regulation of cytokine expression. Western blot analysis confirmed that
methionine stress caused the following: (a) a marked increase of GADD45alpha and 
gamma in the wt-p53 cell lines SWB61 and 40; (b) an increase in GADD34 and p21
protein in all of the methionine-dependent lines; and (c) the induction of MDA7
and phospho-p38 in DAOY and SWB39, consistent with marked transcriptional
activation of the former under methionine stress. It was additionally shown that 
methionine stress down-regulated the highly active phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase
pathway by reducing AKT phosphorylation, especially in DAOY and SWB77, and also
reduced the levels of retinoblastoma (Rb) and pRb (P-ser780, P-ser795, and
P-ser807/811), resulting in a shift in favor of unphosphorylated species in all
of the methionine-dependent lines. Immunohistochemical analysis showed marked
inhibition of nuclear translocation of nuclear factor kappaB under methionine
stress in methionine-dependent lines. In this study we show for the first time
that methionine stress mobilizes several defined cell cycle checkpoints and
proapoptotic pathways while coordinately inhibiting prosurvival mechanisms in
central nervous system tumors. It is clear that methionine stress-induced
cytotoxicity is not restricted by the p53 mutational status.

PMID: 15492278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 22;279(43):45194-207. Epub 2004 Aug 11.

Global and distinct targets of IRF-5 and IRF-7 during innate response to viral
infection.

Barnes BJ(1), Richards J, Mancl M, Hanash S, Beretta L, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor 48109, USA.

The interferon regulatory factors (IRF) are transcriptional mediators of cellular
response to viral invasion that play a critical role in the innate antiviral
defense. Two of these factors, IRF-5 and IRF-7, play a critical role in the
induction of interferon (IFNA) genes in infected cells; they are expressed
constitutively in monocytes, B cells, and precursors of dendritic cells (pDC2)
that are high producers of interferon alpha, and their expression can be further 
stimulated by type I interferon. The goal of the present study was to identify
and analyze expression of cellular genes that are modulated by IRF-5 and IRF-7
during the innate response to viral infection. The transcription profiles of
infected BJAB cells overexpressing IRF-5 or IRF-7 were determined by using
oligonucleotide arrays with probe sets representing about 6800 human genes. This 
analysis shows that IRF-5 and IRF-7 activate a broad profile of heterologous
genes encoding not only antiviral, inflammatory, and pro-apoptotic proteins but
also proteins of other functional categories. The number of IRF-5- and
IRF-7-modulated genes was significantly higher in infected than in uninfected
cells, and the transcription signature was predominantly positive. Although IRF-5
and IRF-7 stimulated a large number of common genes, a distinct functional
profile was associated with each of these IRFs. The noted difference was a broad 
antiviral and early inflammatory transcriptional profile in infected BJAB/IRF-5
cells, whereas the IRF-7-induced transcripts were enriched for the group of
mitochondrial genes and genes affecting the DNA structure. Taken together, these 
data indicate that IRF-5 and IRF-7 act primarily as transcriptional activators
and that IRF-5-and IRF-7-induced innate antiviral response results in a broad
alteration of the transcriptional profile of cellular genes.

PMID: 15308637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Mar;34(3):796-805.

Viral infection and Toll-like receptor agonists induce a differential expression 
of type I and lambda interferons in human plasmacytoid and monocyte-derived
dendritic cells.

Coccia EM(1), Severa M, Giacomini E, Monneron D, Remoli ME, Julkunen I, Cella M, 
Lande R, Uzé G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Infectious, Parasitic and
Immune-mediated Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

In humans, the type I interferon (IFN) family consists of 13 IFN-alpha subtypes, 
IFN-beta and IFN-omicron the newly discovered IFN-like family consists of
IFN-lambda1, -lambda2 and -lambda3. We have investigated the expression of type I
and lambda IFN genes following virus infections or Toll-like receptor (TLR)
triggering in monocyte-derived DC (MDDC) and plasmacytoid DC (pDC). We found that
all IFN-alpha, -beta, -omicron and -lambda subtypes are expressed in
influenza-virus-infected MDDC or pDC. Conversely, differential type I IFN gene
transcription was induced in MDDC and pDC stimulated by specific TLR agonists.
TLR-9 stimulation by CpG DNA induced the expression of all IFN-alpha, -beta,
-omicron and -lambda subtypes in pDC, whereas TLR-4 stimulation by LPS, or TLR-3 
stimulation by poly I:C, induced only IFN-beta and IFN-lambda gene expression in 
MDDC. The expression pattern of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-5 and IRF-7 in MDDC
and pDC was also determined. IRF-5 was constitutively expressed in the two DC
subsets whereas IRF-7 was constitutive in pDC but its expression was induced
along MDDC maturation. Overall, our data indicate that the coordinated expression
of IFN-lambda with IFN-beta would be of crucial importance for the maturation of 
DC.

PMID: 14991609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Int J Cancer. 2004 Mar 1;108(6):845-51.

Differential gene-expression profiling in the leukemia cell lines derived from
indolent and aggressive phases of CD56+ T-cell large granular lymphocyte
leukemia.

Daibata M(1), Matsuo Y, Machida H, Taguchi T, Ohtsuki Y, Taguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Respiratory Medicine, Kochi Medical School, Kochi
783-8505, Japan. daibatam@kochi-ms.ac.jp

As a rule, T cell large granular lymphocyte (T-LGL) leukemia runs a chronic
clinical course without need for therapy. Some cases, however, progress to an
aggressive disease after the indolent clinical stage. The transformation
mechanism into a high-grade malignancy has not been well studied. We have
established 2 leukemia cell lines, MOTN-1 and PLT-2, derived from the same clone 
of CD56+ T-LGL leukemia in chronic and aggressive phases, respectively. The
paired availability of such cell lines is valuable in biologic and genetic
investigation of T-LGL leukemia. We used a microarray containing 406 cDNAs to
elucidate alterations of gene expression between the 2 cell lines. We found a
number of genes that were differentially expressed: 13 genes with increased
expression and 3 genes with reduced expression in PLT-2 cells as compared to
MOTN-1 cells. Increased expression of the dek, rac, Op18, CD6, CD58, CD106, Id2, 
ATF4, IRF5, ELL2 and D6 genes, and reduced expression of the GzmA and GzmK genes 
were confirmed by real-time quantitative reverse transcription-PCR, whose results
paralleled the microarray data. These upregulated genes encode oncoproteins, cell
surface antigens including molecules related to T cell proliferation,
transcription factors, and a chemokine receptor. The two downregulated genes
encode granzymes that play an important role for induction of cell death. These
findings suggest that there is differential gene expression in different clinical
phases of T-LGL leukemia and these differentially expressed genes would be
potential targets for further studies to identify the genes involved in the
transformation process of T-LGL leukemia.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14712486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 1;63(19):6424-31.

Interferon regulatory factor 5, a novel mediator of cell cycle arrest and cell
death.

Barnes BJ(1), Kellum MJ, Pinder KE, Frisancho JA, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1650 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, 
USA. barnebe@jhmi.edu

We have previously shown a critical role for IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) in
the innate immune response to virus infection. For the first time, we now show
that although IRF-5 is a direct target of p53, its cell cycle regulatory and
proapoptotic effects are p53 independent. IRF-5 inhibits both in vitro and in
vivo B-cell lymphoma tumor growth in the absence of wild-type p53. The molecular 
mechanism(s) of IRF-5-mediated growth inhibition is associated with a G(2)-M cell
cycle arrest and modulation of growth regulatory and proapoptotic genes,
including p21, Bak, DAP kinase 2, and Bax. Taken together, these data indicate
that although IRF-5 is a downstream target of p53, its growth inhibitory and
proapoptotic effects are independent of p53.

PMID: 14559832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Eur J Pharmacol. 2003 Mar 19;464(2-3):87-94.

Human proximal tubular cell responses to angiotensin II analyzed using DNA
microarray.

Braam B(1), Allen P, Benes E, Koomans HA, Navar LG, Hammond T.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Section, and Tulane Environmental Astrobiology Center, New Orleans,
LA, USA. g.b.braam@azu.nl

Angiotensin II has been shown to exert complex effects on proximal tubular cell
function and growth. To assess some of the direct effects on proximal tubular
cells, changes in gene expression of selected cellular pathways were determined
after exposure to angiotensin II. We used DNA microarrays to analyze multiple
gene expression responses to increasing angiotensin II concentrations. Human
proximal tubular cells were grown in flasks, and the presence of angiotensin type
1 receptor was confirmed by Western blot analysis. At passages 4-6, these cells
were exposed to angiotensin II and harvested 4 h later and mRNA of the cells was 
extracted; 2 microg of mRNA was fluorescently conjugated for cDNA microarray
hybridization. A custom-made DNA microarray was designed by selecting 300 human
genes from 10 different functional systems and amplifying clones using polymerase
chain reaction. Cells were subjected to 10 and 100 nM angiotensin II with paired 
untreated cells as controls. RNA was isolated, reverse transcribed, labeled and
hybridized to the arrays and the ratios calculated. Ratios of > or =2.0 and < or 
=0.5 were considered significant. Coordinated changes were observed in genes of
the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 family (NHF3; HNF3A, HNF3B and HNF3G), in the E2F
genes (E2F1, E2F3) and the interferon regulatory factors IRF1 and IRF5. Induction
of the expression of transcription factors points towards complex regulation of
gene expression upon angiotensin II exposure. Three genes involved in the
dampening of oxidative stress were enhanced. Taken together, brief exposure of
human tubular epithelial cells to angiotensin II elicited a marked induction of
nuclear factors, antioxidant genes and hormones and hormone receptor genes. The
quick activation of transcription factors by angiotensin II indicates that
angiotensin II can directly initiate a cascade of expressional events in proximal
tubular cells.

PMID: 12620499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):16630-41. Epub 2003 Feb 24.

Virus-induced heterodimer formation between IRF-5 and IRF-7 modulates assembly of
the IFNA enhanceosome in vivo and transcriptional activity of IFNA genes.

Barnes BJ(1), Field AE, Pitha-Rowe PM.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.
barnebe@jhmi.edu

Transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family have been 
identified as critical mediators of early inflammatory gene transcription in
infected cells. We have shown previously that IRF-5, like IRF-3 and IRF-7, is a
direct transducer of virus-mediated signaling and plays a role in the expression 
of multiple cytokines/chemokines. The present study is focused on the molecular
mechanisms underlying the formation and function of IRF-5/IRF-7 heterodimers in
infected cells. The interaction between IRF-5 and IRF-7 is not cooperative and
results in a repression rather than enhancement of IFNA gene transcription. The
formation of the IRF-5/IRF-7 heterodimer is dependent on IRF-7 phosphorylation,
as shown by the glutathione S-transferase pull-down and immunoprecipitation
assays. Mapping of the interaction domain revealed that formation of IRF-5/IRF-7 
heterodimers occurs through the amino terminus resulting in a masking of the DNA 
binding domain, the consequent alteration of the composition of the enhanceosome 
complex binding to IFNA promoters in vivo, and modulation of the expression
profile of IFNA subtypes. Thus, these results indicate that IRF-5 can act as both
an activator and a repressor of IFN gene induction dependent on the
IRF-interacting partner, and IRF-5 may be a part of the regulatory network that
ensures timely expression of the immediate early inflammatory genes.

PMID: 12600985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;22(16):5721-40.

Multiple regulatory domains of IRF-5 control activation, cellular localization,
and induction of chemokines that mediate recruitment of T lymphocytes.

Barnes BJ(1), Kellum MJ, Field AE, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family have been 
identified as critical mediators of early inflammatory gene transcription in
infected cells. We recently determined that, besides IRF-3 and IRF-7, IRF-5
serves as a direct transducer of virus-mediated signaling. In contrast to that
mediated by the other two IRFs, IRF-5-mediated activation is virus specific. We
show that, in addition to Newcastle disease virus (NDV) infection, vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV) and herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) infection
activates IRF-5, leading to the induction of IFNA gene subtypes that are distinct
from subtypes induced by NDV. The IRF-5-mediated stimulation of inflammatory
genes is not limited to IFNA since in BJAB/IRF-5-expressing cells IRF-5
stimulates transcription of RANTES, macrophage inflammatory protein 1 beta,
monocyte chemotactic protein 1, interleukin-8, and I-309 genes in a
virus-specific manner. By transient- transfection assay, we identified
constitutive-activation (amino acids [aa] 410 to 489) and autoinhibitory (aa 490 
to 539) domains in the IRF-5 polypeptide. We identified functional nuclear
localization signals (NLS) in the amino and carboxyl termini of IRF-5 and showed 
that both of these NLS are sufficient for nuclear translocation and retention in 
infected cells. Furthermore, we demonstrated that serine residues 477 and 480
play critical roles in the response to NDV infection. Mutation of these residues 
from serine to alanine dramatically decreased phosphorylation and resulted in a
substantial loss of IRF-5 transactivation in infected cells. Thus, this study
defines the regulatory phosphorylation sites that control the activity of IRF-5
in NDV-infected cells and provides further insight into the structure and
function of IRF-5. It also shows that the range of IRF-5 immunoregulatory target 
genes includes members of the cytokine and chemokine superfamilies.

PMCID: PMC133975
PMID: 12138184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Oncogene. 2002 Apr 25;21(18):2914-8.

Identification of the interferon regulatory factor 5 gene (IRF-5) as a direct
target for p53.

Mori T(1), Anazawa Y, Iiizumi M, Fukuda S, Nakamura Y, Arakawa H.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 
Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) regulate transcription of interferon genes
through DNA sequence-specific binding to these targets. Using a differential
display method for examining gene expression in p53-defective cells infected with
adenovirus containing wild-type p53, we found that expression of interferon
regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) mRNA was increased in the presence of exogenous p53. 
An electrophoretic mobility-shift assay showed that a potential p53 binding site 
(p53BS) detected in exon 2 of the IRF-5 gene could in fact bind to p53 protein.
Moreover, a heterologous reporter assay revealed that the p53BS possessed
p53-dependent transcriptional activity. Expression of IRF-5 was induced in p53+/+
cells (MCF7 and NHDF), but not inp53-/- cells (H1299) when DNA was damaged by
gamma-irradiation, UV-radiation, or adriamycin treatment in a wild-type
p53-dependent manner. These results suggest that IRF-5 is a novel p53-target, and
that it might mediate the p53-dependent immune response.

PMID: 11973653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):59-71.

On the role of IRF in host defense.

Barnes B(1), Lubyova B, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Oncology Research Center, Baltimore, MD 21231-1001, USA.

Transcription factors of the interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF) family have
been shown to play an essential role in the regulated expression of type I IFN
genes, IFN-stimulated genes (ISG), and other cytokines and chemokines. Three
members of the IRF family, IRF-3, IRF-5, and IRF-7, have been identified as
acting as direct transducers of virus-mediated signaling. In infected cells,
these factors are activated by phosphorylation on the serine residues,
transported to the nucleus, where they bind to the promoters of IFNA and IFNB
genes and tether histone transacetylases to the transcription complex
enhanceosome. IFNB and IFNA subtypes are expressed at different levels in
infected cells. The ratio between the relative levels of IRF-3 and IRF-7 was
shown to play an essential role in the inducible expression of type I IFN genes, 
whereas IRF-3 alone is sufficient for expression of the IFNB gene. IRF-5 was
identified recently as another inducer of IFNA genes, which has two unique
properties: (1) its activation is virus specific, and (2) the profile of IFNA
genes induced by IRF-5 is distinct from that induced by IRF-7. Several viruses
target functions of IRF to eliminate the early inflammatory response. Kaposi's
sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) encodes a cluster of four genes with homology to
cellular IRF. Three of these vIRF were shown to inhibit induction of IFN genes
and ISG in infected cells and function as dominant negative mutants of cellular
IRF. The unique properties of previously uncharacterized vIRF-2 and vIRF-3 are
discussed.

PMID: 11846976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23382-90. Epub 2001 Apr 12.

Virus-specific activation of a novel interferon regulatory factor, IRF-5, results
in the induction of distinct interferon alpha genes.

Barnes BJ(1), Moore PA, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center and the Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) genes encode DNA-binding proteins that are
involved in the innate immune response to infection. Two of these proteins, IRF-3
and IRF-7, serve as direct transducers of virus-mediated signaling and play
critical roles in the induction of type I interferon genes. We have now shown
that another factor, IRF-5, participates in the induction of interferon A (IFNA) 
and IFNB genes and can replace the requirement for IRF-7 in the induction of IFNA
genes. We demonstrate that, despite the functional similarity, IRF-5 possesses
unique characteristics and does not have a redundant role. Thus, 1) activation of
IRF-5 by phosphorylation is virus-specific, and its in vivo association with the 
IFNA promoter can be detected only in cells infected with NDV, not Sendai virus, 
while both viruses activate IRF-3 and IRF-7, and 2) NDV infection of
IRF-5-overexpressing cells preferentially induced the IFNA8 subtype, while IFNA1 
was primarily induced in IRF-7 expressing cells. These data indicate that
multiple signaling pathways induced by infection may be differentially recognized
by members of the IRF family and modulate transcription of individual IFNA genes 
in a virus and cell type-specific manner.

PMID: 11303025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Annu Rev Immunol. 2001;19:623-55.

IRF family of transcription factors as regulators of host defense.

Taniguchi T(1), Ogasawara K, Takaoka A, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
tada@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) constitute a family of transcription factors
that commonly possess a novel helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. Following the
initial identification of two structurally related members, IRF-1 and IRF-2,
seven additional members have now been reported. In addition, virally encoded
IRFs, which may interfere with cellular IRFs, have also been identified. Thus
far, intensive functional analyses have been done on IRF-1, revealing a
remarkable functional diversity of this transcription factor in the regulation of
cellular response in host defense. Indeed, IRF-1 selectively modulates different 
sets of genes, depending on the cell type and/or the nature of cellular stimuli, 
in order to evoke appropriate responses in each. More recently, much attention
has also been focused on other IRF family members. Their functional roles,
through interactions with their own or other members of the family of
transcription factors, are becoming clearer in the regulation of host defense,
such as innate and adaptive immune responses and oncogenesis.

PMID: 11244049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


