
1. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2016 Mar 31. [Epub ahead of print]

2'-5' Oligoadenylate synthetase-like 1 (OASL1) deficiency in mice promotes an
effective anti-tumor immune response by enhancing the production of type I
interferons.

Sim CK(1), Cho YS(1), Kim BS(1), Baek IJ(2,)(3), Kim YJ(4), Lee MS(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and Medicine (MoIM), Department of
Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical
Center, 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736, Korea. (2)Asan
Institute for Life Sciences, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul,
138-736, Korea. (3)KMPC (Korea Mouse Phenotyping Center), Seoul, 151-742, Korea. 
(4)Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Technology, Yonsei
University, Seoul, 120-749, Korea. (5)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology and
Medicine (MoIM), Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Ulsan College
of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul,
138-736, Korea. myeong@amc.seoul.kr. (6)KMPC (Korea Mouse Phenotyping Center),
Seoul, 151-742, Korea. myeong@amc.seoul.kr.

Type I interferon (IFN-I) plays a critical role in antiviral and antitumor
defense. In our previous studies, we showed that IFN-I-inducible 2'-5'
oligoadenylate synthetase-like 1 (OASL1) negatively regulates IFN-I production
upon viral infection by specifically inhibiting translation of the
IFN-I-regulating master transcription factor, interferon regulatory factor 7
(IRF7). In this study, we investigated whether OASL1 plays a negative role in the
anti-tumor immune response by using OASL1-deficient (Oasl1 (-/-)) mice and
transplantable syngeneic tumor cell models. We found that Oasl1 (-/-) mice
demonstrate enhanced resistance to lung metastatic tumors and subcutaneously
implanted tumors compared to wild-type (WT) mice. Additionally, we found that
cytotoxic effector cells such as CD8(+) T cells (including tumor antigen-specific
CD8(+) T cells) and NK cells as well as CD8a(+) DCs (the major antigen
cross-presenting cells) were much more frequent (>fivefold) in the Oasl1 (-/-)
mouse tumors. Furthermore, the cytotoxic effector cells in Oasl1 (-/-) mouse
tumors seemed to be more functionally active. However, the proportion of
immunosuppressive myeloid-derived suppressor cells within hematopoietic cells and
of regulatory T cells within CD4(+) T cells in Oasl1 (-/-) mouse tumors did not
differ significantly from that of WT mice. Tumor-challenged Oasl1 (-/-) mice
expressed increased levels of IFN-I and IRF7 protein in the growing tumor,
indicating that the enhanced antitumor immune response observed in Oasl1 (-/-)
mice was caused by higher IFN-I production in Oasl1 (-/-) mice. Collectively,
these results show that OASL1 deficiency promotes the antitumor immune response, 
and thus, OASL1 could be a good therapeutic target for treating tumors.

PMID: 27034232  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2016 Mar 18. doi: 10.1002/art.39679. [Epub ahead of print]

IgE inhibits TLR-7 and -9 mediated expression of interferon-alpha by plasmacytoid
dendritic cells in systemic lupus patients.

Khoryati L(1,)(2), Augusto JF(2), Shipley E(3), Contin-Bordes C(1,)(2,)(3),
Douchet I(2), Mitrovic S(2,)(3), Truchetet ME(1,)(2,)(3), Lazaro E(1,)(2,)(3),
Duffau P(1,)(2,)(3), Couzi L(1,)(2,)(3), Jacquemin C(1,)(2), Barnetche T(3),
Vacher P(1,)(4), Schaeverbeke T(1,)(3), Blanco P(1,)(2,)(3), Richez C(1,)(2,)(3);
FHU ACRONIM.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Bordeaux, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076, Bordeaux, France.
(2)ALYSAI, CNRS-UMR 5164, 146 rue Léo Saignat, 33076, Bordeaux, France. (3)Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Bordeaux, Place Amélie Raba Léon, 33076, Bordeaux,
France. (4)INSERM U916, Institut Bergonié, Bordeaux, France.

OBJECTIVE: Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) play a central role in systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE) pathogenesis through their unique ability to produce
large amounts of type I interferon (IFN-I) upon Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7/9
triggering. pDCs express specific surface regulatory receptors involved in
negative regulation of IFN-a secretion. These receptors use the gamma chain of
high-affinity Fc receptor for immunoglobulin E (IgE), FceRI. We hypothesized that
IgE engagement of FceRI on pDCs may impact IFN-a production in SLE patients.
METHODS: Serum levels of total IgE were measured in healthy volunteers, SLE, and 
allergic patients. FceRI expression on pDCs was evaluated by flow cytometry in
SLE patients. Purified pDCs were incubated with monoclonal IgE for 24h, then
stimulated for 18 hours with TLR agonists or immune complexes. IFN-a production
by pDCs was detected by quantitative RT-PCR and ELISA. Expression of TLR7/9 and
IRF7 was quantified in pDCs by quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We observed significantly higher IgE levels in SLE patients with
quiescent disease than with active disease. In SLE patients, IgE levels were
inversely correlated to disease activity. IgE levels were not associated with
presence of anti-nuclear IgE. Purified pDCs treated during 24h with monoclonal
IgE upregulate FceRI expression in an IgE dose-dependent manner. IgE-treated pDCs
significantly decrease IFN-a secretion and downregulate CCR7 expression upon
TLR7/9 and immune complex stimulation from lupus patients. IgE treatment
downregulates expression of TLR7/9 and IRF7.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support a protective role of IgE in SLE pathogenesis
through the modulation of inflammatory response by pDCs. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016, American College of Rheumatology.

PMID: 26991804  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Tuberculosis (Edinb). 2016 Mar;97:73-85. doi: 10.1016/j.tube.2015.12.002. Epub
2015 Dec 18.

Canonical pathways, networks and transcriptional factor regulation by clinical
strains of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in pulmonary alveolar epithelial cells.

Mvubu NE(1), Pillay B(2), Gamieldien J(3), Bishai W(4), Pillay M(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture, Engineering and Science,
University of KwaZulu-Natal, Westville 3630, South Africa. Electronic address:
207500550@stu.ukzn.ac.za. (2)School of Life Sciences, College of Agriculture,
Engineering and Science, University of KwaZulu-Natal, Westville 3630, South
Africa. Electronic address: pillayb1@ukzn.ac.za. (3)South African National
Bioinformatics Institute/MRC Unit for Bioinformatics Capacity Development,
University of the Western Cape, Bellville 7530, South Africa. Electronic address:
junaid@sanbi.ac.za. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases,
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 1550 Orleans St., Baltimore, MD, United State
of America. Electronic address: wbishai1@jhmi.edu. (5)Medical Microbiology and
Infection Control, School of Laboratory Medicine and Medical Sciences, College of
Health Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal, 719 Umbilo Road, Private Bag 7,
Congella 4013, Durban, South Africa. Electronic address: pillayc@ukzn.ac.za.

Limited knowledge exists on pathways, networks and transcriptional factors
regulated within epithelial cells by diverse Mycobacterium tuberculosis
genotypes. This study aimed to elucidate these mechanisms induced in A549
epithelial cells by dominant clinical strains in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. RNA
for sequencing was extracted from epithelial cells at 48 h post-infection with 5 
strains at a multiplicity of infection of approximately 10:1. Bioinformatics
analysis performed with the RNA-Seq Tuxedo pipeline identified differentially
expressed genes. Changes in pathways, networks and transcriptional factors were
identified using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). The interferon signalling and 
hepatic fibrosis/hepatic stellate cell activation pathways were among the top 5
canonical pathways in all strains. Hierarchical clustering for enrichment of
cholesterol biosynthesis and immune associated pathways revealed similar patterns
for Beijing and Unique; F15/LAM4/KZN and F11; and, F28 and H37Rv strains,
respectively. However, the induction of top scoring networks varied among the
strains. Among the transcriptional factors, only EHL, IRF7, PML, STAT1, STAT2 and
VDR were induced by all clinical strains. Activation of the different pathways,
networks and transcriptional factors revealed in the current study may be an
underlying mechanism that results in the differential host response by clinical
strains of M. tuberculosis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26980499  [PubMed - in process]


4. BMC Microbiol. 2016 Mar 8;16(1):29. doi: 10.1186/s12866-016-0644-4.

Borrelia burgdorferi induces a type I interferon response during early stages of 
disseminated infection in mice.

Petzke MM(1), Iyer R(2), Love AC(3,)(4), Spieler Z(5), Brooks A(6), Schwartz
I(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
New York, USA. mary_petzke@nymc.edu. (2)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA.
radha_iyer@nymc.edu. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York
Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA. andreaclove@gmail.com. (4)Present
Address: Nexcelom Bioscience LLC, Lawrence, Massachusetts, USA.
andreaclove@gmail.com. (5)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York
Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA. zospieler@gmail.com. (6)Bionomics
Research and Technology Center, Robert Wood Johnson-University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey/Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA.
brooks@dls.rutgers.edu. (7)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York
Medical College, Valhalla, New York, USA. ira_schwartz@nymc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Lyme borrelia genotypes differ in their capacity to cause
disseminated disease. Gene array analysis was employed to profile the host
transcriptome induced by Borrelia burgdorferi strains with different capacities
for causing disseminated disease in the blood of C3H/HeJ mice during early
infection.
RESULTS: B. burgdorferi B515, a clinical isolate that causes disseminated
infection in mice, differentially regulated 236 transcripts (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05 by ANOVA,
with fold change of at least 2). The 216 significantly induced transcripts
included interferon (IFN)-responsive genes and genes involved in immunity and
inflammation. In contrast, B. burgdorferi B331, a clinical isolate that causes
transient skin infection but does not disseminate in C3H/HeJ mice, stimulated
changes in only a few genes (1 induced, 4 repressed). Transcriptional regulation 
of type I IFN and IFN-related genes was measured by quantitative RT-PCR in mouse 
skin biopsies collected from the site of infection 24 h after inoculation with B.
burgdorferi. The mean values for transcripts of Ifnb, Cxcl10, Gbp1, Ifit1, Ifit3,
Irf7, Mx1, and Stat2 were found to be significantly increased in B. burgdorferi
strain B515-infected mice relative to the control group. In contrast,
transcription of these genes was not significantly changed in response to B.
burgdorferi strain B331 or B31-4, a mutant that is unable to disseminate.
CONCLUSIONS: These results establish a positive association between the
disseminating capacity of B. burgdorferi and early type I IFN induction in a
murine model of Lyme disease.

PMCID: PMC4784397
PMID: 26957120  [PubMed - in process]


5. J Neuroimmunol. 2016 Mar 15;292:34-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2016.01.010. Epub
2016 Jan 16.

A gene expression study denies the ability of 25 candidate biomarkers to predict 
the interferon-beta treatment response in multiple sclerosis patients.

Martire S(1), Navone ND(2), Montarolo F(3), Perga S(4), Bertolotto A(5).

Author information: 
(1)AOU San Luigi Gonzaga, Neurologia 2 - CReSM (Regional Referring Center of
Multiple Sclerosis), Neurobiology Unit, Orbassano, TO, Italy; Neuroscience
Institute Cavalieri Ottolenghi (NICO), Orbassano, TO, Italy. Electronic address: 
serena.martire@gmail.com. (2)AOU San Luigi Gonzaga, SCDU Medical Oncology,
Orbassano, TO, Italy. Electronic address: nicolednavone@gmail.com. (3)AOU San
Luigi Gonzaga, Neurologia 2 - CReSM (Regional Referring Center of Multiple
Sclerosis), Neurobiology Unit, Orbassano, TO, Italy; Neuroscience Institute
Cavalieri Ottolenghi (NICO), Orbassano, TO, Italy. Electronic address:
francesca.montarolo@unito.it. (4)AOU San Luigi Gonzaga, Neurologia 2 - CReSM
(Regional Referring Center of Multiple Sclerosis), Neurobiology Unit, Orbassano, 
TO, Italy; Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri Ottolenghi (NICO), Orbassano, TO,
Italy. Electronic address: simona.perga@unito.it. (5)AOU San Luigi Gonzaga,
Neurologia 2 - CReSM (Regional Referring Center of Multiple Sclerosis),
Neurobiology Unit, Orbassano, TO, Italy; Neuroscience Institute Cavalieri
Ottolenghi (NICO), Orbassano, TO, Italy. Electronic address:
antonio.bertolotto@gmail.com.

We studied the baseline expression level of 25 interferon-regulated genes (MxA,
GPR3, IL17RC, ISG15, TRAIL, OASL, IFIT1, IFIT2, RSAD2, OAS3, IFI44L, TRIM22,
IL10, CXCL10, STAT1, OAS1, OAS2, IFNAR1, IFNAR2, IFNß, ISG20, IFI6, PKR, IRF7,
USP18), recurrently proposed in the literature as predictive biomarkers of
interferon-beta treatment response, in whole blood of 10 "responders" and 10
"non-responders" multiple sclerosis relapsing-remitting patients, retrospectively
selected on the basis of stringent clinical criteria after a five years
follow-up. However, we cannot confirm the predictive value of these candidate
biomarkers.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26943956  [PubMed - in process]


6. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 26;11(2):e0150251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0150251.
eCollection 2016.

Analysis of Transcriptional Signatures in Response to Listeria monocytogenes
Infection Reveals Temporal Changes That Result from Type I Interferon Signaling.

Pitt JM(1), Blankley S(1), Potempa K(1), Graham CM(1), Moreira-Teixeira L(1),
McNab FW(1), Howes A(1), Stavropoulos E(1), Pascual V(2), Banchereau J(3),
Chaussabel D(4,)(5), O'Garra A(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation and Infection, The Francis Crick Institute,
Mill Hill Laboratory, London, United Kingdom. (2)Baylor Institute for Immunology 
Research/ANRS Center for Human Vaccines, INSERM, Dallas, Texas, United States of 
America. (3)The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, 263 Farmington Ave,
Farmington, CT 06030, Connecticut, United States of America. (4)Systems
Immunology, Benaroya Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of
America. (5)Sidra Medical and Research Center, Doha, Qatar. (6)Department of
Medicine, NHLI, Imperial College, London, United Kingdom.

Analysis of the mouse transcriptional response to Listeria monocytogenes
infection reveals that a large set of genes are perturbed in both blood and
tissue and that these transcriptional responses are enriched for pathways of the 
immune response. Further we identified enrichment for both type I and type II
interferon (IFN) signaling molecules in the blood and tissues upon infection.
Since type I IFN signaling has been reported widely to impair bacterial clearance
we examined gene expression from blood and tissues of wild type (WT) and type I
IFNaß receptor-deficient (Ifnar1-/-) mice at the basal level and upon infection
with L. monocytogenes. Measurement of the fold change response upon infection in 
the absence of type I IFN signaling demonstrated an upregulation of specific
genes at day 1 post infection. A less marked reduction of the global gene
expression signature in blood or tissues from infected Ifnar1-/- as compared to
WT mice was observed at days 2 and 3 after infection, with marked reduction in
key genes such as Oasg1 and Stat2. Moreover, on in depth analysis, changes in
gene expression in uninfected mice of key IFN regulatory genes including Irf9,
Irf7, Stat1 and others were identified, and although induced by an equivalent
degree upon infection this resulted in significantly lower final gene expression 
levels upon infection of Ifnar1-/- mice. These data highlight how dysregulation
of this network in the steady state and temporally upon infection may determine
the outcome of this bacterial infection and how basal levels of type I
IFN-inducible genes may perturb an optimal host immune response to control
intracellular bacterial infections such as L. monocytogenes.

PMCID: PMC4768944
PMID: 26918359  [PubMed - in process]


7. Funct Integr Genomics. 2016 Feb 24. [Epub ahead of print]

Analysis of human breast milk cells: gene expression profiles during pregnancy,
lactation, involution, and mastitic infection.

Sharp JA(1,)(2), Lefèvre C(3), Watt A(4), Nicholas KR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, 3216,
Australia. julie.sharp@deakin.edu.au. (2)Department of Anatomy and Developmental 
Biology, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, 3800, Australia.
julie.sharp@deakin.edu.au. (3)Division of Bioinformatics, Walter and Eliza Hall
Medical Research Institute, Melbourne, 3000, Australia.
chris.lefevre@deakin.edu.au. (4)Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin
University, Geelong, VIC, 3216, Australia. ashalyn.watt@deakin.edu.au.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
VIC, 3800, Australia. k.nicholas@deakin.edu.au.

The molecular processes underlying human milk production and the effects of
mastitic infection are largely unknown because of limitations in obtaining tissue
samples. Determination of gene expression in normal lactating women would be a
significant step toward understanding why some women display poor lactation
outcomes. Here, we demonstrate the utility of RNA obtained directly from human
milk cells to detect mammary epithelial cell (MEC)-specific gene expression. Milk
cell RNA was collected from five time points (24 h prepartum during the colostrum
period, midlactation, two involutions, and during a bout of mastitis) in addition
to an involution series comprising three time points. Gene expression profiles
were determined by use of human Affymetrix arrays. Milk cells collected during
milk production showed that the most highly expressed genes were involved in milk
synthesis (e.g., CEL, OLAH, FOLR1, BTN1A1, and ARG2), while milk cells collected 
during involution showed a significant downregulation of milk synthesis genes and
activation of involution associated genes (e.g., STAT3, NF-kB, IRF5, and IRF7).
Milk cells collected during mastitic infection revealed regulation of a unique
set of genes specific to this disease state, while maintaining regulation of milk
synthesis genes. Use of conventional epithelial cell markers was used to
determine the population of MECs within each sample. This paper is the first to
describe the milk cell transcriptome across the human lactation cycle and during 
mastitic infection, providing valuable insight into gene expression of the human 
mammary gland.

PMID: 26909879  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Res Vet Sci. 2016 Feb;104:188-94. doi: 10.1016/j.rvsc.2015.12.016. Epub 2015 Dec 
23.

Porcine circovirus type 2 induces type I interferon production via
MyD88-IKKa-IRFs signaling rather than NF-<U+03BA>B in porcine alveolar macrophages in
vitro.

Chen M(1), Han J(1), Zhang Y(1), Duan D(1), Zhang S(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Weigang 1,
Nanjing 210095, China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Weigang 1, Nanjing 210095, China. Electronic address:
shuxia@njau.edu.cn.

Type I interferon (IFN-I) plays important roles in host antiviral responses. The 
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) and NF-<U+03BA>B transcription factors are thought to
be important in the processes of viral secretion and triggering of interferon
production. Recently, studies have shown that porcine circovirus type 2 (PCV2)
can induce IFN-I production in vivo and in vitro, but the mechanisms underlying
the production of PAMs infected with PCV2 remains unknown. Treatment of these
cells with BAY11-7082, an inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B activation, allowed us to study the 
secretion of IFN-a and IFN-ß in PAMs infected with PCV2. We found that IFN-a
expression was induced following virus infection of PAMs. Notably, even after
inhibitor treatment of PAMs infected with PCV2, secretion of IFN-a was
significantly higher (P<0.05) compared with the PCV2 infection alone group. Our
findings suggest that NF-<U+03BA>B plays a minor role in PCV2-induced type I interferon 
responses. To further characterize the signaling pathway that drives IFN-I
expression in PAMs in response to PCV2, we used siRNA to silence the expression
of Myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) and study the role of MyD88-IKKa-IRF
signaling in IFN-I production in PAMs induced by PCV2. Our findings show that
PCV2 induced IFN-a mRNA transcription, which is associated with the activities of
MyD88, IRF7, and IRF3. Thus, PCV2 can induce IFN-I transcription via the
MyD88-IKKa-IRF signaling axis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26850559  [PubMed - in process]


9. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2016 Feb;170:47-53. doi: 10.1016/j.vetimm.2015.10.006. 
Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Effect of common carp (Cyprinus carpio) TLR9 overexpression on the expression of 
downstream interferon-associated immune factor mRNAs in epithelioma papulosum
cyprini cells.

Xinxian W(1), Peng J(2), Guixiang T(3), Jinjin W(2), Xiaocong Z(2), Junqiang
H(2), Xianle Y(4), Hong L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Ocean University, College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai
201306, China; Guangxi Academy of Fishery Science, Nanning 530021, China.
(2)Shenzhen Entry-Exit Inspection and Quarantine Bureau, Shenzhen 518045, China. 
(3)Guangxi Academy of Fishery Science, Nanning 530021, China. (4)Shanghai Ocean
University, College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai 201306, China.
Electronic address: xlyang@shou.edu.cn. (5)Shenzhen Entry-Exit Inspection and
Quarantine Bureau, Shenzhen 518045, China. Electronic address:
liuhong@szciq.gov.cn.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are a class of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs)
that recognize pathogen associated molecular patterns (PAMPs) and play an
important role in the antiviral response. To determine the effect of common carp 
TLR9 (CcTLR9) overexpression on the expression of down-stream interferon
associated immune factors in epithelioma papulosum cyprini (EPC) cells, may
provide useful information for the further investigation on the anti-virus effect
mediated by TLR9 in fish. In this study, we constructed an overexpression vector,
pEGFP-N1-CcTLR9, by cloning the CcTLR9 gene and inserting it into an expression
vector pEGFP-N1. Both plasmids DNA of pEGFP-N1 and pEGFP-N1-CcTLR9 were
transfected into EPC cells, and the expression of IRF3, IRF7, ISG15, Mx1, PKR and
Viperin mRNA at 0, 6, 12, 24, 48 and 72h post-transfection were determined by
real-time quantitative PCR (Q-PCR). Overexpression of the CcTLR9 gene in EPC
cells upregulates the expression of IRF3, IRF7, ISG15, Mx1, PKR, and Viperin
mRNA, and this was more significant for Viperin, ISG15, and IRF7, and least
significant for PKR. Thus, fish TLR9 activates IRF7 signaling to induce I-IFN
secretion and the subsequent upregulation of IFN-stimulated genes.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26848048  [PubMed - in process]


10. J Virol. 2016 Mar 28;90(8):3902-12. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00129-16. Print 2016 Apr 15.

Suppression of Type I Interferon Production by Human T-Cell Leukemia Virus Type 1
Oncoprotein Tax through Inhibition of IRF3 Phosphorylation.

Yuen CK(1), Chan CP(2), Fung SY(2), Wang PH(2), Wong WM(1), Tang HM(2), Yuen
KS(2), Chan CP(2), Jin DY(3), Kok KH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. 
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong
Kong. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam,
Hong Kong dyjin@hku.hk khkok@hku.hk. (4)Department of Microbiology, The
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong dyjin@hku.hk khkok@hku.hk.

Infection with human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is associated with
adult T-cell leukemia (ATL) and tropical spastic paraparesis. Type I interferons 
(IFNs) are key effectors of the innate antiviral response, and IFN-a combined
with the nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor zidovudine is considered the 
standard first-line therapy for ATL. HTLV-1 oncoprotein Tax is known to suppress 
innate IFN production and response but the underlying mechanisms remain to be
fully established. In this study, we report on the suppression of type I IFN
production by HTLV-1 Tax through interaction with and inhibition of TBK1 kinase
that phosphorylates IRF3. Induced transcription of IFN-ß was severely impaired in
HTLV-1-transformed ATL cells and freshly infected T lymphocytes. The ability to
suppress IRF3 activation was ascribed to Tax. The expression of Tax alone
sufficiently repressed the induction of IFN production by RIG-I plus PACT, cGAMP 
synthase plus STING, TBK1, IKKe, IRF3, and IRF7, but not by IRF3-5D, a
dominant-active phosphomimetic mutant. This suggests that Tax perturbs IFN
production at the step of IRF3 phosphorylation. Tax mutants deficient for CREB or
NF-<U+03BA>B activation were fully competent in the suppression of IFN production.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the association of Tax with TBK1,
IKKe, STING, and IRF3.In vitrokinase assay indicated an inhibitory effect of Tax 
on TBK1-mediated phosphorylation of IRF3. Taken together, our findings suggested 
a new mechanism by which HTLV-1 oncoprotein Tax circumvents the production of
type I IFNs in infected cells. Our findings have implications in therapeutic
intervention of ATL.IMPORTANCE: Human T-cell leukemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) is
the cause of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL), an aggressive and fatal blood cancer,
as well as another chronic disabling disease of the spinal cord. Treatments are
unsatisfactory, and options are limited. A combination of antiviral cellular
protein alpha interferon and zidovudine, which is an inhibitor of a viral enzyme 
called reverse transcriptase, has been recommended as the standard first-line
therapy for ATL. Exactly how HTLV-1 interacts with the cellular machinery for
interferon production and action is not well understood. Our work sheds light on 
the mechanism of action for the inhibition of interferon production by an HTLV-1 
oncogenic protein called Tax. Our findings might help to improve interferon-based
anti-HTLV-1 and anti-ATL therapy.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 26819312  [PubMed - in process]


11. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 25;17(1):76. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2405-z.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 regulates airway epithelial cell responses to
human rhinovirus infection.

Bosco A(1), Wiehler S(2), Proud D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Telethon Kids Institute, University of Western Australia, PO Box 855, West
Perth, WA, 6872, Australia. Anthony.Bosco@telethonkids.org.au. (2)Airway
Inflammation Research Group, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, and the
Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, University of Calgary Faculty of
Medicine, Calgary, AB, Canada. wiehler@ucalgary.ca. (3)Airway Inflammation
Research Group, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, and the Department of
Physiology & Pharmacology, University of Calgary Faculty of Medicine, Calgary,
AB, Canada. dproud@ucalgary.ca.

BACKGROUND: Human rhinoviruses (HRV) cause the majority of colds and trigger
exacerbations of chronic lower airway diseases. Airway epithelial cells are the
primary site for HRV infection and replication, and the initiation of host
inflammatory responses. At present, the molecular mechanisms that underpin HRV
responses in airway epithelial cells are incompletely understood. The aim of this
study was to employ microarray profiling, upstream regulator analysis, and siRNA 
mediated gene silencing to further our understanding of the role of interferon
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) in this response.
METHODS: Primary human bronchial epithelial cells (HBE) where transfected with
siRNA that targets IRF7 or a non-silencing control (all-star control) using
Lipofectamine. The cells were allowed to recover, and then cultured in the
presence or absence of HRV-16 for 24 h. Global patterns of gene expression were
profiled on microarrays. A subset of genes identified in the microarray study
were validated at the mRNA and/or protein level using real time RT-qPCR, ELISA,
and western blots.
RESULTS: Hundreds of genes were upregulated in HBE during HRV infection. Pathways
analysis demonstrated that these genes were mainly involved in type I and II
interferon signaling, RIG-I/MDA5 signaling, antigen processing and presentation, 
and apoptosis. Upstream regulator analysis of these data suggested that IRF7 was 
a major molecular driver of this response. Knockdown of IRF7 reduced the
HRV-driven upregulation of genes involved in antiviral responses (interferon
signaling, Toll-like receptor signaling, NOD-like receptor signaling, RIG-I/MDA5 
signaling), and increased the expression of genes that promote inflammation (e.g.
CXCL5, IL-33, IL1RL1) and the response to oxidative stress. However, the majority
of genes that were perturbed by HRV in HBE cells including those that are known
to be regulated by IRF7 were insensitive to IRF7 knockdown. Upstream regulator
analysis of the part of the response that was insensitive to IRF7 knockdown
suggested it was driven by NF-<U+03BA>B, STAT1, STAT3, and IRF1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that IRF7 regulates the expression of genes
involved in antiviral immunity, inflammation, and the response to oxidative
stress during HRV infections in HBE cells, and also suggests that other
transcription factors play a major role in this response.

PMCID: PMC4727386
PMID: 26810609  [PubMed - in process]


12. Immunology. 2016 Jan 23. doi: 10.1111/imm.12587. [Epub ahead of print]

Autophagy is involved in regulating the immune response of dendritic cells to
influenza A (H1N1) pdm09 infection.

Zang F(1), Chen Y(2), Lin Z(3), Cai Z(4), Yu L(4), Xu F(5), Wang J(6), Zhu W(7), 
Lu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of respiration, the People's Hospital of Changxing County, Huzhou. 
(2)Division of Infection Disease, Zhejiang Key Laboratory for Neonatal Diseases, 
Children Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou.
(3)Departments of Orthopedics, the Second Affiliated Hospital,
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou. (4)Institute of Immunology,
Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou. (5)Department of Infectious
Diseases, the Second Affiliated Hospital Zhejiang University School of Medicine, 
Hangzhou. (6)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nanjing Medical University,
Affiliated Hangzhou Hospital (Hangzhou First People's Hospital), Hangzhou.
(7)Institute of Cardiology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University
School of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.

Autophagy can mediate antiviral immunity. However, it remains unknown whether
autophagy regulates the immune response of dendritic cells (DCs) to influenza A
(H1N1) pdm09 infection. In this study, we found that infection with the H1N1
virus induced DC autophagy in an endocytosis-dependent manner. Compared with
autophagy-deficient Beclin-1(+/-) mice, we found that bone marrow-derived DCs
from wild type mice (WT BMDCs) presented a more mature phenotype upon H1N1
infection. WT BMDCs secreted higher levels of IL-6, TNF-a, IFN-ß, IL-12p70 and
IFN-<U+03B3> than did Beclin-1(+/-) BMDCs. In contrast to Beclin-1(+/-) BMDCs,
H1N1-infected WT BMDCs exhibited increased activation of ERK, JNK, p38, and NF-<U+03BA>B
as well as IRF7 nuclear translocation. Blockade of autophagosomal and lysosomal
fusion by bafilomycin A1 decreased the co-localization of H1N1 viruses,
autophagosomes and lysosomes as well as the secretion of IL-6, TNF-a and IFN-ß in
H1N1-infected BMDCs. In contrast to Beclin-1(+/-) BMDCs, H1N1-infected WT BMDCs
were more efficient in inducing allogeneic CD4(+) T cell proliferation and
driving Th1, Th2 and Th17 cell differentiation while inhibiting CD4(+) Foxp3(+)
regulatory T cell differentiation. Moreover, WT BMDCs were more efficient at
cross-presenting the OVA antigen to CD8(+) T cells. We consistently found that
Beclin-1(+/-) BMDCs were inferior in their inhibition of H1N1 virus replication
and their induction of H1N1-specific CD4(+) and CD8(+) T cell responses, which
produced lower levels of IL-6, TNF-a and IFN-ß in vivo. Altogether, our data
indicate that autophagy is important in the regulation of the DC immune response 
to H1N1 infection, thereby extending our understanding of host immune responses
to the virus. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26800655  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 22;6:19651. doi: 10.1038/srep19651.

Two Genetic Variations in the IRF8 region are associated with Behçet's disease in
Han Chinese.

Jiang Y(1), Wang H(2), Yu H(1), Li L(1), Xu D(1), Hou S(1), Kijlstra A(3), Yang
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing Key
Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Chongqing Eye Institute, Chongqing, P R China.
(2)Beijing Tongren Eye Center, Beijing Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology and Visual
Science, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, P R
China. (3)University Eye Clinic Maastricht, Maastricht, The Netherlands.

Several modulatory factors in the TLR signaling pathway including IRF3, IRF7,
IRF8, TRIM20, MYD88 and NF-<U+03BA>B1 have been associated with autoimmune disease. In
this study, we investigated the association of 13 SNPs for these genes with
Behçet's disease (BD) and Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada (VKH) syndrome using a polymerase 
chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) assay.
Haplotype and linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis were performed by
Haploview4.2. IRF8 mRNA expression and cytokine production was tested by
real-time PCR and ELISA. Two SNPs near IRF8 were associated with BD (for
rs17445836 GG genotype, Pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.56<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.044; for rs11642873 AA
genotype, Pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>9.24<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.776). No significant association was found
for the 13 SNPs tested with VKH syndrome. Haplotype analysis of the two positive 
SNPs revealed that the AG haplotype was significantly increased in BD patients
(Pc<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.60<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8), OR<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.646). Functional studies revealed an increased mRNA
expression of IRF8 and IFN-<U+03B3> production and a decreased production of IL-10 in
rs17445836 carriers with the GG genotype. Increased expression of IRF8 as well as
IFN-<U+03B3> production and a decreased production of IL-10 were found in individuals
carrying the rs11642873/AA genotype. In conclusion, this study indicates that
IRF8 may contribute to the genetic susceptibility of BD by regulating IRF8
expression and cytokine production.

PMCID: PMC4726413
PMID: 26794091  [PubMed - in process]


14. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Mar;50:34-42. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2016.01.012. Epub
2016 Jan 13.

Positive Darwinian selection within interferon regulatory factor genes of
Gymnocypris przewalskii (Cyprinidae) on the Tibetan Plateau.

Tong C(1), Tian F(2), Tang Y(1), Feng C(1), Guan L(3), Zhang C(2), Zhao K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau Biota, Northwest
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China;
Laboratory of Plateau Fish Evolutionary and Functional Genomics, Northwest
Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau Biota, Northwest Institute of
Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China; Laboratory
of Plateau Fish Evolutionary and Functional Genomics, Northwest Institute of
Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xining, 810001, China.
(3)Department of Life Science and Technology, Xinxiang Medical University,
Xinxiang, 453003, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Adaptation and Evolution of Plateau
Biota, Northwest Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Xining, 810001, China; Laboratory of Plateau Fish Evolutionary and Functional
Genomics, Northwest Institute of Plateau Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Xining, 810001, China. Electronic address: zhaokai@nwipb.cas.cn.

Tibetan Plateau (TP) had experienced phased uplift, resulting in inhospitable
environment of low temperature, hypoxia and high ultraviolet radiation for
Tibetan wildlife. Many organisms can well adapt to TP, it is of ecological and
evolutionary interest to untangle how organisms adapt to extreme environment on
TP through evolution. Previous studies mainly focused on hypoxia and metabolism
related genes, but we know little about the evolutionary history of immune genes 
in Tibetan wildlife. In this study, we first identified 10 interferon regulatory 
factor (IRF) genes from Tibetan naked carp Gymnocypris przewalskii. Within this
gene family, IRF3, IRF5, IRF7 and IRF8 contained positive selection sites.
Evidences indicated that positive selection may lead to IRF genes functional
alternations, presumably driving genes towards adaptation to the environmental
changes. Taken together, our results suggested 4 candidate genes as interesting
targets for further experimental confirmation of their functional variations and 
contributions to high altitude adaptation in Tibet fish.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26774494  [PubMed - in process]


15. Curr Opin Immunol. 2016 Feb;38:109-20. doi: 10.1016/j.coi.2015.12.002. Epub 2016 
Jan 4.

Host genetics of severe influenza: from mouse Mx1 to human IRF7.

Ciancanelli MJ(1), Abel L(2), Zhang SY(2), Casanova JL(3).

Author information: 
(1)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. Electronic address:
mici751@rockefeller.edu. (2)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious
Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA;
Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM-U1163,
Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France; Paris Descartes University,
Imagine Institute, Paris, France. (3)St Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of
Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York,
NY, USA; Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch,
INSERM-U1163, Necker Hospital for Sick Children, Paris, France; Paris Descartes
University, Imagine Institute, Paris, France; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
New York, NY, USA; Pediatric Hematology-Immunology Unit, Necker Hospital for Sick
Children, Paris, France.

Influenza viruses cause mild to moderate respiratory illness in most people, and 
only rarely devastating or fatal infections. The virulence factors encoded by
viral genes can explain seasonal or geographic differences at the population
level but are unlikely to account for inter-individual clinical variability.
Inherited or acquired immunodeficiencies may thus underlie severe cases of
influenza. The crucial role of host genes was first demonstrated by forward
genetics in inbred mice, with the identification of interferon
(IFN)-a/ß-inducible Mx1 as a canonical influenza susceptibility gene. Reverse
genetics has subsequently characterized the in vivo role of other mouse genes
involved in IFN-a/ß and -<U+03BB> immunity. A series of in vitro studies with mouse and 
human cells have also refined the cell-intrinsic mechanisms of protection against
influenza viruses. Population-based human genetic studies have not yet uncovered 
variants with a significant impact. Interestingly, human primary
immunodeficiencies affecting T and B cells were also not found to predispose to
severe influenza. Recently however, human IRF7 was shown to be essential for
IFN-a/ß- and IFN-<U+03BB>-dependent protective immunity against primary influenza in
vivo, as inferred from a patient with life-threatening influenza revealed to be
IRF7-deficient by whole exome sequencing. Next generation sequencing of human
exomes and genomes will facilitate the analysis of the human genetic determinism 
of severe influenza.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4733643 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26761402  [PubMed - in process]


16. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 11;6:19089. doi: 10.1038/srep19089.

OASL1 deficiency promotes antiviral protection against genital herpes simplex
virus type 2 infection by enhancing type I interferon production.

Oh JE(1), Lee MS(2), Kim YJ(3,)(4), Lee HK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defenses, Graduate School of Medical Science and
Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon,
34141, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of
Medicine, University of Ulsan, Seoul, 05505, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of 
Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Technology, Yonsei University, Seoul,
03722, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Integrated Omics for Biomedical
Science Graduate School, Yonsei University, Seoul, 03722, Republic of Korea.

Type I interferon (IFN) interferes with virus replication, promotes antiviral
responses, and controls innate and adaptive immune responses to certain viruses. 
Recently, we reported that 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthetase-like 1 (OASL1)
negatively regulates type I IFN production by inhibiting the translation of the
type I IFN-regulating master transcription factor, IRF7. Notably, while
OASL1-deficient mice induce robust production of type I IFN and are resistant to 
systemic viral infection, the effects of OASL1 during localized viral infection
has not been studied. To this end, we investigated the role of OASL1 during
mucosal HSV-2 infection of the genital tract. Oasl1(-/-) mice exhibited better
survival rates than wild type (WT) mice following intravaginal HSV-2 infection,
and suppressed virus replication more efficiently despite comparable recruitment 
of effector immune cells. Moreover, Ly6C(high) monocytes, and not pDCs or other
cell types, displayed enhanced production of type I IFNs in Oasl1(-/-) mice in
response to HSV-2 infection. Furthermore, cytotoxic T cell responses including
IFN-<U+03B3> production were accelerated in Oasl1(-/-) mice after mucosal HSV-2
infection. Collectively, these results demonstrate that OASL1 deficiency promotes
antiviral immunity against local mucosal viral infection and suggest that OASL1
could be a therapeutic target for treatment of HSV-2 infection of the genital
mucosa.

PMCID: PMC4707503
PMID: 26750802  [PubMed - in process]


17. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 5;6:18778. doi: 10.1038/srep18778.

Bcl6 Sets a Threshold for Antiviral Signaling by Restraining IRF7 Transcriptional
Program.

Xu F(1), Kang Y(2), Zhuang N(2), Lu Z(2), Zhang H(2), Xu D(2,)(3), Ding Y(2), Yin
H(2), Shi L(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang
University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310009, China. (2)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Key Lab of Immunology and Molecular Medicine, School
of Medicine, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310036, China.
(3)MIMR-PHI Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia.
(4)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Nanjing University of Chinese
Medicine, Nanjing 210046, China.

The coordination of restraining and priming of antiviral signaling constitute a
fundamental aspect of immunological functions. However, we currently know little 
about the molecular events that can translate the pathogenic cues into the
appropriate code for antiviral defense. Our present study reports a specific role
of B cell lymphoma (Bcl)6 as a checkpoint in the initiation of the host response 
to cytosolic RNA viruses. Remarkably, Bcl6 specifically binds to the
interferon-regulatory factor (IRF)7 loci and restrains its transcription, thereby
functioning as a negative regulator for interferon (IFN)-ß production and
antiviral responses. The signal-controlled turnover of the Bcl6, most likely
mediated by microRNA-127, coordinates the antiviral response and inflammatory
sequelae. Accordingly, de-repression of Bcl6 resulted in a phenotypic conversion 
of macrophages into highly potent IFN-producing cells and rendered mice more
resistant to pathogenic RNA virus infection. The failure to remove the Bcl6
regulator, however, impedes the antiviral signaling and exaggerates viral
pneumonia in mice. We thus reveal a novel key molecular checkpoint to orchestrate
antiviral innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC4700451
PMID: 26728228  [PubMed - in process]


18. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2016 Feb;49:7-15. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.12.020. Epub
2015 Dec 17.

Cloning and expression analysis of interferon regulatory factor 7 in the Pacific 
cod, Gadus macrocephalus.

Sun H(1), Jiang Z(2), Mao M(1), Huo Y(1), Han Y(1), Zhang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Mariculture & Stock Enhancement in North China's Sea,
Ministry of Agriculture, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian 116023, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Mariculture & Stock Enhancement in North China's Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Dalian Ocean University, Dalian 116023, China. Electronic address:
zhqjiang@dlou.edu.cn.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) plays an important role in regulating the
response of type I interferon (IFN) to viral infection. To understand the
mechanisms underlying immune reactions in the Pacific cod, Gadus macrocephalus,
the gene encoding G. macrocephalus IRF7 was cloned and characterized. The cDNA of
G. macrocephalus IRF7 was also cloned and sequenced. A cDNA sequence of 2032 bp
was assembled using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products. It contains an open
reading frame of 1323 bp in length, which encoded a 440-amino acid polypeptide
that comprised a DNA-binding domain (DBD), an IRF association domain (IAD), and a
serine-rich domain (SRD). In the DBD, the tryptophan cluster consisted of only
four tryptophans, which is a unique characteristic in fish IRF7. The mRNA of IRF7
was detected in various tissues, including in the spleen, thymus, kidney,
intestine, and gills, using relative quantification PCR (R-qPCR). Dynamic
expression of IRF7 was observed in larvae throughout post-hatching (ph)
development, with the highest level detected at day of ph (dph) 25. Response to
immune stimulation was examined by challenging larvae with polyriboinosinic
polyribocytidylic acid (pIC) to mimic viral infection and elicit an immune
reaction. R-qPCR revealed that the expression of IRF7 significantly increased in 
pIC-treated groups relative to that in the control groups, in a time-dependent
manner, with peak responses at 48 and 72 h after pIC-treatment. These results
show that IRF7 is expressed in various tissues of adult fish and larvae and is
sensitive to viral infection, suggesting that it plays a role in antiviral immune
defense in G. macrocephalus.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26702560  [PubMed - in process]


19. Front Vet Sci. 2015 Dec 14;2:76. doi: 10.3389/fvets.2015.00076. eCollection 2015.

West Nile Virus Challenge Alters the Transcription Profiles of Innate Immune
Genes in Rabbit Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells.

Uddin MJ(1), Suen WW(1), Prow NA(2), Hall RA(3), Bielefeldt-Ohmann H(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Science, University of Queensland , Gatton, QLD ,
Australia. (2)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute , Brisbane, QLD ,
Australia. (3)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, University of
Queensland , St Lucia, QLD , Australia ; School of Chemistry and Molecular
Biosciences, University of Queensland , St Lucia, QLD , Australia. (4)School of
Veterinary Science, University of Queensland , Gatton, QLD , Australia ;
Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland , St
Lucia, QLD , Australia ; School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences,
University of Queensland , St Lucia, QLD , Australia.

The peripheral innate immune response to West Nile virus (WNV) is crucial for
control of virus spread to the central nervous system. Therefore, transcriptomes 
encoding the innate immune response proteins against WNV were investigated in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of New Zealand White rabbits, a
recently established novel rabbit model for WNV pathogenesis studies. PBMCs were 
challenged with an Australian WNV strain, WNVNSW2011, in vitro, and mRNA
expression of selected immune response genes were quantified at 2-, 6-, 12-, and 
24-h post-infection (pi) using qRT-PCR. Compared to mock-inoculated PBMCs,
WNV-stimulated PBMCs expressed high levels of interferon (IFN) alpha (IFNA),
gamma (IFNG), IL6, IL12, IL22, CXCL10, and pentraxin 3 (PTX3) mRNA. Likewise,
TLR1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and 10 mRNA became up-regulated with the highest expression
seen for TLR3, 4, and 6. TLRs-signaling downstream genes (MyD88, STAT1, TRAF3,
IRF7, and IRF9) subsequently became up-regulated. The high expression of IFNs,
TLR3, TLR4, TRAF3, STAT1, IRF7, and IRF9 are in accordance with antiviral
activities, while expression of TNFA, HO1, iNOS, caspase 3, and caspase 9
transcripts suggests the involvement of oxidative stress and apoptosis in
WNV-stimulated rabbit PBMCs, respectively. The level of WNVNSW2011 RNA increased 
at 24-h pi in PBMCs challenged with virus in vitro compared to input virus. The
expression dynamics of selected genes were validated in PBMCs from rabbits
experimentally infected with WNV in vivo. Higher expression of IFNA, IFN beta
(IFNB), IFNG, TNFA, IL6, IL22, PTX3, TLR3 and TLR4, IRF7, IRF9, STST1, TRAF3,
caspase 3, and caspase 9 were seen in PBMCs from WNV-infected rabbits on day 3
post-intradermal virus inoculation compared to PBMCs from uninfected control
rabbits. This study highlights the array of cytokines and TLRs involved in the
host innate immune response to WNV in the rabbit leukocytes and suggests that
these cells may be a useful in vitro model for WNV infection study.

PMCID: PMC4677099
PMID: 26697438  [PubMed]


20. Viral Immunol. 2016 Jan-Feb;29(1):49-63. doi: 10.1089/vim.2015.0076. Epub 2015
Dec 18.

Roles for Transcription Factors Sp1, NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF3, and IRF7 in Expression of the
Human IFNL4 Gene.

Chinnaswamy S(1), Bhushan A(1), Behera AK(2), Ghosh S(1), Rampurkar V(1), Chandra
V(1), Pandit B(1), Kundu TK(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 National Institute of Biomedical Genomics , Kalyani, West Bengal, India .
(2)2 Transcription and Disease Laboratory, Molecular Biology and Genetics Unit,
Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research , Bangalore, India .

The expression of a biologically active human IFN<U+03BB>4 depends on the presence of a 
frameshift deletion polymorphism within the first exon of the interferon lambda 4
(IFNL4) gene. In this report, we use the lung carcinoma-derived cell line, A549, 
which is genetically viable to express a functional IFN<U+03BB>4, to address
transcriptional requirements of the IFNL4 gene. We show that the GC-rich
DNA-binding transcription factor (TF) specificity protein 1 (Sp1) is recruited to
the IFNL4 promoter and has a role in induction of gene expression upon
stimulation with viral RNA mimic poly(I:C). By using RNAi and overexpression
strategies, we also show key roles in IFNL4 gene expression for the
virus-inducible TFs, nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B
cells (NF-<U+03BA>B), IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), and IRF7. Interestingly, we also
observe that overexpression of IFN<U+03BB>4 influences IFNL4 promoter activity, which
may further be dependent on the retinoic acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I)-like
receptor pathway. Together, our work for the first time reports on the functional
characterization of the human IFNL4 promoter.

PMID: 26684959  [PubMed - in process]


21. Immunity. 2015 Dec 15;43(6):1148-59. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2015.11.015.

Sequential Activation of Two Pathogen-Sensing Pathways Required for Type I
Interferon Expression and Resistance to an Acute DNA Virus Infection.

Xu RH(1), Wong EB(1), Rubio D(1), Roscoe F(1), Ma X(1), Nair S(1), Remakus S(1), 
Schwendener R(2), John S(3), Shlomchik M(4), Sigal LJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Immune Cell Development and Host Defense Program, The Research Institute at
Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.
(2)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University Zurich, 8057 Zurich,
Switzerland. (3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06520, USA. (4)Department of Immunology, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, 200 Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. (5)Immune Cell
Development and Host Defense Program, The Research Institute at Fox Chase Cancer 
Center, 333 Cottman Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. Electronic address:
luis.sigal@jefferson.edu.

Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9), its adaptor MyD88, the downstream transcription
factor interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), and type I interferons (IFN-I) are 
all required for resistance to infection with ectromelia virus (ECTV). However,
it is not known how or in which cells these effectors function to promote
survival. Here, we showed that after infection with ECTV, the TLR9-MyD88-IRF7
pathway was necessary in CD11c(+) cells for the expression of proinflammatory
cytokines and the recruitment of inflammatory monocytes (iMos) to the draining
lymph node (dLN). In the dLN, the major producers of IFN-I were infected iMos,
which used the DNA sensor-adaptor STING to activate IRF7 and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
(NF-<U+03BA>B) signaling to induce the expression of IFN-a and IFN-ß, respectively.
Thus, in vivo, two pathways of DNA pathogen sensing act sequentially in two
distinct cell types to orchestrate resistance to a viral disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4684903 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26682986  [PubMed - in process]


22. IEEE/ACM Trans Comput Biol Bioinform. 2015 Dec 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Discovering condition specific topological pattern changes in coexpression
network: an application to HIV1 progression.

Ray S, Bandyopadhyay S.

The natural progression of HIV-1 begins with a short acute retroviral syndrome
which typically transit to chronic and clinical latency stages and subsequently
progresses to a symptomatic, life-threatening immunodeficiency disease known as
AIDS. Microarray analysis based on gene coexpression is widely used to
investigate the coregulation pattern of a group (or cluster) of genes in a
specific phenotype. Moreover, an investigation on the topological patterns across
multiple phenotypes can facilitate the understanding of stage specific infection 
pattern of HIV-1 virus. Here, we develop a novel framework to identify
topological patterns of gene coexpression network and detect changes of modular
structure across different stages of HIV progression. This is achieved by
comparing the topological and intramodular properties of HIV infection modules.
To capture the diversity in modular structure, some topological, correlation
based and eigengene based measures are utilized here. We have applied a rank
aggregation scheme to rank all the modules to provide a good agreement between
these measures. Some novel transcription factors like 'FOXO1','GATA3',
'GFI1','IRF1', 'IRF7', 'MAX', 'STAT1', 'STAT3', 'XBP1' and 'YY1' that emerge from
the modules show significant change in expression pattern over HIV progression
stages. Moreover, we have performed an eigengene based analysis to reveal the
perturbation in modular structure across three stages of HIV-1 progression.

PMID: 26661789  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Eur J Immunol. 2016 Mar;46(3):712-24. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545567. Epub 2016 Jan
12.

Grancalcin (GCA) modulates Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) mediated signaling through
its direct interaction with TLR9.

Kim TW(1), Hong S(1), Talukder AH(2), Pascual V(1), Liu YJ(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Institute for Immunology Research, Dallas, TX, USA. (2)Department of
Melanoma Medical Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (3)MedImmune, Inc, Gaithersburg, MD, USA.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are playing important roles in stimulating the innate 
immune response and intensifying adaptive immune response against invading
pathogens. Appropriate regulation of TLR activation is important to maintain a
balance between preventing tumor activation and inhibiting autoimmunity.
Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) senses microbial DNA in the endosomes of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells and triggers myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88
(MyD88) dependent nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathways and type I interferon
(IFN) responses. However, mechanisms of how TLR9 signals are mediated and which
molecules are involved in controlling TLR9 functions remain poorly understood.
Here, we report that penta EF-hand protein grancalcin (GCA) interacts and binds
with TLR9 in a yeast two-hybrid system and an overexpression system. Using
siRNA-mediated knockdown experiments, we also revealed that GCA positively
regulates type I IFN production, cytokine/chemokine production through nuclear
localization of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), NF-<U+03BA>B activation, and
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) activation in plasmacytoid dendritic
cells. Our results indicate that heterodimerization of GCA and TLR9 is important 
for TLR9-mediated downstream signaling and might serve to fine tune processes
against viral infection.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26648480  [PubMed - in process]


24. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 3;5:17554. doi: 10.1038/srep17554.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus ORF4b protein inhibits type I
interferon production through both cytoplasmic and nuclear targets.

Yang Y(1,)(2), Ye F(1), Zhu N(1), Wang W(1), Deng Y(1), Zhao Z(3), Tan W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Medical Virology, Ministry of Health; National Institute for
Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Chinese Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Beijing, 102206, China. (2)Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Pathogen and
Immunity, Shenzhen Third People's Hospital, Shenzhen, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Pathogen System Biology, Ministry of Health; Institute of Pathogen Biology,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, 100176, China.

Middle East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV) is a novel and highly
pathogenic human coronavirus and has quickly spread to other countries in the
Middle East, Europe, North Africa and Asia since 2012. Previous studies have
shown that MERS-CoV ORF4b antagonizes the early antiviral alpha/beta interferon
(IFN-a/ß) response, which may significantly contribute to MERS-CoV pathogenesis; 
however, the underlying mechanism is poorly understood. Here, we found that ORF4b
in the cytoplasm could specifically bind to TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and I<U+03BA>B 
kinase epsilon (IKKe), suppress the molecular interaction between mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) and IKKe, and inhibit IFN regulatory factor 3 
(IRF3) phosphorylation and subsequent IFN-ß production. Further analysis showed
that ORF4b could also inhibit IRF3 and IRF7-induced production of IFN-ß, whereas 
deletion of the nuclear localization signal of ORF4b abrogated its ability to
inhibit IRF3 and IRF7-induced production of IFN-ß, but not IFN-ß production
induced by RIG-I, MDA5, MAVS, IKKe, and TBK-1, suggesting that ORF4b could
inhibit the induction of IFN-ß in both the cytoplasm and nucleus. Collectively,
these results indicate that MERS-CoV ORF4b inhibits the induction of type I IFN
through a direct interaction with IKKe/TBK1 in the cytoplasm, and also in the
nucleus with unknown mechanism. Viruses have evolved multiple strategies to evade
or thwart a host's antiviral responses. A novel human coronavirus (HCoV), Middle 
East respiratory syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV), is distinguished from other
coronaviruses by its high pathogenicity and mortality. However, virulence
determinants that distinguish MERS-CoV from other HCoVs have yet to be
identified. MERS-CoV ORF4b antagonizes the early antiviral response, which may
contribute to MERS-CoV pathogenesis. Here, we report the identification of the
interferon (IFN) antagonism mechanism of MERS-CoV ORF4b. MERS-CoV ORF4b inhibits 
the production of type I IFN through a direct interaction with IKKe/TBK1 in the
cytoplasm, and also in the nucleus with unknown mechanism. These findings provide
a rationale for the novel pathogenesis of MERS-CoV as well as a basis for
developing a candidate therapeutic against this virus.

PMCID: PMC4668369
PMID: 26631542  [PubMed - in process]


25. Lupus Sci Med. 2015 Nov 18;2(1):e000112. doi: 10.1136/lupus-2015-000112.
eCollection 2015.

Characterising the immune profile of the kidney biopsy at lupus nephritis flare
differentiates early treatment responders from non-responders.

Parikh SV(1), Malvar A(2), Song H(1), Alberton V(3), Lococo B(2), Vance J(1),
Zhang J(4), Yu L(2), Rovin BH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology , The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center ,
Columbus, Ohio , USA. (2)Nephrology Unit , Hospital Fernandez , Buenos Aires ,
Argentina. (3)Department of Pathology , Hospital Fernandez , Buenos Aires ,
Argentina. (4)Center for Biostatistics, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical 
Center , Columbus, Ohio , USA.

INTRODUCTION: The kidney biopsy is used to diagnose and guide initial therapy in 
patients with lupus nephritis (LN). Kidney histology does not correlate well with
clinical measurements of kidney injury or predict how patients will respond to
standard-of-care immunosuppression. We postulated that the gene expression
profile of kidney tissue at the time of biopsy may differentiate patients who
will from those who will not respond to treatment.
METHODS: The expression of 511 immune-response genes was measured in kidney
biopsies from 19 patients with proliferative LN and 4 normal controls. RNA was
extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded kidney biopsies done at flare.
After induction therapy, 5 patients achieved a complete clinical response (CR),
10 had a partial response (PR) and 4 patients were non-responders (NRs).
Transcript expression was compared with normal controls and between renal
response groups.
RESULTS: A principal component analysis showed that intrarenal transcript
expression from normal kidney, CR biopsies and NR biopsies segregated from each
other. The top genes responsible for CR clustering included several interferon
pathway genes (STAT1, IRF1, IRF7, MX1, STAT2, JAK2), while complement genes (C1R,
C1QB, C6, C9, C5, MASP2) were mainly responsible for NR clustering. Overall, 35
genes were uniquely expressed in NR compared with CR. Pathway analysis revealed
that interferon signalling and complement activation pathways were upregulated in
both groups, while BAFF, APRIL, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and interleukin-6 signalling
were increased in CR but suppressed in NR.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that molecular profiling of the kidney biopsy at 
LN flare may be useful in predicting treatment response to induction therapy.

PMCID: PMC4654163
PMID: 26629350  [PubMed]


26. J Virol. 2015 Nov 25;90(3):1613-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02395-15.

3C Protease of Enterovirus D68 Inhibits Cellular Defense Mediated by Interferon
Regulatory Factor 7.

Xiang Z(1), Liu L(2), Lei X(1), Zhou Z(1), He B(3), Wang J(4).

Author information: 
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens and Christophe Mérieux
Laboratory, IPB, CAMS-Fondation Mérieux, Institute of Pathogen Biology (IPB),
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, People's Republic of China Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis
and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens and Christophe Mérieux
Laboratory, IPB, CAMS-Fondation Mérieux, Institute of Pathogen Biology (IPB),
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois, USA
tshuo@uic.edu wangjw28@163.com. (4)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of
Pathogens and Christophe Mérieux Laboratory, IPB, CAMS-Fondation Mérieux,
Institute of Pathogen Biology (IPB), Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS)
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China
Collaborative Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious
Diseases, Hangzhou, People's Republic of China tshuo@uic.edu wangjw28@163.com.

Human enterovirus 68 (EV-D68) is a member of the EV-D species, which belongs to
the EV genus of the Picornaviridae family. Over the past several years, clusters 
of EV-D68 infections have occurred worldwide. A recent outbreak in the United
States is the largest one associated with severe respiratory illness and
neurological complication. Although clinical symptoms are recognized, the virus
remains poorly understood. Here we report that EV-D68 inhibits innate antiviral
immunity by downregulation of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), an immune
factor with a pivotal role in viral pathogenesis. This process depends on
3C(pro), an EV-D68-encoded protease, to mediate IRF7 cleavage. When expressed in 
host cells, 3C(pro) targets Q167 and Q189 within the constitutive activation
domain, resulting in cleavage of IRF7. Accordingly, wild-type IRF7 is fully
active. However, IRF7 cleavage abrogated its capacity to activate type I
interferon expression and limit replication of EV-D68. Notably, IRF7 cleavage
strictly requires the protease activity of 3C(pro). Together, these results
suggest that a dynamic interplay between 3C(pro) and IRF7 may determine the
outcome of EV-D68 infection.IMPORTANCE: EV-D68 is a globally emerging pathogen,
but the molecular basis of EV-D68 pathogenesis is unclear. Here we report that
EV-D68 inhibits innate immune responses by targeting an immune factor, IRF7. This
involves the 3C protease encoded by EV-D68, which mediates the cleavage of IRF7. 
These observations suggest that the 3C(pro)-IRF7 interaction may represent an
interface that dictates EV-D68 infection.

Copyright © 2016, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4719596 [Available on 2016-07-15]
PMID: 26608321  [PubMed - in process]


27. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 23;10(11):e0143539. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143539.
eCollection 2015.

Respiratory DC Use IFITM3 to Avoid Direct Viral Infection and Safeguard
Virus-Specific CD8+ T Cell Priming.

Infusini G(1), Smith JM(2), Yuan H(2), Pizzolla A(2), Ng WC(2), Londrigan SL(2), 
Haque A(3), Reading PC(2,)(4), Villadangos JA(2,)(5), Wakim LM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Systems Biology and Personalised Medicine, The Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia. (2)Department
of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Melbourne, at the Peter Doherty
Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia.
(3)Malaria Immunology Lab, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane,
Australia. (4)WHO Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza,
Victorian Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, at the Peter Doherty
Institute for Infection and Immunity, Melbourne, Victoria 3000, Australia.
(5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and 
Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010,
Australia.

Respiratory dendritic cells (DC) play a pivotal role in the initiation of
adaptive immune responses to influenza virus. To do this, respiratory DCs must
ferry viral antigen from the lung to the draining lymph node without becoming
infected and perishing en route. We show that respiratory DCs up-regulate the
expression of the antiviral molecule, interferon-induced transmembrane protein 3 
(IFITM3) in response to influenza virus infection, in a manner dependent on type 
I interferon signaling and the transcription factors IRF7 and IRF3. Failure of
respiratory DCs to up-regulate IFITM3 following influenza virus infection
resulted in impaired trafficking to the draining LN and consequently in impaired 
priming of an influenza-specific CD8+ T cell response. The impaired trafficking
of IFITM3-deficient DC correlated with an increased susceptibility of these DC to
influenza virus infection. This work shows that the expression of IFITM3 protects
respiratory DCs from influenza virus infection, permitting migration from lung to
LN and optimal priming of a virus specific T-cell response.

PMCID: PMC4657952
PMID: 26600246  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 Nov 24;12:216. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0438-x.

Amelioration of Japanese encephalitis by blockage of 4-1BB signaling is coupled
to divergent enhancement of type I/II IFN responses and Ly-6C(hi) monocyte
differentiation.

Kim SB(1), Choi JY(1), Kim JH(1), Uyangaa E(1), Patil AM(1), Park SY(1,)(2), Lee 
JH(1,)(2), Kim K(3), Han YW(1), Eo SK(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine and Bio-Safety Research Institute, Chonbuk
National University, Iksan, 54596, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Bioactive 
Material Sciences, Graduate School, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, 54896,
Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Pusan
National University, Yangsan, 50612, Republic of Korea. (4)College of Veterinary 
Medicine and Bio-Safety Research Institute, Chonbuk National University, Iksan,
54596, Republic of Korea. vetvirus@chonbuk.ac.kr. (5)Department of Bioactive
Material Sciences, Graduate School, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, 54896,
Republic of Korea. vetvirus@chonbuk.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Japanese encephalitis (JE), a neuroinflammation caused by zoonotic JE
virus, is the major cause of viral encephalitis worldwide and poses an increasing
threat to global health and welfare. To date, however, there has been no report
describing the regulation of JE progression using immunomodulatory tools for
developing therapeutic strategies. We tested whether blocking the 4-1BB signaling
pathway would regulate JE progression using murine JE model.
METHODS: Infected wild-type and 4-1BB-knockout (KO) mice were examined daily for 
mortality and clinical signs, and neuroinflammation in the CNS was evaluated by
infiltration of inflammatory leukocytes and cytokine expression. In addition,
viral burden, JEV-specific T cell, and type I/II IFN (IFN-I/II) innate responses 
were analyzed.
RESULTS: Blocking the 4-1BB signaling pathway significantly increased resistance 
to JE and reduced viral burden in extraneural tissues and the CNS, rather than
causing a detrimental effect. In addition, treatment with 4-1BB agonistic
antibody exacerbated JE. Furthermore, JE amelioration and reduction of viral
burden by blocking the 4-1BB signaling pathway were associated with an increased 
frequency of IFN-II-producing NK and CD4(+) Th1 cells as well as increased
infiltration of mature Ly-6C(hi) monocytes in the inflamed CNS. More
interestingly, DCs and macrophages derived from 4-1BB KO mice showed potent and
rapid IFN-I innate immune responses upon JEV infection, which was coupled to
strong induction of PRRs (RIG-I, MDA5), transcription factors (IRF7), and
antiviral ISG genes (ISG49, ISG54, ISG56). Further, the ablation of 4-1BB
signaling enhanced IFN-I innate responses in neuron cells, which likely regulated
viral spread in the CNS. Finally, we confirmed that blocking the 4-1BB signaling 
pathway in myeloid cells derived from hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) played a
dominant role in ameliorating JE. In support of this finding, HSC-derived
leukocytes played a dominant role in generating the IFN-I innate responses in the
host.
CONCLUSIONS: Blocking the 4-1BB signaling pathway ameliorates JE via divergent
enhancement of IFN-II-producing NK and CD4(+) Th1 cells and mature Ly-6C(hi)
monocyte infiltration, as well as an IFN-I innate response of myeloid-derived
cells. Therefore, regulation of the 4-1BB signaling pathway with antibodies or
inhibitors could be a valuable therapeutic strategy for the treatment of JE.

PMCID: PMC4657197
PMID: 26597582  [PubMed - in process]


29. Cell Prolif. 2015 Dec;48(6):643-9. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12223. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

microRNA-762 promotes breast cancer cell proliferation and invasion by targeting 
IRF7 expression.

Li Y(1), Huang R(2), Wang L(1), Hao J(1), Zhang Q(3), Ling R(1), Yun J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thyroid, Breast and Vascular Surgery, Xijing Hospital, Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi, 710032, China. (2)Department of
occupational and environmental Health, School of Public Health, Central South
University, Changsha, HuNan, 410078, China. (3)Department of Oncology, Xijing
Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi, 710032, China.

OBJECTIVES: miRNAs play crucial roles in human tumourigenesis. This study was
performed to measure expression and function of miR-762 in breast cancer.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of miR-762 in breast tissues and cell lines
(SK-BR-3, DA-MB-435s, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231, HBL-100) was measured by using
real-time RT-PCR. We restored expression of miR-762 in MCF-7 cells to measure its
functional roles. Luciferase assays were performed to reveal the target gene of
miR-762.
RESULTS: Expression of miR-762 was high in both breast cancer cell lines and
specimens, and its overexpression increased breast cancer cell proliferation and 
invasion. Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a direct target of miR-762 and
overexpression of miR-762 reduced expression of IRF7. Moreover, IRF7 was
repressed, its levels inversely correlated to miR-762 expression. IRF7 rescued
miR-762-induced cell invasion and proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that miR-762 tumour effect was achieved by
targeting IRF7 in human breast cancer specimens.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26597380  [PubMed - in process]


30. J Immunol. 2016 Jan 1;196(1):310-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501836. Epub 2015 Nov 
20.

A cGAS-Independent STING/IRF7 Pathway Mediates the Immunogenicity of DNA
Vaccines.

Suschak JJ(1), Wang S(1), Fitzgerald KA(2), Lu S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nucleic Acid Vaccines, Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655; and. (2)Program in Innate
Immunity, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, University of 
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655. (3)Laboratory of Nucleic Acid 
Vaccines, Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655; and shan.lu@umassmed.edu.

It has been known since the discovery of DNA vaccines >20 y ago that DNA vaccines
can function as adjuvants. Our recent study reported the involvement of Aim2 as
the sensor of DNA vaccines in eliciting Ag-specific Ab responses. Our findings
indicated the presence of previously unrecognized innate immune response pathways
in addition to the TLR9 pathway, which is mainly activated by the CpG motifs of
DNA vaccines. Our data further demonstrated the requirement of type I IFN in DNA 
vaccine-induced immune responses via the Aim2 pathway, but the exact downstream
molecular mechanism was not characterized. In the present study, we investigated 
the roles of the putative DNA sensor cyclic GMP-AMP synthase (cGas), as well as
the downstream IFN regulatory factors (IRF) 3 and 7 in type I IFN induction and
Ag-specific immune responses elicited by DNA vaccination. Our results showed that
DNA vaccine-induced, Irf7-dependent signaling, as part of the Sting pathway, was 
critical for generation of both innate cytokine signaling and Ag-specific B and T
cell responses. In contrast, Irf3 was not as critical as expected in this pathway
and, more surprisingly, immune responses elicited by DNA vaccines were not
cGas-dependent in vivo. Data from this study provide more details on the innate
immune mechanisms involved in DNA vaccination and further enrich our
understanding on the potential utility of DNA vaccines in generating Ag-specific 
immune responses.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4685033 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26590319  [PubMed - in process]


31. Gene. 2016 Jan 15;576(1 Pt 3):512-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.070. Epub 2015
Nov 4.

The transcription regulation analysis of Ctenopharyngodon idellus PKR and PKZ
genes.

Liu D(1), Mao H(1), Gu M(1), Xu X(1), Sun Z(1), Lin G(1), Wang H(1), Xie D(1),
Hou Q(1), Wang X(1), Mi Y(1), Liu X(1), Hu C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China. Electronic address:
hucy2008@163.com.

Protein kinase R (PKR), the double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase, exists 
in mammalian and fish. PKZ, a PKR-like protein kinase containing Z-DNA binding
domains, just exists in fish. PKR and PKZ work synergistically in the antiviral
defense by inhibiting intracellular protein translation. The transcriptional
factor IRF3 (interferon regulatory factor 3) acts as a key regulator of type I
IFN (Interferon) and ISG (interferon stimulated gene). On the basis of the cloned
CiIRF3 previously, CiIRF3 with His-tag was over-expressed in BL21 Escherichia
coli, and the expressed protein was purified by affinity chromatography with
Ni-NTA His-Bind Resin. In this study, we have demonstrated that grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idellus) PKR (CiPKR) and PKZ (CiPKZ) genes were inducible by
Poly I:C in C. idella kidney (CIK) cells. So, they might be implicated in the
intracellular antiviral activity. To understand the up regulatory mechanism of
CiPKR and CiPKZ genes upon virus induction, we constructed wild type
(pGL3-CiPKR-luc and pGL3-CiPKZ-luc) and the mutant (pGL3-CiPKR-nISRE-luc and
pGL3-CiPKZ-nISRE-luc) reporter gene vectors according to the promoter sequences
of CiPKR (KJ704845) and CiPKZ (KJ704844). In vitro, gel mobility shift assays
demonstrated that CiIRF3 can combine CiPKR and CiPKZ promoters with high
affinity. However, CiIRF3 bound to the mutants CiPKR-nISRE and CiPKZ-nISRE
faintly. Whereafter, the recombinant plasmids of pGL3-CiPKR-luc, pGL3-CiPKZ-luc
were transiently co-transfected with pcDNA3.1-CiIRF3, pcDNA3.1-CiIRF7
respectively into CIK cells. Cell transfection assays indicated that CiIRF3 and
CiIRF7 up-regulated the transcriptional level of CiPKR and CiPKZ. The results
also revealed that the consensus sequence of ISRE (interferon stimulated response
element) is an important regulatory element for the transcriptional initiation of
CiPKR and CiPKZ.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26546976  [PubMed - in process]


32. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Dec;47(2):978-85. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.10.039.
Epub 2015 Nov 3.

Fish IRF3 up-regulates the transcriptional level of IRF1, IRF2, IRF3 and IRF7 in 
CIK cells.

Xu X(1), Lai Q(2), Gu M(1), Liu D(1), Hou Q(1), Liu X(1), Mi Y(1), Sun Z(1), Wang
H(1), Lin G(1), Hu C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University,
Nanchang 330031, China. (2)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China; Infectious Diseases Hospital of
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, Jiangxi Province, China. (3)Department of
Bioscience, College of Life Science, Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China.
Electronic address: hucy2008@163.com.

Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs) belong to a family of transcription factor
involved in transcriptional regulation of type I IFN and IFN-stimulated genes
(ISG) in cells. In the present study, an IRF3 full-length cDNA (termed CiIRF3,
JX999055) and its promoter sequence were cloned by homology cloning strategy and 
genome walking from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). The full-length cDNA
sequence of CiIRF3 is comprised of a 5'UTR (195 bp), a 3'UTR (269 bp) and a
largest open reading frame (ORF) of 1377 bp encoding a polypeptide of 458 amino
acids. CiIRF3 has a conservative DNA-binding domain (DBD) at N-terminal and a
relatively conserved interferon regulatory factors association domain (IAD).
Phylogenetic tree analysis indicated that CiIRF3 gathers together with other
IRF-3 from higher vertebrates in the same branch. The promoter sequence of CiIRF3
(596 bp) consists of three IRF-E, a C/EBP beta, a NF-kappa B and a TATA-BOX.
CiIRF3 was constitutively expressed at low level in different grass carp tissues 
but was rapidly up-regulated with Poly I:C stimulation. To study the molecular
mechanism of CiIRF3 regulating the transcription of IRFs, CiIRF3 was expressed in
Escherichia coli BL21 and purified by affinity chromatography with the Ni-NTA
His-Bind Resin. Gel mobility shift assays revealed the affinity of CiIRF3 protein
with promoters of CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7 respectively. Then, CIK cells
were co-transfected with pcDNA3.1-CiIRF3, pGL3-promotor (pGL3-CiIRF1,
pGL3-CiIRF2, pGL3-CiIRF3, pGL3-CiIRF7) and luciferase reporter vector
respectively. The cotransfection experiment showed that CiIRF3 increased the
promoter activity of CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7. Furthermore,
overexpression of CiIRF3 in CIK cells also up-regulated the expressions of
CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7. So, CiIRF3 can improve the transcriptional
level of CiIRF1, CiIRF2, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26545324  [PubMed - in process]


33. J Gen Virol. 2016 Jan;97(1):95-109. doi: 10.1099/jgv.0.000334. Epub 2015 Nov 5.

Reduction in sphingosine kinase 1 influences the susceptibility to dengue virus
infection by altering antiviral responses.

Clarke JN(1), Davies LK(2), Calvert JK(1), Gliddon BL(2), Shujari WH(1), Aloia
AL(1), Helbig KJ(3), Beard MR(3), Pitson SM(2), Carr JM(1).

Author information: 
(1)1<U+200B>Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, School of Medicine, Flinders
University, Bedford Park, Adelaide, South Australia 5042, Australia. (2)2<U+200B>Centre 
for Cancer Biology, University of South Australia and SA Pathology, Adelaide,
South Australia 5000, Australia. (3)3<U+200B>School of Molecular and Biomedical Science,
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.

Sphingosine kinase (SK) 1 is a host kinase that enhances some viral infections.
Here we investigated the ability of SK1 to modulate dengue virus (DENV) infection
in vitro. Overexpression of SK1 did not alter DENV infection; however, targeting 
SK1 through chemical inhibition resulted in reduced DENV RNA and infectious virus
release. DENV infection of SK1-<U+2009>/<U+2009>-<U+2009> murine embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) resulted
in inhibition of infection in an immortalized line (iMEF) but enhanced infection 
in primary MEFs (1°MEFs). Global cellular gene expression profiles showed
expected innate immune mRNA changes in DENV-infected WT but no induction of these
responses in SK1-<U+2009>/<U+2009>-<U+2009> iMEFs. Reverse transciption PCR demonstrated a low-level
induction of IFN-ß and poor induction of mRNA for the interferon-stimulated genes
(ISGs) viperin, IFIT1 and CXCL10 in DENV-infected SK1-<U+2009>/<U+2009>-<U+2009> compared with WT
iMEFs. Similarly, reduced induction of ISGs was observed in SK1-<U+2009>/<U+2009>-<U+2009> 1°MEFs,
even in the face of high-level DENV replication. In both iMEFs and 1°MEFs, DENV
infection induced production of IFN-ß protein. Additionally, higher basal levels 
of antiviral factors (IRF7, CXCL10 and OAS1) were observed in uninfected
SK1-<U+2009>/<U+2009>-<U+2009> iMEFs but not 1°MEFs. This suggests that, in this single iMEF line,
lack of SK1 upregulates the basal levels of factors that may protect cells
against DENV infection. More importantly, regardless of the levels of DENV
replication, all cells that lacked SK1 produced IFN-ß but were refractory to
induction of ISGs such as viperin, IFIT1 and CXCL10. Based on these findings, we 
propose new roles for SK1 in affecting innate responses that regulate
susceptibility to DENV infection.

PMID: 26541871  [PubMed - in process]


34. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Dec;21(12):917-29. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav058. Epub 2015 Oct
26.

Induction of interferon-<U+03BB> contributes to TLR3 and RIG-I activation-mediated
inhibition of herpes simplex virus type 2 replication in human cervical
epithelial cells.

Zhou L(1), Li JL(2), Zhou Y(2), Liu JB(1), Zhuang K(1), Gao JF(3), Liu S(4), Sang
M(5), Wu JG(4), Ho WZ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biosafety Level III Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment,
Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China State Key Laboratory of Virology, College
of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China. (2)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA. (3)Animal Biosafety Level III Laboratory at the
Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China. (5)Animal Biosafety Level III Laboratory at the Center for Animal
Experiment, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071, China Present address: College of
Basic Medical Sciences, Central Laboratory of the Fourth Affiliated Hospital in
Xiangyang, Hubei Key Laboratory of Wudang Local Chinese Medicine Research, Hubei 
University of Medicine, Shiyan 44200, China. (6)Animal Biosafety Level III
Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430071,
China Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA wenzheho@temple.edu.

STUDY HYPOTHESIS: Is it possible to immunologically activate human cervical
epithelial cells to produce antiviral factors that inhibit herpes simplex virus
type 2 (HSV-2) replication?
STUDY FINDING: Our results indicate that human cervical epithelial cells possess 
a functional TLR3/RIG-I signaling system, the activation of which can mount an
Interferon-<U+03BB> (IFN-<U+03BB>)-mediated anti-HSV-2 response.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: There is limited information about the role of cervical
epithelial cells in genital innate immunity against HSV-2 infection.
STUDY DESIGN, SAMPLES/MATERIALS, METHODS: We examined the expression of toll-like
receptors (TLRs) and retinoic acid-inducible I (RIG-I) in End1/E6E7 cells by
real-time PCR. The IFN-<U+03BB> induced by TLR3 and RIG-I activation of End1/E6E7 cells 
was also examined by real-time PCR and ELISA. HSV-2 infection of End1/E6E7 cells 
was evaluated by the real-time PCR detection of HSV-2 gD expression. The antibody
to IL-10Rß was used to determine whether IFN-<U+03BB> contributes to TLR3/RIG-I mediated
HSV-2 inhibition. Expression of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), IRF7,
IFN-stimulated gene 56 (ISG56), 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase I (OAS-1) and
myxovirus resistance A (MxA) were determined by the real-time PCR and western
blot. End1/E6E7 cells were transfected with shRNA to knockdown the IRF3, IRF7 or 
RIG-I expression. Student's t-test and post Newman-Keuls test were used to
analyze stabilized differences in the immunological parameters above between
TLR3/RIG-I-activated cells and control cells.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Human cervical epithelial cells expressed
functional TLR3 and RIG-I, which could be activated by poly I:C and 5'ppp
double-strand RNAs (5'ppp dsRNA), resulting in the induction of endogenous
interferon lambda (IFN-<U+03BB>). The induced IFN-<U+03BB> contributed to TLR3/RIG-I-mediated
inhibition of HSV-2 replication in human cervical epithelial cells, as an
antibody to IL-10Rß, an IFN-<U+03BB> receptor subunit, could compromise
TLR3/RIG-I-mediated inhibition of HSV-2. Further studies showed that TLR3/RIG-I
signaling in the cervical epithelial cells by dsRNA induced the expression of the
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), ISG56, 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase I (OAS-1) and
myxovirus resistance A (MxA), the key antiviral elements in the IFN signaling
pathway. In addition, we observed that the topical treatment of genital mucosa
with poly I:C could protect mice from genital HSV-2 infection.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Future prospective studies with primary cells
and suitable animal models are needed in order to confirm these outcomes.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The findings provide direct and compelling
evidence that there is intracellular expression and regulation of IFN-<U+03BB> in human 
cervical epithelial cells, which may have a key role in the innate genital
protection against viral infections.
LARGE SCALE DATA: Not applicable.
STUDY FUNDING AND COMPETING INTERESTS: This work was supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (81301428 to L.Z. and 81271334 to W.-Z.H.),
the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2042015kf0188 to
L.Z.), the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2013M531745 to L.Z.), the
Development Program of China ('973', 2012CB518900 to W.-Z.H.) from the Ministry
of Science and Technology of the People's Republic of China, grants (DA12815 and 
DA022177 to W.-Z.H.) from the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and the
open project of Hubei Key Laboratory of Wudang Local Chinese Medicine Research
(WDCM005 to M.S.). The authors declare no competing financial interests.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4664393 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26502803  [PubMed - in process]


35. Aging Cell. 2016 Feb;15(1):177-80. doi: 10.1111/acel.12406. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Age-related changes in murine myometrial transcript profile are mediated by
exposure to the female sex hormones.

Chong HP(1), Cordeaux Y(1), Ranjan YS(1), Richardson S(2), Liquet B(2), Smith
GC(1), Charnock-Jones DS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology & NIHR Biomedical Research Centre,
University of Cambridge, The Rosie Hospital, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0SW,
UK. (2)MRC Biostatistics Unit, Cambridge Institute of Public Health, Cambridge,
CB2 0SR, UK.

In humans, the risk of operative first delivery increases linearly with maternal 
age. We previously hypothesized that prolonged, cyclical, prepregnancy exposure
to estrogen and progesterone contributes to uterine aging. Here, we test this
hypothesis. Myometrium was obtained from four groups of virgin mice: (i) 10- to
12-week- and 28- to 30-week-old mice; (ii) 10- to 12-week- and 38- to 40-week-old
mice; (iii) 38-week-old mice that had an ovariectomy or sham operation early in
life; (iv) 38-week-old mice that had been treated with progesterone or vehicle
containing implants from 8 to 36 weeks. Transcript profiling was carried out
using Affymetrix Gene ST 1.1 arrays, and data were normalized. We identified 60
differentially regulated transcripts associated with advancing age (group 1). We 
validated these changes in group 2 (P for overlap = 5.8 × 10(-46) ). Early
ovariectomy prevented the age-related changes in myometrial transcript profile.
Similarly, progesterone-mediated long-term ovarian suppression prevented the
age-related changes in myometrial transcript profile. Interferon regulatory
factor 7 (Irf7) mRNA was regulated by age and hormonal exposure, and was
identified as a predicted regulator of the other differentially expressed
transcripts by both promoter sequence and canonical pathway activation analysis
(P = 8.47 × 10(-5) and P < 10(-10) , respectively). Immunohistochemistry
demonstrated IRF7 in both mouse and human myometrium. We conclude the following: 
(i) Myometrial aging in mice is associated with reproducible changes in
transcript profile; (ii) these changes can be prevented by interventions which
inhibit cyclical changes in the female sex hormones; and (iii) IRF7 may be an
important regulator of myometrial function and aging.

© 2015 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4717263
PMID: 26490259  [PubMed - in process]


36. Genom Data. 2015 Apr 11;4:137-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.03.017. eCollection
2015.

Microarray profiling of L1-overexpressing endothelial cells reveals STAT3
activation via IL-6/IL-6Ra axis.

Magrini E(1), Cavallaro U(2), Bianchi F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan,
Italy. (2)Molecular Medicine Program, Department of Experimental Oncology,
European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.

We recently identified a novel role for the L1 transmembrane glycoprotein (also
known as L1CAM or CD171) in the regulation of tumor angiogenesis and vessels
stabilization. L1 overexpression in cultured endothelial cells of the lung
(luECs) exerted a pleiotropic effect in that it regulated proliferation,
migration, tubulogenesis, vascular permeability, and endothelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EndMT). In addition, we provided strong evidence that
antibody-mediated targeting of L1 may be an effective strategy for vessel
normalization with the potential to increase efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents.
High-throughput microarray expression profile revealed that L1 modulates the
expression of hundreds of genes mainly involved in cell cycle regulation, DNA
replication, cellular assembly, migration, development and organization. By using
a 'pathway-oriented' analysis strategy we were able to identify a network of 105 
genes modulated by L1 through the predicted activation of five transcription
factors: STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, IRF7, and ATF4. Indeed, L1 overexpression resulted 
in the strong induction of STAT3 phosphorylation which was abolished by
antibody-mediated neutralization of IL-6Ra. These results indicated that L1
promoted STAT3 activation via the IL-6/IL-6Ra axis.

PMCID: PMC4536177
PMID: 26484199  [PubMed]


37. J Virol. 2015 Oct 14;90(1):189-205. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02276-15.

Interferon-Regulatory Factor 5-Dependent Signaling Restricts Orthobunyavirus
Dissemination to the Central Nervous System.

Proenca-Modena JL(1), Hyde JL(2), Sesti-Costa R(3), Lucas T(2), Pinto AK(2),
Richner JM(2), Gorman MJ(4), Lazear HM(5), Diamond MS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Genetics, Evolution and Bioagents, Institute of
Biology, University of Campinas, Campinas, Brazil. (2)Department of Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (3)Department
of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA Department of Biochemistry and Immunology, University of São Paulo,
Ribeirão Preto School of Medicine, Ribeirão Preto, Brazil. (4)Department of
Pathology & Immunology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, USA. (5)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of North Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Pathology & Immunology, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Molecular
Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA 
Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA diamond@wusm.wustl.edu.

Interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) is a transcription factor that
induces inflammatory responses after engagement and signaling by pattern
recognition receptors. To define the role of IRF-5 during bunyavirus infection,
we evaluated Oropouche virus (OROV) and La Crosse virus (LACV) pathogenesis and
immune responses in primary cells and in mice with gene deletions in Irf3, Irf5, 
and Irf7 or in Irf5 alone. Deletion of Irf3, Irf5, and Irf7 together resulted in 
uncontrolled viral replication in the liver and spleen, hypercytokinemia,
extensive liver injury, and an early-death phenotype. Remarkably, deletion of
Irf5 alone resulted in meningoencephalitis and death on a more protracted
timeline, 1 to 2 weeks after initial OROV or LACV infection. The clinical signs
in OROV-infected Irf5(-/-) mice were associated with abundant viral antigen and
terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase-mediated dUTP-biotin nick end labeling
(TUNEL)-positive cells in several regions of the brain. Circulating dendritic
cell (DC) subsets in Irf5(-/-) mice had higher levels of OROV RNA in vivo yet
produced lower levels of type I IFN than wild-type (WT) cells. This result was
supported by data obtained in vitro, since a deficiency of IRF-5 resulted in
enhanced OROV infection and diminished type I IFN production in bone
marrow-derived DCs. Collectively, these results indicate a key role for IRF-5 in 
modulating the host antiviral response in peripheral organs that controls
bunyavirus neuroinvasion in mice.IMPORTANCE: Oropouche virus (OROV) and La Crosse
virus (LACV) are orthobunyaviruses that are transmitted by insects and cause
meningitis and encephalitis in subsets of individuals in the Americas. Recently, 
we demonstrated that components of the type I interferon (IFN) induction pathway,
particularly the regulatory transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7, have key
protective roles during OROV infection. However, the lethality in Irf3(-/-)
Irf7(-/-) (DKO) mice infected with OROV was not as rapid or complete as observed 
in Ifnar(-/-) mice, indicating that other transcriptional factors associated with
an IFN response contribute to antiviral immunity against OROV. Here, we evaluated
bunyavirus replication, tissue tropism, and cytokine production in primary cells 
and mice lacking IRF-5. We demonstrate an important role for IRF-5 in preventing 
neuroinvasion and the ensuing encephalitis caused by OROV and LACV.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702527 [Available on 2016-06-17]
PMID: 26468541  [PubMed - in process]


38. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 14;10(10):e0140515. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140515.
eCollection 2015.

Comparing the Primary and Recall Immune Response Induced by a New EV71 Vaccine
Using Systems Biology Approaches.

Shao J(1), Zhang J(2), Wu X(2), Mao Q(2), Chen P(2), Zhu F(3), Xu M(2), Kong
W(1), Liang Z(2), Wang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, P.R.China.
(2)Division of Hepatitis Virus Vaccines, National Institutes for Food and Drug
Control, Beijing, P.R.China. (3)Jiangsu Provincial Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, Nanjing, Jiangsu, P.R.China.

Three inactivated EV71 whole-virus vaccines have completed Phase III clinical
trials in mainland China, with high efficacy, satisfactory safety, and sustained 
immunogenicity. However, the molecular mechanisms how this new vaccine elicit
potent immune response remain poorly understood. To characterize the primary and 
recall responses to EV71 vaccines, PBMC from 19 recipients before and after
vaccination with EV71 vaccine are collected and their gene expression signatures 
after stimulation with EV71 antigen were compared. The results showed that
primary and recall response to EV71 antigen have both activated an IRF7
regulating type I interferon and antiviral immune response network. However,
up-regulated genes involved in T cell activation regulated by IRF1, inflammatory 
response, B-cell activation and humoral immune response were only observed in
recall response. The specific secretion of IL-10 in primary response and
IL-2,IP-10,CCL14a, CCL21 in recall response was consistent with the activation of
immune response process found in genes. Furthermore, the expression of MX1 and
secretion of IP-10 in recall response were strongly correlated with NTAb level at
180d after vaccination (r = 0.81 and 0.99). In summary, inflammatory response,
adaptive immune response and a stronger antiviral response were indentified in
recall response.

PMCID: PMC4605509
PMID: 26465882  [PubMed - in process]


39. Cancer Cell. 2015 Oct 12;28(4):415-28. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.09.004.

Structural Design of Engineered Costimulation Determines Tumor Rejection Kinetics
and Persistence of CAR T Cells.

Zhao Z(1), Condomines M(1), van der Stegen SJ(1), Perna F(1), Kloss CC(1), Gunset
G(1), Plotkin J(1), Sadelain M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell Engineering, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10065, USA; Immunology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065,
USA. (2)Center for Cell Engineering, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY 10065, USA; Immunology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, New York, NY 
10065, USA. Electronic address: m-sadelain@ski.mskcc.org.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2015 Oct 12;28(4):401-2.

T cell engineering is a powerful means to rapidly generate anti-tumor T cells.
The costimulatory properties of second-generation chimeric antigen receptors
(CARs) determine the overall potency of adoptively transferred T cells. Using an 
in vivo "stress test" to challenge CD19-targeted T cells, we studied the
functionality and persistence imparted by seven different CAR structures
providing CD28 and/or 4-1BB costimulation. One configuration, which uses two
signaling domains (CD28 and CD3<U+03B6>) and the 4-1BB ligand, provided the highest
therapeutic efficacy, showing balanced tumoricidal function and increased T cell 
persistence accompanied by an elevated CD8/CD4 ratio and decreased exhaustion.
Remarkably, induction of the IRF7/IFNß pathway was required for optimal
anti-tumor activity. Thus, 1928z-41BBL T cells possess strikingly potent
intrinsic and immunomodulatory qualities.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26461090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 13;10(10):e0140243. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0140243.
eCollection 2015.

RelA-Induced Interferon Response Negatively Regulates Proliferation.

Kochupurakkal BS(1), Wang ZC(1), Hua T(1), Culhane AC(2), Rodig SJ(3),
Rajkovic-Molek K(4), Lazaro JB(1), Richardson AL(5), Biswas DK(1), Iglehart
JD(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (2)Department of Biostatistics and
Computational Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America. (3)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America. (4)Department of
Cytology, Clinical Hospital Center Rijeka, Rijeka, Croatia. (5)Department of
Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, United
States of America; Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (6)Department of Cancer Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America;
Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America.

Both oncogenic and tumor-suppressor activities are attributed to the Nuclear
Factor kappa B (NF-kB) pathway. Moreover, NF-kB may positively or negatively
regulate proliferation. The molecular determinants of these opposing roles of
NF-kB are unclear. Using primary human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) as a
model, we show that increased RelA levels and consequent increase in basal
transcriptional activity of RelA induces IRF1, a target gene. Induced IRF1
upregulates STAT1 and IRF7, and in consort, these factors induce the expression
of interferon response genes. Activation of the interferon pathway down-regulates
CDK4 and up-regulates p27 resulting in Rb hypo-phosphorylation and cell cycle
arrest. Stimulation of HMEC with IFN-<U+03B3> elicits similar phenotypic and molecular
changes suggesting that basal activity of RelA and IFN-<U+03B3> converge on IRF1 to
regulate proliferation. The anti-proliferative RelA-IRF1-CDK4 signaling axis is
retained in ER+/HER2- breast tumors analyzed by The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
Using immuno-histochemical analysis of breast tumors, we confirm the negative
correlation between RelA levels and proliferation rate in ER+/HER2- breast
tumors. These findings attribute an anti-proliferative tumor-suppressor role to
basal RelA activity. Inactivation of Rb, down-regulation of RelA or IRF1, or
upregulation of CDK4 or IRF2 rescues the RelA-IRF1-CDK4 induced proliferation
arrest in HMEC and are points of disruption in aggressive tumors. Activity of the
RelA-IRF1-CDK4 axis may explain favorable response to CDK4/6 inhibition observed 
in patients with ER+ Rb competent tumors.

PMCID: PMC4604146
PMID: 26460486  [PubMed - in process]


41. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2015;391:119-49. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22834-1_4.

The Latent Membrane Protein 1 (LMP1).

Kieser A(1,)(2), Sterz KR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Center Munich-German Research Center for Environmental Health,
Munich, Germany. a.kieser@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (2)German Center for Infection
Research (DZIF), Partner Site Munich, Munich, Germany.
a.kieser@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (3)Helmholtz Center Munich-German Research Center
for Environmental Health, Munich, Germany.

Almost exactly twenty years after the discovery of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), the 
latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) entered the EBV stage, and soon thereafter, it
was recognized as the primary transforming gene product of the virus. LMP1 is
expressed in most EBV-associated lymphoproliferative diseases and malignancies,
and it critically contributes to pathogenesis and disease phenotypes. Thirty
years of LMP1 research revealed its high potential as a deregulator of cellular
signal transduction pathways leading to target cell proliferation and the
simultaneous subversion of cell death programs. However, LMP1 has multiple roles 
beyond cell transformation and immortalization, ranging from cytokine and
chemokine induction, immune modulation, the global alteration of gene and
microRNA expression patterns to the regulation of tumor angiogenesis, cell-cell
contact, cell migration, and invasive growth of tumor cells. By acting like a
constitutively active receptor, LMP1 recruits cellular signaling molecules
associated with tumor necrosis factor receptors such as tumor necrosis factor
receptor-associated factor (TRAF) proteins and TRADD to mimic signals of the
costimulatory CD40 receptor in the EBV-infected B lymphocyte. LMP1 activates
NF-<U+03BA>B, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
(PI3-K), IRF7, and STAT pathways. Here, we review LMP1's molecular and biological
functions, highlighting the interface between LMP1 and the cellular signal
transduction network as an important factor of virus-host interaction and a
potential therapeutic target.

PMID: 26428373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Nov;47(1):157-67. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.09.014.
Epub 2015 Sep 7.

Antiviral role of grouper STING against iridovirus infection.

Huang Y(1), Ouyang Z(1), Wang W(1), Yu Y(1), Li P(1), Zhou S(1), Wei S(1), Wei
J(1), Huang X(2), Qin Q(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and Ecology, South China Sea
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road,
Guangzhou 510301, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and
Ecology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou 510301, China. Electronic address:
huangxh@scsio.ac.cn. (3)Key Laboratory of Tropical Marine Bio-resources and
Ecology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou 510301, China. Electronic address:
qinqw@scsio.ac.cn.

Stimulator of interferon genes (STING, also known as MITA, ERIS, MPYS or TMEM173)
has been identified as a central component in the innate immune response to
cytosolic DNA and RNA derived from different pathogens. However, the detailed
role of STING during fish iridovirus infection still remained largely unknown.
Here, the STING homolog from grouper Epinephelus coioides (EcSTING) was cloned
and its effects on IFN response and antiviral activity were investigated. The
full-length EcSTING cDNA was composed of 1590 bp and encoded a polypeptide of 409
amino acids with 80% identity to STING homolog from large yellow croaker. Amino
acid alignment analysis indicated that EcSTING contained 4 predicated
transmembrane motifs (TMs) in the N terminal, and a C-terminal domain (CTD) which
consisted of a dimerization domain (DD), c-di-GMP-binding domain (CBD) and a
C-terminal tail (CTT). Expression profile analysis revealed that EcSTING was
abundant in gill, spleen, brain, skin, and liver. Upon different stimuli in vivo,
the EcSTING transcript was dramatically up-regulated after challenging with
Singapore grouper iridovirus (SGIV), lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
polyinosin-polycytidylic acid (poly I:C). Reporter gene assay showed that EcSTING
activated ISRE, zebrafish type I IFN and type III IFN promoter in vitro. Mutant
analysis showed that IFN promoter activity was mostly mediated by the
phosphorylation sites at serine residue S379 and S387. Moreover, EcSTING induced 
type I and III IFN promoter activity could be impaired by overexpression of
EcIRF3-DN or EcIRF7-DN, suggesting that EcSTING mediated IFN response in
IRF3/IRF7 dependent manner. In addition, the cytopathic effect (CPE) progression 
of SGIV infection and viral protein synthesis was significantly inhibited by
overexpression of EcSTING, and the inhibitory effect was abolished in serine
residue S379 and S387 mutant transfected cells. Together, our results
demonstrated that EcSTING might be an important regulator of grouper innate
immune response against iridovirus infection.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26359551  [PubMed - in process]


43. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 2;10(9):e0137672. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137672.
eCollection 2015.

Correction: Functional Analysis of Chicken IRF7 in Response to dsRNA Analog
Poly(I:C) by Integrating Overexpression and Knockdown.

Kim TH, Zhou H.

Erratum for
    PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0133450.

PMCID: PMC4558000
PMID: 26332206  [PubMed]


44. Hepatology. 2015 Dec;62(6):1683-96. doi: 10.1002/hep.28143. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Impaired monocyte-macrophage functions and defective toll-like receptor signaling
in hepatitis E virus-infected pregnant women with acute liver failure.

Sehgal R(1), Patra S(2), David P(1), Vyas A(1), Khanam A(1), Hissar S(1), Gupta
E(3), Kumar G(1), Kottilil S(4), Maiwall R(5), Sarin SK(1,)(5), Trehanpati N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New Delhi,
India. (2)Gynecology and Obstetrics, Lady Harding Medical College, New Delhi,
India. (3)Department of Virology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New
Delhi, India. (4)Laboratory of Immunoregulation, National Institute of Allergy
and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(5)Department of Hepatology, Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, New Delhi, 
India.

Acute viral hepatitis resulting due to hepatitis E viral infection (AVH-E) is
often serious in pregnancy and could result in acute liver failure (ALF). The
role of monocytes and macrophages (mono-macs) in the pathogenesis of AVH-E and
development of ALF-E in pregnancy is unclear. We investigated the functions of
mono-macs in pregnant (P), AVH-E (n = 44), ALF-E (n = 12), healthy controls (HC; 
n = 20) and compared with nonpregnant (NP) AVH-E (n = 10), ALF-E (n = 5), and HC 
(n = 10). We also recruited non-hepatitis E virus-related pregnant (P), ALF-NE (n
= 5) and non-pregnant (NP), ALF-NE (n = 12) patients with ALF. Mono-macs,
dendritic cell (DC) phenotypes, and Toll-like receptor (TLR) expressions were
studied by flow cytometry and reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
Mono-macs functionality was determined by analyzing their phagocytic activity and
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation by using flow cytometry. Frequency of
mono-macs and DCs was increased during HEV infection compared to HC (P < 0.001). 
Macrophages were increased (P < 0.002) in ALF-E(P) compared to ALF-NE(P). The
macrophage phagocytic activity and Escherichia coli-induced ROS production was
significantly impaired in ALF-E(P) compared to AVH-E(P) (P < 0.001), ALF-E(NP),
and ALF-NE(P) patients (P < 0.02). TLR3 and TLR9 expression and downstream MYD88 
signalling molecules IRF3 and IRF7 were significantly down-regulated in ALF-E(P) 
(P < 0.00) compared to AVH-E(P) and ALF-NE(P).CONCLUSION: Functionality of
mono-macs is impaired in pregnant ALF-E patients compared to AVH-E(P). Reduced
TLR3 and TLR7 expression and TLR downstream-signaling molecules in pregnant ALF-E
patients suggests inadequate triggers for the innate immune responses
contributing to development and severity of ALF-E. Studies using TLR agonists to 
activate mono-macs may be of use and in vitro studies should be undertaken using 
patient samples.(Hepatology 2015;62:1683-1696).

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 26331854  [PubMed - in process]


45. Vet Res Commun. 2015 Dec;39(4):211-6. doi: 10.1007/s11259-015-9644-3. Epub 2015
Sep 2.

Positive regulation of humoral and innate immune responses induced by inactivated
Avian Influenza Virus vaccine in broiler chickens.

Abdallah F(1), Hassanin O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig University,
Zagazig, 445119, Egypt. mm.fatma@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Avian and Rabbit
Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt.

Avian Influenza (AI) vaccines are widely used for mammals and birds in a trial to
eliminate the Avian Influenza virus (AIV) infection from the world. However and
up till now the virus is still existed via modulation of its antigenic structure 
to evade the pressure of host immune responses. For a complete understanding of
the immune responses following AI vaccination in chickens, the modulations of the
chickens humoral immune responses and interferon-alpha signaling pathway, as a
fundamental part of the innate immune responses, were investigated. In our study,
we measured the humoral immune response using hemagglutination-inhibition (HI)
and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) tests. In addition, chicken
interferon-alpha pathway components was measured at RNA levels using Quantitative
Real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) following one dose of inactivated H5N1 influenza vaccine 
at 14 days of age. In this study, the protective levels of humoral antibody
responses were observed at 14, 21 and 28 days following immunization with
inactivated (Re-1/H5N1) AI vaccine. In the chicken spleen cells, up regulation in
the chicken interferon-alpha pathway components (MX1 & IRF7) was existed as early
as 48 h post vaccination and remained until 28 days post vaccination at the
endogenous state. However, after the recall with ex-vivo stimulation, the up
regulation was more pronounced in the transcriptional factor (IRF7) compared to
the antiviral gene (MX1) at 28 days post vaccination. So far, from our results it
appears that the inactivated H5N1 vaccine can trigger the chicken
interferon-alpha signaling pathway as well as it can elicit protective humoral
antibody responses.

PMID: 26329833  [PubMed - in process]


46. BMC Genomics. 2015 Sep 2;16:655. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1867-8.

RNAseq expression analysis of resistant and susceptible mice after influenza A
virus infection identifies novel genes associated with virus replication and
important for host resistance to infection.

Wilk E(1), Pandey AK(2), Leist SR(1), Hatesuer B(1), Preusse M(3,)(4), Pommerenke
C(5), Wang J(6), Schughart K(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Genetics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research and 
University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Inhoffenstr. 7, 38124, Braunschweig, 
Germany. (2)Department of Genetics, Genomics and Informatics, Center for
Integrative and Translational Genomics, University of Tennessee Health Science
Center, 855 Madison Avenue, Memphis, TN, 38163, USA. (3)Institute for
Experimental Infection Research, TWINCORE Centre for Experimental and Clinical
Infection Research, Hannover, Germany. (4)Department of Molecular Bacteriology,
Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany.
(5)Leibniz-Institut DSMZ-Deutsche Sammlung von Mikroorganismen und Zellkulturen
GmbH, Inhoffenstr. 7B, 38124, Braunschweig, Germany. (6)Bioinformatics and
Statistics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany.
(7)Department of Infection Genetics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research and 
University of Veterinary Medicine Hannover, Inhoffenstr. 7, 38124, Braunschweig, 
Germany. kls@helmholtz-hzi.de. (8)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and
Biochemistry, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, USA.
kls@helmholtz-hzi.de.

BACKGROUND: The host response to influenza A infections is strongly influenced by
host genetic factors. Animal models of genetically diverse mouse strains are well
suited to identify host genes involved in severe pathology, viral replication and
immune responses. Here, we have utilized a dual RNAseq approach that allowed us
to investigate both viral and host gene expression in the same individual mouse
after H1N1 infection.
RESULTS: We performed a detailed expression analysis to identify (i) correlations
between changes in expression of host and virus genes, (ii) host genes involved
in viral replication, and (iii) genes showing differential expression between two
mouse strains that strongly differ in resistance to influenza infections. These
genes may be key players involved in regulating the differences in pathogenesis
and host defense mechanisms after influenza A infections. Expression levels of
influenza segments correlated well with the viral load and may thus be used as
surrogates for conventional viral load measurements. Furthermore, we investigated
the functional role of two genes, Reg3g and Irf7, in knock-out mice and found
that deletion of the Irf7 gene renders the host highly susceptible to H1N1
infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Using RNAseq analysis we identified novel genes important for viral 
replication or the host defense. This study adds further important knowledge to
host-pathogen-interactions and suggests additional candidates that are crucial
for host susceptibility or survival during influenza A infections.

PMCID: PMC4557482
PMID: 26329040  [PubMed - in process]


47. Cell. 2015 Aug 27;162(5):961-73. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.07.056.

DNA-Demethylating Agents Target Colorectal Cancer Cells by Inducing Viral Mimicry
by Endogenous Transcripts.

Roulois D(1), Loo Yau H(2), Singhania R(1), Wang Y(1), Danesh A(1), Shen SY(1),
Han H(3), Liang G(3), Jones PA(3), Pugh TJ(2), O'Brien C(4), De Carvalho DD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G
2M9, Canada. (2)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network,
Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada; Department of Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada. (3)Department of Urology, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.
(4)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G
2M9, Canada; Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 1A1, Canada; Department of Surgery, Toronto General
Hospital, Toronto, ON M5T 1P5, Canada. (5)Princess Margaret Cancer Centre,
University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada; Department of Medical
Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada. Electronic
address: ddecarv@uhnres.utoronto.ca.

Comment in
    Cell. 2015 Aug 27;162(5):938-9.

DNA-demethylating agents have shown clinical anti-tumor efficacy via an unknown
mechanism of action. Using a combination of experimental and bioinformatics
analyses in colorectal cancer cells, we demonstrate that low-dose 5-AZA-CdR
targets colorectal cancer-initiating cells (CICs) by inducing viral mimicry. This
is associated with induction of dsRNAs derived at least in part from endogenous
retroviral elements, activation of the MDA5/MAVS RNA recognition pathway, and
downstream activation of IRF7. Indeed, disruption of virus recognition pathways, 
by individually knocking down MDA5, MAVS, or IRF7, inhibits the ability of
5-AZA-CdR to target colorectal CICs and significantly decreases 5-AZA-CdR
long-term growth effects. Moreover, transfection of dsRNA into CICs can mimic the
effects of 5-AZA-CdR. Together, our results represent a major shift in
understanding the anti-tumor mechanisms of DNA-demethylating agents and highlight
the MDA5/MAVS/IRF7 pathway as a potentially druggable target against CICs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26317465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Oct;46(2):745-52. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.08.013.
Epub 2015 Aug 17.

Expression profiles and interaction suggest TBK1 can be regulated by Nrdp1 in
response to immune stimulation in large yellow croaker Larimichthys crocea.

Zhang DL(1), Yu da H(2), Chen J(1), Fan S(2), Wang ZY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for The East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture, Fisheries College, Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, PR China.
(2)South China Sea Resource Exploitation and Protection Collaborative Innovation 
Center (SCS-REPIC), South China Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy
of Fishery Sciences, Guangzhou, 510300, PR China. (3)Key Laboratory of Healthy
Mariculture for The East China Sea, Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries College,
Jimei University, Xiamen 361021, PR China. Electronic address: zywang@jmu.edu.cn.

TBK1 has been extensively studied in mammals because of its important roles as a 
molecular bridge, linking the TLRs (TLR3 and TLR4) and RLRs signals to activate
transcriptional factors IRF3 and IRF7 for IFN-I production. However, the
information on molecular and functional characteristics of TBK1 in teleosts is
limited. In this study, the molecular characterization and immune response of
TBK1 in Larimichthys crocea (named as LcTBK1) as well as its interaction with
Nrdp1 were investigated. Sequence analysis demonstrated that LcTBK1 included four
functional motifs, the N-terminal protein kinase domain and ATP-binding site,
middle ULD and C-terminal coiled-coil domain. The tissue expression profiles
indicated that LcTBK1 gene was constitutively expressed in the twelve tissues
examined, with high expression in brain. Temporal expression analysis showed that
LcTBK1 mRNA was obviously increased in the liver after injection of LPS, Poly I:C
and inactive Vibrio parahaemolyticus, however, declined at some time points in
spleen and head-kidney. Furthermore, we found that LcTBK1 can interact with
LcNrdp1, an E3 ubiquitin ligase that involved in immune response to Cryptocaryon 
irritans infection in L. crocea. The qPCR showed that LcNrdp1 was also
significantly up-regulated in liver, down-regualted at some time points in spleen
and head-kidney after LPS, Poly I:C and inactive V. parahaemolyticus injection,
although the expression patterns of the two genes after the three treatments were
different in change magnitude and up-regulation timespan. These results suggested
that LcTBK1 was involved in L. crocea defense against the pathogen infection and 
can be regulated by Nrdp1 in PPRs signaling pathway of fishes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26291490  [PubMed - in process]


49. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 Aug 18;8:52. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0127-8.

Transcriptional analysis of immune-related gene expression in p53-deficient mice 
with increased susceptibility to influenza A virus infection.

Yan W(1), Wei J(2), Deng X(3), Shi Z(4), Zhu Z(5), Shao D(6), Li B(7), Wang S(8),
Tong G(9), Ma Z(10).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Science, No. 518, Ziyue Road, Shanghai,, 200241, PR China. yanwenjun01@163.com.
(2)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Science, No. 518, Ziyue Road, Shanghai,, 200241, PR China.
jianchaowei@shvri.ac.cn. (3)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Science, No. 518, Ziyue Road, Shanghai,, 200241, PR
China. dengxf2008@gmail.com. (4)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Science, No. 518, Ziyue Road, Shanghai,, 200241, PR
China. shizixue858@126.com. (5)Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, 730046, China. zhuzixiang@caas.cn.
(6)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Science, No. 518, Ziyue Road, Shanghai,, 200241, PR China.
shaodonghua@shvri.ac.cn. (7)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Science, No. 518, Ziyue Road, Shanghai,, 200241, PR
China. lbb@shvri.ac.cn. (8)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Science, No. 518, Ziyue Road, Shanghai,, 200241, PR
China. shwang@shvri.ac.cn. (9)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Science, No. 518, Ziyue Road, Shanghai,, 200241, PR
China. gztong@shvri.ac.cn. (10)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Agricultural Science, No. 518, Ziyue Road, Shanghai,, 200241, PR
China. zhiyongma@shvri.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: p53 is a tumor suppressor that contributes to the host immune
response against viral infections in addition to its well-established protective 
role against cancer development. In response to influenza A virus (IAV)
infection, p53 is activated and plays an essential role in inhibiting IAV
replication. As a transcription factor, p53 regulates the expression of a range
of downstream responsive genes either directly or indirectly in response to viral
infection. We compared the expression profiles of immune-related genes between
IAV-infected wild-type p53 (p53WT) and p53-deficient (p53KO) mice to gain an
insight into the basis of p53-mediated antiviral response.
METHODS: p53KO and p53WT mice were infected with influenza A/Puerto Rico/8/1934
(PR8) strain. Clinical symptoms and body weight changes were monitored daily.
Lung specimens of IAV-infected mice were collected for analysis of virus titers
and gene expression profiles. The difference in immune-related gene expression
levels between IAV-infected p53KO and p53WT mice was comparatively determined
using microarray analysis and confirmed by quantitative real-time reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: p53KO mice showed an increased susceptibility to IAV infection compared 
to p53WT mice. Microarray analysis of gene expression profiles in the lungs of
IAV-infected mice indicated that the increased susceptibility was associated with
significantly changed expression levels in a range of immune-related genes in
IAV-infected p53KO mice. A significantly attenuated expression of Ifng (encoding 
interferon (IFN)-gamma), Irf7 (encoding IFN regulator factor 7), and antiviral
genes, such as Mx2 and Eif2ak2 (encoding PKR), were observed in IAV-infected
p53KO mice, suggesting an impaired IFN-mediated immune response against IAV
infection in the absence of p53. In addition, dysregulated expression levels of
proinflammatory cytokines and chemokines, such as Ccl2 (encoding MCP-1), Cxcl9,
Cxcl10 (encoding IP-10), and Tnf, were detected in IAV-infected p53KO mice during
early IAV infection, reflecting an aberrant inflammatory response.
CONCLUSION: Lack of p53 resulted in the impaired expression of genes involved in 
IFN signaling and the dysregulated expression of cytokine and chemokine genes in 
IAV-infected mice, suggesting an essential role of p53 in the regulation of
antiviral and inflammatory responses during IAV infection.

PMCID: PMC4539693
PMID: 26282854  [PubMed - in process]


50. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2015 Nov;35(11):901-16. doi: 10.1089/jir.2015.0013.
Epub 2015 Aug 11.

Role of STAT1 in Chlamydia-Induced Type-1 Interferon Production in Oviduct
Epithelial Cells.

Hosey KL(1), Hu S(1,)(2), Derbigny WA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine , Indianapolis, Indiana. (2)2 College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong
Agricultural University , Wuhan, People's Republic of China .

We previously reported that Chlamydia muridarum-infected murine oviduct
epithelial cells (OE cells) secrete interferon ß (IFN-ß) in a mostly
TLR3-dependent manner. However, C. muridarum-infected TLR3-deficient OE cells
were still able to secrete detectable levels of IFN-ß into the supernatants,
suggesting that other signaling pathways contribute to Chlamydia-induced IFN-ß
synthesis in these cells. We investigated the role of STAT1 as a possible
contributor in the Chlamydia-induced type-1 IFN production in wild-type (WT) and 
TLR3-deficient OE cells to ascertain its putative role at early- and late-times
during Chlamydia infection. Our data show that C. muridarum infection
significantly increased STAT1 gene expression and protein activation in WT OE
cells; however, TLR3-deficient OE cells showed diminished STAT1 protein
activation and gene expression. There was significantly less IFN-ß detected in
the supernatants of C. muridarum-infected OE cells derived from mice deficient in
STAT1 when compared with WT OE cells, which suggest that STAT1 is required for
the optimal synthesis of IFN-ß during infection. Real-time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction analyses of signaling components of the type-1 IFN
signaling pathway demonstrated equal upregulation in the expression of STAT2 and 
IRF7 genes in the WT and TLR3-deficient OE cells, but no upregulation in these
genes in the STAT1-deficient OE cells. Finally, experiments in which INFAR1 was
blocked with neutralizing antibody revealed that IFNAR1-mediated signaling was
critical to the Chlamydia-induced upregulation in IFN-a gene transcription, but
had no role in the Chlamydia-induced upregulation in IFN-ß gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC4642836 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26262558  [PubMed - in process]


51. Elife. 2015 Aug 11;4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.06848.

ISG15 counteracts Listeria monocytogenes infection.

Radoshevich L(1), Impens F(1), Ribet D(1), Quereda JJ(1), Nam Tham T(1), Nahori
MA(1), Bierne H(2), Dussurget O(1), Pizarro-Cerdá J(1), Knobeloch KP(3), Cossart 
P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unité, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. (2)Institut National de la Recherche
Agronomique, UMR1319, Micalis, AgroParisTech, Jouy-en-Josas, France. (3)Molecular
Genetics Group, Neuropathologie, Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

ISG15 is an interferon-stimulated, linear di-ubiquitin-like protein, with
anti-viral activity. The role of ISG15 during bacterial infection remains
elusive. We show that ISG15 expression in nonphagocytic cells is dramatically
induced upon Listeria infection. Surprisingly this induction can be type I
interferon independent and depends on the cytosolic surveillance pathway, which
senses bacterial DNA and signals through STING, TBK1, IRF3 and IRF7. Most
importantly, we observed that ISG15 expression restricts Listeria infection in
vitro and in vivo. We made use of stable isotope labeling in tissue culture
(SILAC) to identify ISGylated proteins that could be responsible for the
protective effect. Strikingly, infection or overexpression of ISG15 leads to
ISGylation of ER and Golgi proteins, which correlates with increased secretion of
cytokines known to counteract infection. Together, our data reveal a previously
uncharacterized ISG15-dependent restriction of Listeria infection, reinforcing
the view that ISG15 is a key component of the innate immune response.

PMCID: PMC4530601
PMID: 26259872  [PubMed - in process]


52. Dis Markers. 2015;2015:909572. doi: 10.1155/2015/909572. Epub 2015 Jul 15.

Toll-Like Receptor 9 Inactivation Alleviated Atherosclerotic Progression and
Inhibited Macrophage Polarized to M1 Phenotype in ApoE-/- Mice.

Ma C(1), Ouyang Q(1), Huang Z(2), Chen X(3), Lin Y(3), Hu W(3), Lin L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Department, Second Affiliated Hospital and Second Clinical
Medical College, Fujian Medical University, Quanzhou, Fujian 362000, China ; Key 
Laboratory of Cardiovascular Remodeling and Function Research, Chinese Ministry
of Education and Chinese Ministry of Health, Shandong University Qilu Hospital,
Jinan, Shandong 250012, China. (2)Cardiovascular Department, Second Affiliated
Hospital and Second Clinical Medical College, Fujian Medical University,
Quanzhou, Fujian 362000, China. (3)Rheumatism Department, Second Affiliated
Hospital and Second Clinical Medical College, Fujian Medical University,
Quanzhou, Fujian 362000, China.

OBJECTIVE: Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) is involved in many inflammatory diseases,
but its role in atherosclerosis remains controversial. This study aimed to
investigate the role of TLR9 in atherosclerosis development and macrophage
polarization.
METHODS: ApoE(-/-) mice were treated with vehicle or IRS869 for 12 weeks. Plaque 
vulnerability was assessed with immunohistochemical analysis, picro-sirius red,
and oil red O staining. The expressions of M1- and M2-associated markers in
plaques were detected by RT-PCR and immunofluorescence. The aorta TLR9 and its
downstream molecules including myeloid differentiation protein 88 (MyD88),
phosphorylated nuclear factor-kappa B (p-NF-<U+03BA>B), and interferon regulatory factor
7 (IRF7) were determined by western blot analysis. The frequency of M1 and M2
subtype in RAW264.7 cells treated with IRS869 and/or ODN1826 was evaluated with
flow cytometry.
RESULTS: In ApoE(-/-) mice, functional inactivation of TLR9 pathway resulted in
attenuated atherosclerosis development, as manifested by reduced plaque burden
and by decreased plaque vulnerability. Mechanistically, TLR9 inhibition prevented
the activation of MyD88/NF-<U+03BA>B pathway and shifted the balance of M1/M2 toward M2 
macrophages that were involved.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicated that TLR9 inactivation ameliorated
atherosclerosis via skewing macrophage plasticity to M2 phenotype in
ApoE-deficient mice. These findings may provide a promising therapeutic strategy 
for atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC4518170
PMID: 26257462  [PubMed - in process]


53. Innate Immun. 2015 Oct;21(7):770-7. doi: 10.1177/1753425915596844. Epub 2015 Jul 
29.

TGF-ß1 inhibits the production of IFN in response to CpG DNA via ubiquitination
of TNF receptor-associated factor (TRAF) 6.

Naiki Y(1), Komatsu T(2), Koide N(2), Dagvadorj J(3), Yoshida T(2), Arditi M(4), 
Yokochi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi Medical University School of 
Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan naikiy@aichi-med-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
Nagakute, Aichi, Japan. (3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi
Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi, Japan Division of
Pediatrics Infectious Disease and Immunology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, CA, USA. (4)Division of Pediatrics Infectious Disease and Immunology,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

The effect of TGF-ß1 on CpG DNA-induced type I IFN production was examined by
reconstituting a series of signaling molecules in TLR 3 signaling. TGF-ß1
inhibited CpG DNA-induced IFN-a4 productivity in HeLa cells. Transfection of IFN 
regulatory factor (IRF)7 but not TNF receptor-associated factor (TRAF)6 and TRAF3
into cells triggered IFN-a4 productivity, and TGF-ß1 inhibited IRF7-mediated type
I IFN production in the presence of TRAF6. TGF-ß1 induced ubiquitination of
TRAF6, although CpG DNA did not induce it. Moreover, TGF-ß1 accelerated the
ubiquitination of TRAF6 in the presence of CpG DNA. TGF-ß1 ubiquitinated TRAF6 at
K63 but not K48. TGF-ß1 also induced ubiquitination of IRF7. Further, TGF-ß1 did 
not impair the interaction of IRF7 and TRAF6. CpG DNA induced the phosphorylation
of IRF7 in the presence of TRAF6, whereas TGF-ß1 inhibited the IRF7
phosphorylation. Blocking of TRAF6 ubiquitination abolished the inhibition of CpG
DNA-induced type I IFN production by TGF-ß. Taken together, TGF-ß was suggested
to inhibit CpG DNA-induced type I IFN production transcriptionally via
ubiquitination of TRAF6.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26224488  [PubMed - in process]


54. Mol Immunol. 2015 Oct;67(2 Pt B):416-25. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.07.006. Epub 
2015 Jul 22.

Dysfunction in macrophage toll-like receptor signaling caused by an inborn error 
of cationic amino acid transport.

Kurko J(1), Vähä-Mäkilä M(2), Tringham M(3), Tanner L(4), Paavanen-Huhtala S(5), 
Saarinen M(6), Näntö-Salonen K(7), Simell O(8), Niinikoski H(9), Mykkänen J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Turku,
Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
johanna.kurko@utu.fi. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and 
University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic
address: mari.vaha-makila@utu.fi. (3)Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Genetics, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, Finland.
Electronic address: maaria.tringham@utu.fi. (4)Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Genetics, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, Finland;
Department of Clinical Genetics, Turku University Hospital, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, 
PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic address: laura.tanner@utu.fi.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku,
Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
paavanen@gmail.com. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and
University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland; Department
of Public Health, University of Turku, Lemminkäisenkatu 1, 20014 Turku, Finland. 
Electronic address: maiju.m.saarinen@utu.fi. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Turku
University Hospital and University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521
Turku, Finland. Electronic address: kirsti.nanto-salonen@tyks.fi. (8)Department
of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu
4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic address: olli.simell@utu.fi.
(9)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital and University of Turku,
Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
harri.niinikoski@tyks.fi. (10)Department of Pediatrics, Turku University Hospital
and University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 4-8, PL 52, 20521 Turku, Finland;
Research Centre of Applied and Preventive Cardiovascular Medicine, University of 
Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, 20520 Turku, Finland. Electronic address:
juha.mykkanen@utu.fi.

Amino acids, especially arginine, are vital for the well-being and activity of
immune cells, and disruption of amino acid balance may weaken immunity and
predispose to infectious and autoimmune diseases. We present here a model of an
inborn aminoaciduria, lysinuric protein intolerance (LPI), in which a single
mutation in y(+)LAT1 cationic amino acid transporter gene SLC7A7 leads to a
multisystem disease characterized by immunological complications,
life-threatening pulmonary alveolar proteinosis and nephropathy. Macrophages are 
suggested to play a central role in LPI in the development of these severe
secondary symptoms. We thus studied the effect of the Finnish y(+)LAT1 mutation
on monocyte-derived macrophages where toll-like receptors (TLRs) act as the key
molecules in innate immune response against external pathogens. The function of
LPI patient and control macrophage TLR signaling was examined by stimulating the 
TLR2/1, TLR4 and TLR9 pathways with their associated pathogen-associated
molecular patterns. Downregulation in expression of TLR9, IRF7, IRF3 and IFNB1
and in secretion of IFN-a was detected, suggesting an impaired response to TLR9
stimulation. In addition, secretion of TNF-a, IL-12 and IL-1RA by TLR2/1
stimulation and IL-12 and IL-1RA by TLR4 stimulation was increased in the LPI
patients. LPI macrophages secreted significantly less nitric oxide than control
macrophages, whereas plasma concentrations of inflammatory chemokines CXCL8,
CXCL9 and CXCL10 were elevated in the LPI patients. In conclusion, our results
strengthen the relevance of macrophages in the pathogenesis of LPI and,
furthermore, suggest that cationic amino acid transport plays an important role
in the regulation of innate immune responses.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26210182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Oct;46(2):493-500. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.07.010.
Epub 2015 Jul 21.

Expression of virus-responsive genes and their response to challenge with
poly(I:C) at different stages of the annual fish Nothobranchius guentheri:
Implications for an asymmetric decrease in immunity.

Liu S(1), Jiang C(2), Duan C(1), Hu L(1), Zhang S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Evolution & Development, Institute of Evolution & Marine
Biodiversity and Department of Marine Biology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao
266003, China. (2)Laboratory for Evolution & Development, Institute of Evolution 
& Marine Biodiversity and Department of Marine Biology, Ocean University of
China, Qingdao 266003, China; College of Life Science and Technology, Hong He
University, Mengzi, Yunnan 661100, China. (3)Laboratory for Evolution &
Development, Institute of Evolution & Marine Biodiversity and Department of
Marine Biology, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, China. Electronic
address: sczhang@ouc.edu.cn.

Aging deteriorates immunity. However, if aging affects immunity in an asymmetric 
or symmetric way remains largely unknown. In this study we clearly demonstrate
that compared with adult fish, the anti-viral responses of aged annual fish
Nothobranchius guentheri, as reflected by the expression levels of
virus-responsive genes, including lgp2 and mda5 encoding sensor molecules, ifn-i 
and viperin encoding the effector molecules and irf1, irf7, stat1 and atf3
encoding the regulation elements, are either reduced remarkably or elevated
markedly or show little difference depending upon the different tissues.
Moreover, although challenge with poly(I:C) results in a significant decrease in 
the expression of virus-responsive genes in most tissues of aged N. guentheri, it
also causes a considerable increase in the expression of the genes in other
tissues of aged fish. Collectively, these data suggest that the anti-viral
responses of the annual fish N. guentheri generally reduces with age in an
asymmetric way among the most tissues.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26206608  [PubMed - in process]


56. BMC Immunol. 2015 Jul 23;16:42. doi: 10.1186/s12865-015-0109-9.

Negative feedback circuit for toll like receptor-8 activation in human embryonic 
Kidney 293 using outer membrane vesicle delivered bi-specific siRNA.

Adhikari A(1), Gupta BP(2), Das Manandhar K(3), Mishra SK(4), Saiju HK(5),
Shrestha RM(6), Mishra N(7), Sharma S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Asian Institute of Technology & Management, Purbanchal University, Knowledge
village, Khumaltar, Satdobato, Lalitpur, Nepal. adhikari_anurag13@yahoo.com.
(2)Central Department of Biotechnology, Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, Nepal.
guptabirendra10@gmail.com. (3)Central Department of Biotechnology, Tribhuvan
University, Kathmandu, Nepal. krishnamanandhar@gmail.com. (4)National Public
Health Laboratory, Teku, Kathmandu, Nepal. mishrashravan75@gmail.com. (5)Asian
Institute of Technology & Management, Purbanchal University, Knowledge village,
Khumaltar, Satdobato, Lalitpur, Nepal. harisainju959@gmail.com. (6)Padma Kanya
Multiple Campus, Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, Nepal. shresthar641@gmail.com. 
(7)South Asian University, New Delhi, India. nawneetmishra6@gmail.com. (8)Asian
Institute of Technology & Management, Purbanchal University, Knowledge village,
Khumaltar, Satdobato, Lalitpur, Nepal. shishirsharma618@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: TLR8 assists in antiviral approach by producing Type 1 INF via MyD88 
dependent IRF7 pathway. However, over expression of INFa/ß molecule poses threat 
by developing tolerance in chronic infection cases and enhancing inflammatory
response. Here we report a bi-specific siRNA based complex which differentially
activates and silences the TLR8 and MYD88 respectively in a negatively regulated 
fashion.
RESULTS: Outer membrane vesicle from Escherichia coli used for siRNA delivery was
observed more efficient when attached with invasive protein Ail along with OmpA
(P<0.001) in HEK293-TLR8 cell line. siRNA complexed with p19 protein was
efficient in activating TLR8, confirmed by the increment of INFß molecules
(P<0.001) in HEK293-TLR8 compared to its counterpart. Fusion of lipid bilayer of 
endosomal compartment was significant at pH 4.5 when fusogenic peptides (diINF-7)
were incubated in membrane vesicle, thus facilitating the escape of siRNA complex
to the host cytoplasm in order to silence MyD88 transcript (P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: We investigated the activation of TLR8 by bi-specific si-RNA for the
production of INFß. In the same setting we showed that bi-specific si-RNA was
able to silence MyD88 transcript in a delayed manner. For the cases of auto
immune disease and inflammation where over activation of endosomal TLRs poses
serious threat, bi specific siRNA could be used as negative feedback controlled
system.

PMCID: PMC4510891
PMID: 26202481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 17;10(7):e0133450. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133450.
eCollection 2015.

Functional Analysis of Chicken IRF7 in Response to dsRNA Analog Poly(I:C) by
Integrating Overexpression and Knockdown.

Kim TH(1), Zhou H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Genetics and Genomics Graduate Group, Department of Animal
Science, University of California, Davis, California, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(9):e0137672.

In order to develop novel strategies to protect against increasingly virulent
bird-linked pathogens, a better understanding of the avian antiviral response
mechanism is essential. Type I interferons (IFNs) are recognized as the first
line of defense in a host's antiviral response; and it has been suggested that
IRF7, a member of the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family, plays an important role
in modulating the immune response to avian influenza virus infection in chickens.
The objective of this study was to identify candidate genes and pathways
associated with IRF7 regulation at the transcriptome level as a first step
towards elucidating the underlying cellular mechanisms of IRF7 modulation in the 
chicken antiviral response. IRF7 overexpression and knockdown DF-1 cell lines
were established and stimulated by various pathogen-associated molecular
patterns. Significant IRF7 and type I IFN expression changes were observed in
both the IRF7 overexpression cell line and the IRF7 knockdown cell line upon
exposure to the double stranded RNA (dsRNA) analog poly(I:C). Using RNA-seq based
transcriptome analysis, we identified potential novel genes that IRF7 may help
regulate as part of the host immune response to dsRNA; potential biomarkers and
therapeutic targets revealed as a result of this study warrant further
investigation. Based on our results, we suggest that IRF7 may have conserved
functional activity in the avian antiviral response, and plays a crucial role in 
type I IFN regulation.

PMCID: PMC4505898
PMID: 26186542  [PubMed - in process]


58. BMC Genomics. 2015 Jul 10;16:517. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1728-5.

Transcriptome sequencing of microglial cells stimulated with TLR3 and TLR4
ligands.

Das A(1), Chai JC(2), Kim SH(3), Lee YS(4), Park KS(5), Jung KH(6,)(7), Chai
YG(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bionanotechnology, Hanyang University, Seoul, 133-791, Republic 
of Korea. amitabhdas.kn@gmail.com. (2)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences,
Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791, Republic of Korea. jincchai@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences, Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791,
Republic of Korea. eio3492@gmail.com. (4)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences,
Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791, Republic of Korea. yslee@hanyang.ac.kr.
(5)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences, Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791,
Republic of Korea. kspark73@gmail.com. (6)Department of Molecular & Life
Sciences, Hanyang University, Ansan, 426-791, Republic of Korea.
khjung2@gmail.com. (7)Institute of Natural Science & Technology, Hanyang
University, Ansan, 426-791, South Korea. khjung2@gmail.com. (8)Department of
Bionanotechnology, Hanyang University, Seoul, 133-791, Republic of Korea.
ygchai@hanyang.ac.kr. (9)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences, Hanyang
University, Ansan, 426-791, Republic of Korea. ygchai@hanyang.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: Resident macrophages in the CNS microglia become activated and
produce proinflammatory molecules upon encountering bacteria or viruses. TLRs are
a phylogenetically conserved diverse family of sensors that drive innate immune
responses following interactions with PAMPs. TLR3 and TLR4 recognize viral dsRNA 
Poly (I:C) and bacterial endotoxin LPS, respectively. Importantly, these
receptors differ in their downstream adaptor molecules. Thus far, only a few
studies have investigated the effects of TLR3 and TLR4 in macrophages. However, a
genome-wide search for the effects of these TLRs has not been performed in
microglia using RNA-seq. Gene expression patterns were determined for the BV-2
microglial cell line when stimulated with viral dsRNA Poly (I:C) or bacterial
endotoxin LPS to identify novel transcribed genes, as well as investigate how
differences in downstream signaling could influence gene expression in innate
immunity.
RESULTS: Sequencing assessment and quality evaluation revealed that common and
unique patterns of proinflammatory genes were significantly up-regulated in
response to TLR3 and TLR4 stimulation. However, the IFN/viral response gene
showed a stronger response to TLR3 stimulation than to TLR4 stimulation.
Unexpectedly, TLR3 and TLR4 stimulation did not activate IFN-ß and IRF3 in BV-2
microglia. Most importantly, we observed that previously unidentified
transcription factors (TFs) (i.e., IRF1, IRF7, and IRF9) and the epigenetic
regulators KDM4A and DNMT3L were significantly up-regulated in both TLR3- and
TLR4-stimulated microglia. We also identified 29 previously unidentified genes
that are important in immune regulation. In addition, we confirmed the
expressions of key inflammatory genes as well as pro-inflammatory mediators in
the supernatants were significantly induced in TLR3-and TLR4-stimulated primary
microglial cells. Moreover, transcriptional start sites (TSSs) and isoforms, as
well as differential promoter usage, revealed a complex pattern of
transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene regulation upon infection with TLR3
and TLR4. Furthermore, TF motif analysis (-950 to +50 bp of the 5' upstream
promoters) revealed that the DNA sequences for NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF1, and STAT1 were
significantly enriched in TLR3- and TLR4-stimulated microglia.
CONCLUSIONS: These unprecedented findings not only permit a comparison of
TLR3-and TLR4-stimulated genes but also identify new genes that have not been
previously implicated in innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC4497376
PMID: 26159724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 2;10(7):e0131699. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131699.
eCollection 2015.

Cell Free DNA of Tumor Origin Induces a 'Metastatic' Expression Profile in HT-29 
Cancer Cell Line.

Furi I(1), Kalmár A(2), Wichmann B(1), Spisák S(1), Schöller A(2), Barták B(2),
Tulassay Z(1), Molnár B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Molecular Medicine Research Unit, Budapest,
Hungary. (2)2nd Dept. of Internal Medicine, Semmelweis University, Budapest,
Hungary.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial cells in malignant conditions release DNA into the
extracellular compartment. Cell free DNA of tumor origin may act as a ligand of
DNA sensing mechanisms and mediate changes in epithelial-stromal interactions.
AIMS: To evaluate and compare the potential autocrine and paracrine regulatory
effect of normal and malignant epithelial cell-related DNA on TLR9 and STING
mediated pathways in HT-29 human colorectal adenocarcinoma cells and normal
fibroblasts.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA isolated from normal and tumorous colonic epithelia of
fresh frozen surgically removed tissue samples was used for 24 and 6 hour
treatment of HT-29 colon carcinoma and HDF-a fibroblast cells. Whole genome mRNA 
expression analysis and qRT-PCR was performed for the elements/members of TLR9
signaling pathway. Immunocytochemistry was performed for epithelial markers (i.e.
CK20 and E-cadherin), DNA methyltransferase 3a (DNMT3a) and NF<U+03BA>B (for treated
HDFa cells).
RESULTS: Administration of tumor derived DNA on HT29 cells resulted in
significant (p<0.05) mRNA level alteration in 118 genes (logFc=1, p=0.05),
including overexpression of metallothionein genes (i.e. MT1H, MT1X, MT1P2, MT2A),
metastasis-associated genes (i.e. TACSTD2, MACC1, MALAT1), tumor biomarker
(CEACAM5), metabolic genes (i.e. INSIG1, LIPG), messenger molecule genes (i.e.
DAPP, CREB3L2). Increased protein levels of CK20, E-cadherin, and DNMT3a was
observed after tumor DNA treatment in HT-29 cells. Healthy DNA treatment affected
mRNA expression of 613 genes (logFc=1, p=0.05), including increased expression of
key adaptor molecules of TLR9 pathway (e.g. MYD88, IRAK2, NF<U+03BA>B, IL8, IL-1ß),
STING pathway (ADAR, IRF7, CXCL10, CASP1) and the FGF2 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: DNA from tumorous colon epithelium, but not from the normal
epithelial cells acts as a pro-metastatic factor to HT-29 cells through the
overexpression of pro-metastatic genes through TLR9/MYD88 independent pathway. In
contrast, DNA derived from healthy colonic epithelium induced TLR9 and STING
signaling pathway in normal fibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC4489610
PMID: 26133168  [PubMed - in process]


60. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 29;10(6):e0131919. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131919.
eCollection 2015.

Enhancing Interferon Regulatory Factor 7 Mediated Antiviral Responses and
Decreasing Nuclear Factor Kappa B Expression Limit HIV-1 Replication in Cervical 
Tissues.

Rollenhagen C, Macura SL(2), Lathrop MJ(3), Mackenzie TA(4), Doncel GF(5), Asin
SN(6).

Author information: 
(1)Research Service, V. A. Medical Center, White River Junction, VT, United
States of America; Department of Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, United States of America. (2)Research Service, V. A.
Medical Center, White River Junction, VT, United States of America. (3)Department
of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, 
NH, Unites States of America. (4)Department of Medicine, Geisel School of
Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, United States of America; Department of
Community and Family Medicine, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon,
NH, United States of America. (5)CONRAD, Eastern Virginia Medical School,
Norfolk, VA, United States of America. (6)Research Service, V. A. Medical Center,
White River Junction, VT, United States of America; Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH, Unites
States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0133815. Rollenhage, Christiane [corrected to Rollenhagen, 
Christiane].

Establishment of a productive HIV-1 infection in the female reproductive tract
likely depends on the balance between anti-viral and pro-inflammatory responses
leading to activation and proliferation of HIV target cells. Immune modulators
that boost anti-viral and depress pro-inflammatory immune responses may decrease 
HIV-1 infection or replication. Polyinosinic:polycytidylic [Poly (I:C)] has been 
reported to down-regulate HIV-1 replication in immune cell subsets and lymphoid
tissues, yet the scope and mechanisms of poly (I:C) regulation of HIV-1
replication in the cervicovaginal mucosa, the main portal of viral entry in women
remain unknown. Using a relevant, underexplored ex vivo cervical tissue model, we
demonstrated that poly (I:C) enhanced Interferon Regulatory Factor (IRF)7
mediated antiviral responses and decreased tissue Nuclear Factor Kappa B (NF<U+03BA>B)
RNA expression. This pattern of cellular transcription factor expression
correlated with decreased HIV-1 transcription and viral release. Reducing IRF7
expression up-regulated HIV-1 and NF<U+03BA>B transcription, providing proof of concept 
for the critical involvement of IRF7 in cervical tissues. By combining poly (I:C)
with a suboptimal concentration of tenofovir, the leading anti-HIV prophylactic
microbicide candidate, we demonstrated an earlier and greater decrease in HIV
replication in poly (I:C)/tenofovir treated tissues compared with tissues treated
with tenofovir alone, indicating overall improved efficacy. Poly (I:C) decreases 
HIV-1 replication by stimulating IRF7 mediated antiviral responses while reducing
NF<U+03BA>B expression. Early during the infection, poly (I:C) improved the anti-HIV-1
activity of suboptimal concentrations of tenofovir likely to be present during
periods of poor adherence i.e. inconsistent or inadequate drug use. Understanding
interactions between anti-viral and pro-inflammatory immune responses in the
genital mucosa will provide crucial insights for the identification of targets
that can be harnessed to develop preventative combination strategies to improve
the efficacy of topical or systemic antiviral prophylactic agents and protect
women from HIV-1 and other sexually transmitted infections.

PMCID: PMC4485897
PMID: 26121689  [PubMed - in process]


61. Autophagy. 2015;11(7):1010-24. doi: 10.1080/15548627.2015.1052206.

B cell autophagy mediates TLR7-dependent autoimmunity and inflammation.

Weindel CG(1), Richey LJ, Bolland S, Mehta AJ, Kearney JF, Huber BT.

Author information: 
(1)a Graduate Program in Genetics; Sackler School of Graduate Biomedical
Sciences; Tufts University School of Medicine ; Boston , MA , USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a heterogeneous autoimmune disease, defined
by loss of B cell self-tolerance that results in production of antinuclear
antibodies (ANA) and chronic inflammation. While the initiating events in lupus
development are not well defined, overexpression of the RNA-recognizing toll-like
receptor (TLR)7 has been linked to SLE in humans and mice. We postulated that
autophagy plays an essential role in TLR7 activation of B cells for the induction
of SLE by delivering RNA ligands to the endosomes, where this innate immune
receptor resides. To test this hypothesis, we compared SLE development in Tlr7
transgenic (Tg) mice with or without B cell-specific ablation of autophagy
(Cd19-Cre Atg5(f/f)). We observed that in the absence of B cell autophagy the 2
hallmarks of SLE, ANA and inflammation, were eliminated, thus curing these mice
of lupus. This was also evident in the significantly extended survival of the
autophagy-deficient mice compared to Tlr7.1 Tg mice. Furthermore,
glomerulonephritis was ameliorated, and the serum levels of inflammatory
cytokines in the knockout (KO) mice were indistinguishable from those of control 
mice. These data provide direct evidence that B cells require TLR7-dependent
priming through an autophagy-dependent mechanism before autoimmunity is induced, 
thereafter involving many cell types. Surprisingly, hyper-IgM production
persisted in Tlr7.1 Tg mice in the absence of autophagy, likely involving a
different activation pathway than the production of autoantibodies. Furthermore, 
these mice still presented with anemia, but responded with a striking increase in
extramedullary hematopoiesis (EMH), possibly due to the absence of
pro-inflammatory cytokines.

PMCID: PMC4590645 [Available on 2016-06-29]
PMID: 26120731  [PubMed - in process]


62. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Aug 18;43(14):6969-82. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv646. Epub 2015
Jun 27.

Redefining the transcriptional regulatory dynamics of classically and
alternatively activated macrophages by deepCAGE transcriptomics.

Roy S(1), Schmeier S(2), Arner E(1), Alam T(3), Parihar SP(4), Ozturk M(4),
Tamgue O(4), Kawaji H(5), de Hoon MJ(1), Itoh M(5), Lassmann T(1), Carninci P(1),
Hayashizaki Y(6), Forrest AR(1), Bajic VB(3), Guler R(4); Fantom Consortium(7),
Brombacher F(8), Suzuki H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Omics Science
Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (2)Massey
University, Institute of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Auckland, New
Zealand. (3)King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST),
Computational Bioscience Research Center (CBRC), Computer, Electrical and
Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division (CEMSE), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia.
(4)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Cape
Town Component, Cape Town, South Africa University of Cape Town, Health Science
Faculty, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular Medicine (IDM), Division 
of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa. (5)Division of Genomic Technologies,
RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku,
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis
Innovation Program (PMI), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan. (6)Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama
230-0045, Japan Riken Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program (PMI),
1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (7)Division of Genomic 
Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22
Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan Massey University, Institute of
Natural and Mathematical Sciences, Auckland, New Zealand King Abdullah University
of Science and Technology (KAUST), Computational Bioscience Research Center
(CBRC), Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division
(CEMSE), Thuwal, Saudi Arabia International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Cape Town Component, Cape Town, South Africa University of
Cape Town, Health Science Faculty, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular
Medicine (IDM), Division of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa Riken Preventive 
Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation Program (PMI), 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, 
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (8)International Centre for Genetic Engineering and
Biotechnology (ICGEB), Cape Town Component, Cape Town, South Africa University of
Cape Town, Health Science Faculty, Institute of Infectious Diseases and Molecular
Medicine (IDM), Division of Immunology, Cape Town, South Africa
harukazu@gsc.riken.jp. (9)Division of Genomic Technologies, RIKEN Center for Life
Science Technologies, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan
Riken Omics Science Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045,
Japan harukazu@gsc.riken.jp.

Classically or alternatively activated macrophages (M1 and M2, respectively) play
distinct and important roles for microbiocidal activity, regulation of
inflammation and tissue homeostasis. Despite this, their transcriptional
regulatory dynamics are poorly understood. Using promoter-level expression
profiling by non-biased deepCAGE we have studied the transcriptional dynamics of 
classically and alternatively activated macrophages. Transcription factor (TF)
binding motif activity analysis revealed four motifs, NFKB1_REL_RELA, IRF1,2,
IRF7 and TBP that are commonly activated but have distinct activity dynamics in
M1 and M2 activation. We observe matching changes in the expression profiles of
the corresponding TFs and show that only a restricted set of TFs change
expression. There is an overall drastic and transient up-regulation in M1 and a
weaker and more sustainable up-regulation in M2. Novel TFs, such as Thap6, Maff, 
(M1) and Hivep1, Nfil3, Prdm1, (M2) among others, were suggested to be involved
in the activation processes. Additionally, 52 (M1) and 67 (M2) novel
differentially expressed genes and, for the first time, several differentially
expressed long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcriptome markers were identified. In 
conclusion, the finding of novel motifs, TFs and protein-coding and lncRNA genes 
is an important step forward to fully understand the transcriptional machinery of
macrophage activation.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4538831
PMID: 26117544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Sep;45(9):2615-27. doi: 10.1002/eji.201545514. Epub 2015 Jul 
20.

DLK1 is a novel inflammatory inhibitor which interferes with NOTCH1 signaling in 
TLR-activated murine macrophages.

González MJ(1), Ruiz-García A(1), Monsalve EM(1), Sánchez-Prieto R(1), Laborda
J(1), Díaz-Guerra MJ(1), Ruiz-Hidalgo MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Centro Regional de Investigaciones Biomédicas (CRIB),
Unidad de Biomedicina UCLM-CSIC, Albacete, Spain.

Delta-like protein 1 (DLK1) is a noncanonical ligand that inhibits NOTCH1
receptor activity and regulates multiple differentiation processes. In
macrophages, NOTCH signaling increases TLR-induced expression of key
pro-inflammatory mediators. We have investigated the role of DLK1 in macrophage
activation and inflammation using Dlk1-deficient mice and Raw 264.7 cells
overexpressing Dlk1. In the absence of Dlk1, NOTCH1 expression is increased and
the activation of macrophages with TLR3 or TLR4 agonists leads to higher
production of IFN-ß and other pro-inflammatory cytokines, including TNF-a, IL-12,
and IL-23. The expression of key proteins involved in IFN-ß signaling, such as
IRF3, IRF7, IRF1, or STAT1, as well as cRel, or RelB, which are responsible for
the generation of IL-12 and IL-23, is enhanced in Dlk1 KO macrophages.
Consistently, Dlk1 KO mice are more sensitive to LPS-induced endotoxic shock.
These effects seem to be mediated through the modulation of NOTCH1 signaling.
TLR4 activation reduces DLK1 expression, whereas increases NOTCH1 levels. In
addition, DLK1 expression diminishes during differentiation of human U937 cells
to macrophages. Overall, these results reveal a novel role for DLK1 as a
regulator of NOTCH-mediated, pro-inflammatory macrophage activation, which could 
help to ensure a baseline level preventing constant tissue inflammation.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 26115479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Comp Immunol. 2015 Nov;53(1):23-32. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2015.06.005. Epub 2015
Jun 23.

Functional characterizations of IPS-1 in CIK cells: Potential roles in regulating
IFN-I response dependent on IRF7 but not IRF3.

Feng X(1), Zhang Y(1), Yang C(2), Liao L(3), Wang Y(3), Su J(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling
712100, China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology
and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 
430072, China. (4)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F
University, Yangling 712100, China; College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan 430070, China; Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation 
Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430070, China. Electronic address:
sujianguo2015@163.com.

IPS-1, as the sole adaptor of RIG-I and MDA5, plays a central role in innate
antiviral immunity. In this study, we investigated potential roles of IPS-1 in
innate immunity and the domain-requirement of IPS-1 for its signaling in grass
carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). Overexpression experiment showed that CiIPS-1
mediated IFN-I signal possibly dependent on CiIRF7 but not CiIRF3. Post GCRV
challenge, CiIPS-1 could enhance antiviral immune responses. CARD and TM domains 
were crucial for antiviral function of CiIPS-1, and TRAF motif played an
assistant role. PRO domain seemed as a negative regulator but was pivotal for the
initiation of CiIFN-I and CiMx1. Post viral/bacterial PAMPs stimulation,
CiIPS-1-mediated signaling was tightly controlled. CARD domain of CiIPS-1 could
significantly elicit poly I:C/LPS/PGN-mediated signaling. PRO domain negatively
regulated CiIRF7 and CiIFN-I but was indispensable for inductions of CiMx1 and
CiIL-1ß. TRAF motif and TM domain regulated the signaling presumably in a
cooperative fashion. Post poly I:C stimulation, TRAF motif negatively regulated
CiIRF7, CiIFN-I and CiIL-1ß at a relative early time while TM domain functioned
at a relative late time. TRAF motif was indispensable for the production of
CiMx1, while TM domain slightly negatively regulated the expression. Post LPS and
PGN stimulation, TRAF motif excited an assistant and persistent negative role on 
CiIFN-I, CiIRF7 and CiIL-1ß induction, but was crucial for induction of CiMx1. TM
domain slightly negatively regulated LPS- and PGN-triggered signaling. Taken
together, CiIPS-1 not only exerted important functions in antiviral immune
response but also participated in viral/bacterial PAMPs-triggered immune response
which was tightly controlled to prevent harmful effects resulting from excessive 
activation. This study provided novel insights into the pivotal role of IPS-1 in 
innate immunity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26111995  [PubMed - in process]


65. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Nov;98(5):689-702. doi: 10.1189/jlb.3HI0914-453R. Epub 2015
Jun 9.

Differential effects of IFN-ß on IL-12, IL-23, and IL-10 expression in
TLR-stimulated dendritic cells.

Yen JH(1), Kong W(1), Hooper KM(1), Emig F(1), Rahbari KM(1), Kuo PC(1), Scofield
BA(1), Ganea D(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Fort Wayne, Indiana, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.
(2)*Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Fort Wayne, Indiana, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
dganea@temple.edu.

Comment in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Nov;98(5):683-5.

MS is an autoimmune disease characterized by immune cell infiltration in the CNS,
leading to cumulative disability. IFN-ß, used clinically in RR-MS reduces lesion 
formation and rates of relapse. Although the molecular mechanisms are not
entirely elucidated, myeloid cells appear to be a major target for the
therapeutic effects of IFN-ß. DCs have a critical role in experimental models of 
MS through their effect on encephalitogenic Th1/Th17 cell differentiation and
expansion. Here we focused on the effects of IFN-ß on DC expression of cytokines 
involved in the control of Th1/Th17 differentiation and expansion. Administration
of IFN-ß to mice immunized with MOG35-55 inhibited IL-12 and IL-23 expression in 
splenic DC and reduced in vivo differentiation of Th1/Th17 cells. IFN-ß affected 
cytokine expression in TLR-stimulated DC in a similar manner in vitro, inhibiting
IL-12 and IL-23 and stimulating IL-10 at both mRNA and protein levels, by
signaling through IFNAR. We investigated the role of the signaling molecules
STAT1/STAT2, IRF-1 and IRF-7, and of the PI3K<U+2192>GSK3 pathway. IFN-ß inhibition of
the IL-12 subunits p40 and p35 was mediated through STAT1/STAT2, whereas
inhibition of IL-23 was STAT1 dependent, and the stimulatory effect on IL-10
expression was mediated through STAT2. IFN-ß induces IRF-7 and, to a lesser
degree, IRF-1. However, neither IRF mediated the effects of IFN-ß on IL-12,
IL-23, or IL-10. We found that the PI3K pathway mediated IL-12 inhibition but did
not interfere with the inhibition of IL-23 or stimulation of IL-10.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4600065 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26059829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Med J Islam Repub Iran. 2015 Feb 16;29:180. eCollection 2015.

The effect of depression and anxiety on expression levels of toll like receptor
signaling molecules in chronic HBV infected patients.

Nikbakht Dastjerdi M(1), Momeni M(2), Bidaki R(3), Khaleghinia M(4),
Karimi-Googheri M(5), Kazemi Arababadi M(6), Shabanizadeh A(7).

Author information: 
(1)PhD in Anatomy, Department of Anatomical Sciences and Molecular Biology,
School of Medicine, Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran.
nikbakht@med.mui.ac.ir. (2)MSc in Immunology, Immunology of Infectious Diseases
Research Center, Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran.
Immunology85@yahoo.com. (3)MD, Department of Psychiatry, Research center for
Addiction and Behavioral Sciences, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical
Sciences, Yazd, Iran. reza.bidaki111@yahoo.com. (4)MD in Internal Medicine,
Kerman University of Medical Sciences, Kerman, Iran. m.inf088830@yahoo.com.
(5)MSc in Immunology, Department of Immunology, Kerman University of Medical
Sciences, Kerman, Iran. masoud7756@gmail.com. (6)PhD in Immunology, Immunology of
Infectious Diseases Research Center, Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences,
Rafsanjan, Iran. dr.kazemi@rums.ac.ir. (7)PhD in Anatomy, Department of Anatomy, 
Faculty of Medicine, Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran.
shebani54@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: Toll- like receptors (TLRs) play an important role in the recognition
of DAMPs and PAMPs and induction of inflammation. Previous studies demonstrated
that depression and anxiety can influence the expression levels of immune related
molecules. Our previous study revealed that mRNA levels of IRAKIRAK4, TRAF3 and
IRF7 were significantly decreased in chronic HBV infected (CHB) patients when
compared to healthy controls. Therefore, the aim of this study was to evaluate
the effects of depression and anxiety on the expression levels of these molecules
in CHB patients.
METHODS: Sixty CHB patients participated in this study and filled out the
standard questionnaires; and the expression of IRAK4, TRAF3 and IRF7 were
examined using Real-Time PCR techniques.
RESULTS: The results of this study demonstrated that expression of IRAK4, TRAF3
and IRF7 did not differ between patients with various stages of depression and
anxiety (all p>0.05).
CONCLUSION: According to the results, it seems that declined expression of IRAK4,
TRAF3 and IRF7 in CHB patients were not related to depression and anxiety, and
other factors including genetic and immunoregulatory effects of HBV may be
responsible for the declined expression of these molecules.

PMCID: PMC4431442
PMID: 26034733  [PubMed]


67. J Autoimmun. 2015 Jul;61:29-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.05.003. Epub 2015 May
23.

Renal involvement in lupus is characterized by unique DNA methylation changes in 
naïve CD4+ T cells.

Coit P(1), Renauer P(1), Jeffries MA(2), Merrill JT(3), McCune WJ(1),
Maksimowicz-McKinnon K(4), Sawalha AH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (3)Clinical Pharmacology
Program, Oklahoma Medical Research Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
(4)Division of Rheumatology, Henry Ford Health System, Detroit, MI, USA.
(5)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA; Center for Computational Medicine and
Bioinformatics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. Electronic address:
asawalha@umich.edu.

Systemic lupus erythematosus is a multi-system disease characterized by
wide-spread DNA methylation changes. To identify epigenetic susceptibility loci
for lupus nephritis, genome-wide DNA methylation changes in naïve CD4+ T cells
were compared between two sets of lupus patients with and without a history of
renal involvement. A total of 56 lupus patients (28 with renal involvement and 28
without renal involvement), and 56 age-, sex-, and ethnicity-matched healthy
controls were included in our study. We identified 191 CG sites and 121 genes
that were only differentially methylated in lupus patients with but not without a
history of renal involvement. The tyrosine kinase gene TNK2 involved in cell
trafficking and tissue invasion, and the phosphatase gene DUSP5 which
dephosphorylates and inhibits the ERK signaling pathway, were among the most
hypomethylated. Independent of disease activity, renal involvement is
characterized by more robust demethylation in interferon regulated genes
differentially methylated in both sets of lupus patients with and without renal
involvement (fold change 1.4, P = 0.0014). The type-I interferon master regulator
gene IRF7 is only hypomethylated in lupus patients with renal involvement. IRF-7 
is an upstream transcription factor that regulates several loci demethylated only
with renal involvement such as CD80, HERC5, IFI44, IRF7, ISG15, ISG20, ITGAX, and
PARP12 (P = 1.78 × 10(-6)). Among the CG sites only hypomethylated with renal
involvement, CG10152449 in CHST12 has a sensitivity of 85.7% and a specificity of
64.3% for stratifying lupus patients for a history of renal involvement
(P = 0.0029). Our data identified novel epigenetic susceptibility loci that are
differentially methylated with renal involvement in lupus. These loci will help
better understand lupus nephritis, and provide a proof of principle for the
potential applicability of specific methylation changes as predictors for
specific organ involvement in lupus.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4497927 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26005050  [PubMed - in process]


68. Blood. 2015 Aug 6;126(6):779-89. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-02-628669. Epub 2015 May
22.

CC-122, a pleiotropic pathway modifier, mimics an interferon response and has
antitumor activity in DLBCL.

Hagner PR(1), Man HW(1), Fontanillo C(2), Wang M(3), Couto S(3), Breider M(3),
Bjorklund C(1), Havens CG(3), Lu G(3), Rychak E(3), Raymon H(3), Narla RK(3),
Barnes L(3), Khambatta G(3), Chiu H(1), Kosek J(1), Kang J(1), Amantangelo MD(1),
Waldman M(1), Lopez-Girona A(3), Cai T(1), Pourdehnad M(4), Trotter M(2), Daniel 
TO(3), Schafer PH(1), Klippel A(1), Thakurta A(1), Chopra R(1), Gandhi AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Celgene Corporation, Summit, NJ; (2)Celgene Corporation, Sevilla, Spain;
(3)Celgene Corporation, San Diego, CA; and. (4)Celgene Corporation, San
Francisco, CA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Aug 6;126(6):698-700.

Cereblon (CRBN), a substrate receptor of the Cullin 4 RING E3 ubiquitin ligase
complex, is the target of the immunomodulatory drugs lenalidomide and
pomalidomide. Recently, it was demonstrated that binding of these drugs to CRBN
promotes the ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of 2 common substrates,
transcription factors Aiolos and Ikaros. Here we report that CC-122, a new
chemical entity termed pleiotropic pathway modifier, binds CRBN and promotes
degradation of Aiolos and Ikaros in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and T
cells in vitro, in vivo, and in patients, resulting in both cell autonomous as
well as immunostimulatory effects. In DLBCL cell lines, CC-122-induced
degradation or short hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of Aiolos and Ikaros
correlates with increased transcription of interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes
independent of IFN-a, -ß, and -<U+03B3> production and/or secretion and results in
apoptosis in both activated B-cell (ABC) and germinal center B-cell DLBCL cell
lines. Our results provide mechanistic insight into the cell-of-origin
independent antilymphoma activity of CC-122, in contrast to the ABC subtype
selective activity of lenalidomide.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4528065
PMID: 26002965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Aug;45(2):574-82. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.05.019.
Epub 2015 May 16.

Functions of the two zebrafish MAVS variants are opposite in the induction of
IFN1 by targeting IRF7.

Lu LF(1), Li S(2), Lu XB(1), Zhang YA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. (3)Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. Electronic
address: yzhang@ihb.ac.cn.

IFNs create the first line of host cells to defense viral infection, however,
unrestricted expression of IFN can be hazardous to the host. IRF7 is the master
regulator of type I IFN expression. To our knowledge, non research about the
inhibition of IFN expression by targeting IRF7 has been reported in fish. In this
study, we reported that the splicing variant of wildtype MAVS (MAVS_tv1),
MAVS_tv2, negatively regulated IRF7-mediated IFN production. Firstly, in vivo,
the transcriptional levels of MAVS_tv2 in trunk kidney and spleen from the
zebrafish infected with SVCV were monitored. Then, in vitro, the protein
expression pattern of MAVS_tv2 in zebrafish cell lines was detected using
anti-MAVS_tv2 antibody. Furthermore, overexpression of MAVS_tv2 decreased the
activation of IFN1 promoter that induced by IRF7 in a dose-dependent manner,
whereas it had little effect on IRF3, a close relative of IRF7. In addition, such
inhibition was also observed in IRF7-mediated epcIFN promoter and ISRE
activities, but not in the activation of the promoters of type II IFNs and NF-<U+0138>B,
due to IRF7 not regulating their expression. Lastly, overexpression of MAVS_tv2
decreased the transcriptional levels of several IFN-stimulated genes activated by
IRF7. These findings suggest that MAVS_tv2 is a negative regulator of IFN1 by
targeting IRF7.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25989622  [PubMed - in process]


70. J La State Med Soc. 2015 Jan-Feb;167(1):21-4. Epub 2015 Feb 15.

Bilateral subdural hematomas, an unusual vaso-occlusive event and prolonged
prothrombin time in a 58-year-old victim of an armed robbery.

Anand K(1), Shows R(1), Veillon D(1), Mills G(1), Munker R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, and Pathology, at the LSU Health Sciences
Center in Shreveport, LA.

Factor VII deficiency is one of the most common of rare bleeding disorders(1).
This autosomal recessive disorder has a prevalence of 1:500,000 with geographic
variations. Clinical manifestations vary from asymptomatic to severe
mucocutaneous bleeding. According to the International Registry of Factor VII
Deficiency (IRF7) epistaxis is the most common clinical manifestation.
Gastrointestinal and central nervous system(CNS) bleeding are rare
presentations.(2-4) We present here the case of a patient with life-threatening
CNS bleeding who was found at the age of 58 years to have congenital factor VII
deficiency.

PMID: 25978752  [PubMed - in process]


71. Cell Death Dis. 2015 May 7;6:e1758. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.122.

IPS-1 differentially induces TRAIL, BCL2, BIRC3 and PRKCE in type I
interferons-dependent and -independent anticancer activity.

Kumar S(1), Ingle H(1), Mishra S(1), Mahla RS(1), Kumar A(1), Kawai T(2), Akira
S(3), Takaoka A(4), Raut AA(5), Kumar H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute 
of Science Education and Research, Bhopal, India. (2)Laboratory of Molecular
Immunobiology, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Nara Institute of Science 
and Technology, Nara, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology
Frontier Research Centre, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan. (4)Division of
Signaling in Cancer and Immunology, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan. (5)Pathogenomics Laboratory, ICAR-National Institute 
of High Security Animal Diseases, OIE Reference lab for Avian Influenza, Bhopal, 
India. (6)1] Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Biological Sciences, Indian 
Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhopal, India [2] Laboratory of Host
Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Centre, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

RIG-I-like receptors are the key cytosolic sensors for RNA viruses and induce the
production of type I interferons (IFN) and pro-inflammatory cytokines through a
sole adaptor IFN-ß promoter stimulator-1 (IPS-1) (also known as Cardif, MAVS and 
VISA) in antiviral innate immunity. These sensors also have a pivotal role in
anticancer activity through induction of apoptosis. However, the mechanism for
their anticancer activity is poorly understood. Here, we show that anticancer
vaccine adjuvant, PolyIC (primarily sensed by MDA5) and the oncolytic virus,
Newcastle disease virus (NDV) (sensed by RIG-I), induce anticancer activity. The 
ectopic expression of IPS-1 into type I IFN-responsive and non-responsive cancer 
cells induces anticancer activity. PolyIC transfection and NDV infection
upregulate pro-apoptotic gene TRAIL and downregulate the anti-apoptotic genes
BCL2, BIRC3 and PRKCE. Furthermore, stable knockdown of IPS-1, IRF3 or IRF7 in
IFN-non-responsive cancer cells show reduced anticancer activity by suppressing
apoptosis via TRAIL and anti-apoptotic genes. Collectively, our study shows that 
IPS-1 induces anticancer activity through upregulation of pro-apoptotic gene
TRAIL and downregulation of the anti-apoptotic genes BCL2, BIRC3 and PRKCE via
IRF3 and IRF7 in type I IFN-dependent and -independent manners.

PMCID: PMC4669701
PMID: 25950488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Asia Pac Allergy. 2015 Apr;5(2):114-22. doi: 10.5415/apallergy.2015.5.2.114. Epub
2015 Apr 29.

Reduced IRF7 response to rhinovirus unrelated with DNA methylation in peripheral 
mononuclear cells of adult asthmatics.

Kim SH(1), Lim KH(2), Park HK(2), Lee SY(1), Kim SH(3), Kang HR(2), Park HW(2),
Chang YS(1), Cho SH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-899, Korea. ; Institute of Allergy and Clinical Immunology,
Seoul National University Medical Research Center, Seoul 110-899, Korea. ;
Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital,
Seongnam 463-707, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-899, Korea. ; Institute of Allergy and 
Clinical Immunology, Seoul National University Medical Research Center, Seoul
110-899, Korea. (3)Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University
Bundang Hospital, Seongnam 463-707, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Human rhinoviruses are the major cause of asthma exacerbation in both
children and adults. Recently, impaired antiviral interferon (IFN) response in
asthmatics has been indicated as a primary reason of the susceptibility to
respiratory virus, but the mechanism of defective IFN production is little
understood to date. The expression of IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a
transcriptional factor for virus-induced type I IFN production is known to be
regulated epigenetically by DNA methylation.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate the expression of IFN-a, IFN-ß, and IRF7 in
response to rhinovirus infection in the adult asthmatics and evaluate DNA
methylation status of IRF7 gene promotor.
METHODS: Twenty symptomatic adult asthmatics and 10 healthy subjects were
enrolled and peripheral blood was collected from each subject. Peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were isolated, cultured, and ex vivo stimulated with
rhinovirus-16. The mRNA expressions of IFN-a, IFN-ß, and IRF7 were analyzed using
real time quantitative polymerase chain reaction. Genomic DNA was isolated from
untreated PBMCs and the methylation status of IRF7 gene promotor was investigated
using bisulfite pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: The mean age of asthmatics was 45.4 ± 15.7 years and 40% was male, which
were not different with those of control group. Asthmatics showed significantly
decreased mRNA expressions (relative expression to beta-actin) of IFN-a and IFN-ß
compared with normal control. The mRNA expression of IRF7 in the asthmatics was
also significantly lower than those in the normal control. No significant
difference of DNA methylation was observed between asthmatics and controls in all
analyzed positions of IRF7 promotor CpG loci.
CONCLUSION: The mRNA expression of type I IFN in response to rhinovirus was
impaired in the PBMCs of adult asthmatics. The mRNA expression of IRF7,
transcriptional factor inducing type I IFN was also reduced, but not caused by
altered DNA methylation in the IRF7 gene promotor.

PMCID: PMC4415177
PMID: 25938076  [PubMed]


73. J Gen Virol. 2015 Aug;96(8):2176-87. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.000164. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Characterization of the IFN pathway in the teleost fish gonad against vertically 
transmitted viral nervous necrosis virus.

Valero Y(1), Morcillo P(2), Meseguer J(2), Buonocore F(3), Esteban MA(2),
Chaves-Pozo E(1), Cuesta A(2).

Author information: 
(1)1<U+200B>Centro Oceanográfico de Murcia, Instituto Español de Oceanografía (IEO),
Carretera de la Azohía s/n, Puerto de Mazarrón, 30860 Murcia, Spain.
(2)2<U+200B>Department of Cell Biology and Histology, Faculty of Biology, Regional
Campus of International Excellence 'Campus Mare Nostrum', University of Murcia,
30100 Murcia, Spain. (3)3<U+200B>Dipartimento per l'Innovazione nei Sistemi Biologici
Agroalimentari e Forestali, Università della Tuscia, Italy.

One of the most powerful innate immune responses against viruses is mediated by
type I IFN. In teleost fish, it is known that virus infection triggers the
expression of ifn and many IFN-stimulated genes, but the viral RNA sensors and
mediators leading to IFN production are scarcely known. Thus, we have searched
for the presence of these genes in gilt-head sea bream (Sparus aurata) and
European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax), and evaluated their expression after
infection with viral nervous necrosis virus (VNNV) in the brain, the main viral
target tissue, and the gonad, used to transmit the virus vertically. In sea
bream, a fish species resistant to the VNNV strain used, we found an upregulation
of the genes encoding MDA5 (melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5), TBK1
(TANK-binding kinase 1), IRF3 (IFN regulatory factor 3), IFN, Mx [myxovirus
(influenza) resistance protein] and PKR (dsRNA-dependent protein kinase receptor)
proteins in the brain, which were unaltered in the gonad and could favour the
dissemination by gonad fluids or gametes. Strikingly, in European sea bass, a
very susceptible species, we also identified, transcripts coding for LGP2
(Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology 2), MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral
signalling), TRAF3 (TNF receptor-associated factor 3), TANK (TRAF family
member-associated NF<U+03BA>B activator) and IRF7 (IFN regulatory factor 7), and found
that all the genes analysed were upregulated in the gonad, but only mda5, lgp2,
irf3, mx and pkr were upregulated in the brain. These findings supported the
notion that the European sea bass brain innate immune response is unable to clear
the virus and pointed to the importance of gonad immunity to control the
dissemination of VNNV to the progeny--an aspect that is worth investigating in
aquatic animals.

PMID: 25918238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jun 5;290(23):14729-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.633065. Epub 2015
Apr 24.

Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor Interacting Protein Targets IRF7 to Suppress Antiviral 
Signaling and the Induction of Type I Interferon.

Zhou Q(1), Lavorgna A(2), Bowman M(3), Hiscott J(4), Harhaj EW(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The University of Miami,
Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida 33136. (2)the Department of Oncology,
Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287. (3)the Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, the Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Johns
Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, and. (4)the Division of
Infectious Diseases, Vaccine & Gene Therapy Institute of Florida, Port Saint
Lucie, Florida 34987. (5)the Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive 
Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287,
eharhaj1@jhmi.edu.

The transcription factor IRF7 (interferon regulatory factor 7) is a key regulator
of type I interferon and plays essential roles in restricting virus infection and
spread. IRF7 activation is tightly regulated to prevent excessive inflammation
and autoimmunity; however, how IRF7 is suppressed by negative regulators remains 
poorly understood. Here, we have identified AIP (aryl hydrocarbon receptor
interacting protein) as a new binding partner of IRF7. The interaction between
AIP and IRF7 is enhanced upon virus infection, and AIP potently inhibits
IRF7-induced type I IFN (IFNa/ß) production. Overexpression of AIP blocks
virus-induced activation of IFN, whereas knockdown of AIP by siRNA potentiates
virally activated IFN production. Consistently, AIP-deficient murine embryonic
fibroblasts are highly resistant to virus infection because of increased
production of IFNa/ß. AIP inhibits IRF7 function by antagonizing the nuclear
localization of IRF7. Together, our study identifies AIP as a novel inhibitor of 
IRF7 and a negative regulator of innate antiviral signaling.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4505538 [Available on 2016-06-05]
PMID: 25911105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 24;10(4):e0124392. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124392.
eCollection 2015.

Establishment of a new quality control and vaccine safety test for influenza
vaccines and adjuvants using gene expression profiling.

Momose H(1), Mizukami T(1), Kuramitsu M(1), Takizawa K(1), Masumi A(1), Araki
K(1), Furuhata K(1), Yamaguchi K(1), Hamaguchi I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Research on Blood and Biological Products, National
Institute of Infectious Diseases, Musashimurayama, Tokyo, Japan.

We have previously identified 17 biomarker genes which were upregulated by whole 
virion influenza vaccines, and reported that gene expression profiles of these
biomarker genes had a good correlation with conventional animal safety tests
checking body weight and leukocyte counts. In this study, we have shown that
conventional animal tests showed varied and no dose-dependent results in serially
diluted bulk materials of influenza HA vaccines. In contrast, dose dependency was
clearly shown in the expression profiles of biomarker genes, demonstrating higher
sensitivity of gene expression analysis than the current animal safety tests of
influenza vaccines. The introduction of branched DNA based-concurrent expression 
analysis could simplify the complexity of multiple gene expression approach, and 
could shorten the test period from 7 days to 3 days. Furthermore, upregulation of
10 genes, Zbp1, Mx2, Irf7, Lgals9, Ifi47, Tapbp, Timp1, Trafd1, Psmb9, and Tap2, 
was seen upon virosomal-adjuvanted vaccine treatment, indicating that these
biomarkers could be useful for the safety control of virosomal-adjuvanted
vaccines. In summary, profiling biomarker gene expression could be a useful,
rapid, and highly sensitive method of animal safety testing compared with
conventional methods, and could be used to evaluate the safety of various types
of influenza vaccines, including adjuvanted vaccine.

PMCID: PMC4409070
PMID: 25909814  [PubMed - in process]


76. Diagn Pathol. 2015 Apr 24;10:35. doi: 10.1186/s13000-015-0263-7.

Gene expression of OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and MYC (OSKM) induced pluripotent stem
cells: identification for potential mechanisms.

Cai Y(1,)(2), Dai X(3,)(4), Zhang Q(5,)(6), Dai Z(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)School of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Higher
Education Mega Center, No.132 East Outer Ring Road, Guangzhou, China.
caiyanningmitl@sina.com. (2)SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research
Institute (JRI), Shunde, Guangdong, China. caiyanningmitl@sina.com. (3)School of 
Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Higher Education Mega
Center, No.132 East Outer Ring Road, Guangzhou, China. issdxh@mail.sysu.edu.cn.
(4)SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research Institute (JRI), Shunde,
Guangdong, China. issdxh@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (5)School of Information Science and
Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Higher Education Mega Center, No.132 East
Outer Ring Road, Guangzhou, China. sunnydoll78@163.com. (6)SYSU-CMU Shunde
International Joint Research Institute (JRI), Shunde, Guangdong, China.
sunnydoll78@163.com. (7)School of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen
University, Higher Education Mega Center, No.132 East Outer Ring Road, Guangzhou,
China. daizhim@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (8)SYSU-CMU Shunde International Joint Research 
Institute (JRI), Shunde, Guangdong, China. daizhim@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Somatic cells could be reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPS) by ectopic expression of OCT4, SOX2, KLF4 and MYC (OSKM). We aimed to gain 
insights into the early mechanisms underlying the induction of pluripotency.
METHODS: GSE28688 containing 14 gene expression profiles were downloaded from
GEO, including untreated human neonatal foreskin fibroblasts (HFF1) as control,
OSKM-induced HFF1 (at 24, 48, 72 h post-transduction of OSKM encoding viruses),
two iPS cell lines, and two embryonic stem (ES) cell lines. Differentially
expressed genes (DEGs) were screened between different cell lines and the control
by Limma package in Bioconductor. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed 
by DAVID. The STRING database was used to construct protein-protein interaction
(PPI) network. Activities and regulatory networks of transcription factors (TFs) 
were calculated and constructed by Fast Network Component Analysis (FastNCA).
RESULTS: Compared with untreated HFF1, 117, 347, 557, 2263 and 2307 DEGs were
obtained from three point post-transduction HFF1, iPS and ES cells. Meanwhile,
up-regulated DEGs in first two days of HFF1 were mainly enriched in RIG-I-like
receptor (RLR) and Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling pathways. Down-regulated
DEGs at 72 h were significantly enriched in focal adhesion pathway which was
similar to iPS cells. Moreover, ISG15, IRF7, STAT1 and DDX58 were with higher
degree in PPI networks during time series. Furthermore, the targets of six
selected TFs were mainly enriched in screened DEGs.
CONCLUSION: In this study, screened DEGs including ISG15, IRF7 and CCL5
participated in OSKM-induced pluripotency might attenuate immune response
post-transduction through RLR and TLR signaling pathways.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/2503890341543007 .

PMCID: PMC4414430
PMID: 25907774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. FEBS Lett. 2015 May 22;589(12):1322-30. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.04.019. Epub 
2015 Apr 20.

TRIM35 negatively regulates TLR7- and TLR9-mediated type I interferon production 
by targeting IRF7.

Wang Y(1), Yan S(1), Yang B(1), Wang Y(2), Zhou H(3), Lian Q(3), Sun B(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei,
China. (2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology & Immunology, Institute Pasteur of
Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. (3)Institute of
Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. (4)Institute of Biochemistry and
Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: bsun@sibs.ac.cn.

Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) and TLR9 sense viral nucleic acids and induce type I 
IFN production, which must be properly controlled to avoid autoimmune diseases.
Here, we report the negative regulation of TLR7/9-mediated type I IFN production 
by TRIM35. TRIM35 expression is induced by TLR7/9 stimulation and then interacts 
with IRF7, which is the master regulator of type I IFN response. Furthermore,
TRIM35 promotes the K48-linked ubiquitination of IRF7 and induces its degradation
via a proteasome-dependent pathway. Therefore, TRIM35 is a negative feedback
regulator of TLR7/9-mediated type I IFN production due to its ability to suppress
the stability of IRF7.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25907537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Math Biosci. 2015 Jul;265:12-27. doi: 10.1016/j.mbs.2015.04.003. Epub 2015 Apr
17.

Negative feedback contributes to the stochastic expression of the interferon-ß
gene in virus-triggered type I interferon signaling pathways.

Zhang W(1), Tian T(2), Zou X(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China;
School of Sciences, East China Jiaotong University, Nanchang 330013, China.
(2)School of Mathematical Science, Monash University, Melbourne Vic 3800,
Australia. (3)School of Mathematics and Statistics, Wuhan University, Wuhan
430072, China. Electronic address: xfzou@whu.edu.cn.

Type I interferon (IFN) signaling pathways play an essential role in the defense 
against early viral infections; however, the diverse and intricate molecular
mechanisms of virus-triggered type I IFN responses are still poorly understood.
In this study, we analyzed and compared two classes of models i.e., deterministic
ordinary differential equations (ODEs) and stochastic models to elucidate the
dynamics and stochasticity of type I IFN signaling pathways. Bifurcation analysis
based on an ODE model reveals that the system exhibits a bistable switch and a
one-way switch at high or low levels when the strengths of the negative and
positive feedbacks are tuned. Furthermore, we compared the stochastic simulation 
results under the Master and Langevin equations. Both of the stochastic equations
generate the bistable switch phenomenon, and the distance between two stable
states are smaller than normal under the simulation of the Langevin equation. The
quantitative computations also show that a moderate ratio between positive and
negative feedback strengths is required to ensure a reliable switch between the
different IFN concentrations that regulate the immune response. Moreover, we
propose a multi-state stochastic model based on the above deterministic model to 
describe the multi-cellular system coupled with the diffusion of IFNs. The
perturbation and inhibition analysis showed that the positive feedback, as well
as noises, has little effect on the stochastic expression of IFNs, but the
negative feedback of ISG56 on the activation of IRF7 has a great influence on IFN
stochastic expression. Together, these results reveal that positive feedback
stabilizes IFN gene expression, and negative feedback may be the main
contribution to the stochastic expression of the IFN gene in the virus-triggered 
type I IFN response. These findings will provide new insight into the molecular
mechanisms of virus-triggered type I IFN signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25892253  [PubMed - in process]


79. J Neuroinflammation. 2015 Apr 12;12:71. doi: 10.1186/s12974-015-0263-2.

Soluble amyloid triggers a myeloid differentiation factor 88 and interferon
regulatory factor 7 dependent neuronal type-1 interferon response in vitro.

Minter MR(1), Main BS(2), Brody KM(3), Zhang M(4), Taylor JM(5), Crack PJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Melbourne, 8th
floor, Medical building, Grattan St, Parkville, Melbourne, 3010, VIC, Australia. 
mminter.student@unimelb.edu.au. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics,
University of Melbourne, 8th floor, Medical building, Grattan St, Parkville,
Melbourne, 3010, VIC, Australia. bmain@student.unimelb.edu.au. (3)Department of
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Melbourne, 8th floor, Medical
building, Grattan St, Parkville, Melbourne, 3010, VIC, Australia.
kbrody@unimelb.edu.au. (4)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University
of Melbourne, 8th floor, Medical building, Grattan St, Parkville, Melbourne,
3010, VIC, Australia. haiqingz@unimelb.edu.au. (5)Department of Pharmacology and 
Therapeutics, University of Melbourne, 8th floor, Medical building, Grattan St,
Parkville, Melbourne, 3010, VIC, Australia. juliett@unimelb.edu.au. (6)Department
of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, University of Melbourne, 8th floor, Medical
building, Grattan St, Parkville, Melbourne, 3010, VIC, Australia.
pcrack@unimelb.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: Neuro-inflammation has long been implicated as a contributor to the
progression of Alzheimer's disease in both humans and animal models. Type-1
interferons (IFNs) are pleiotropic cytokines critical in mediating the innate
immune pro-inflammatory response. The production of type-1 IFNs following
pathogen detection is, in part, through the activation of the toll-like receptors
(TLRs) and subsequent signalling through myeloid differentiation factor-88
(Myd88) and interferon regulatory factors (IRFs). We have previously identified
that neuronal type-1 IFN signalling, through the type-1 interferon alpha
receptor-1 (IFNAR1), is detrimental in models of AD. Using an in vitro approach, 
this study investigated the TLR network as a potential production pathway for
neuronal type-1 IFNs in response to Aß.
METHODS: Wildtype and Myd88(-/-) primary cultured cortical and hippocampal
neurons were treated with 2.5 µM Aß1-42 for 24 to 72 h or 1 to 10 µM Aß1-42 for
72 h. Human BE(2)M17 neuroblastoma cells stably expressing an IRF7 small hairpin 
RNA (shRNA) or negative control shRNA construct were subjected to 7.5 µM
Aß1-42/Aß42-1 for 24 to 96 h, 2.5 to 15 µM Aß1-42 for 96 h or 100 ng/ml LPS for
0.5 to 24 h. Q-PCR was used to analyse IFNa, IFNß, IL-1ß, IL-6 and TNFa mRNA
transcript levels. Phosphorylation of STAT-3 was detected by Western blot
analysis, and cell viability was assessed by MTS assay.
RESULTS: Reduced IFNa, IFNß, IL-1ß, IL-6 and TNFa expression was detected in
Aß1-42-treated Myd88(-/-) neurons compared to wildtype cells. This correlated
with reduced phosphorylation of STAT-3, a downstream type-1 IFN signalling
mediator. Significantly, Myd88(-/-) neuronal cultures were protected against
Aß1-42-induced neurotoxicity compared to wildtype as determined by MTS assay.
Knockdown of IRF7 in M17 cells was sufficient in blocking IFNa, IFNß and p-STAT-3
induction to both Aß1-42 and the TLR4 agonist LPS. M17 IRF7 KD cells were also
protected against Aß1-42-induced cytotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that the neuronal type-1 IFN response to soluble
amyloid is mediated primarily through TLRs. This production is dependent upon
Myd88 and IRF7 signalling. This study suggests that targeting this pathway to
modulate neuronal type-1 IFN levels may be beneficial in controlling Aß-induced
neurotoxicity.

PMCID: PMC4407532
PMID: 25879763  [PubMed - in process]


80. J Immunol. 2015 May 15;194(10):4737-49. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402312. Epub 2015 
Apr 10.

SCARB2/LIMP-2 Regulates IFN Production of Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cells by
Mediating Endosomal Translocation of TLR9 and Nuclear Translocation of IRF7.

Guo H(1), Zhang J(2), Zhang X(1), Wang Y(2), Yu H(1), Yin X(1), Li J(1), Du P(2),
Plumas J(3), Chaperot L(3), Chen J(4), Su L(5), Liu Y(6), Zhang L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Immunity and Infection, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, BJ 100101, China; University of Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, Beijing, BJ 100080, China; (2)Key Laboratory of Immunity and Infection,
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, BJ 100101, China; 
(3)Department of Research and Development, Etablissement Français du Sang
Rhône-Alpes Grenoble, La Tronche 38701, France; (4)Key Laboratory of Immunity and
Infection, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, BJ
100101, China; Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; (5)Key Laboratory of 
Immunity and Infection, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, BJ 100101, China; Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of 
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599; Department of Microbiology 
and Immunology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599; and. (6)Key Laboratory of Immunity and Infection, Institute of Biophysics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, BJ 100101, China; Baylor Institute for
Immunology Research, Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, TX 75204. (7)Key
Laboratory of Immunity and Infection, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing, BJ 100101, China; liguozhang@ibp.ac.cn.

Scavenger receptor class B, member 2 (SCARB2) is essential for endosome
biogenesis and reorganization and serves as a receptor for both
ß-glucocerebrosidase and enterovirus 71. However, little is known about its
function in innate immune cells. In this study, we show that, among human
peripheral blood cells, SCARB2 is most highly expressed in plasmacytoid dendritic
cells (pDCs), and its expression is further upregulated by CpG
oligodeoxynucleotide stimulation. Knockdown of SCARB2 in pDC cell line GEN2.2
dramatically reduces CpG-induced type I IFN production. Detailed studies reveal
that SCARB2 localizes in late endosome/lysosome of pDCs, and knockdown of SCARB2 
does not affect CpG oligodeoxynucleotide uptake but results in the retention of
TLR9 in the endoplasmic reticulum and an impaired nuclear translocation of IFN
regulatory factor 7. The IFN-I production by TLR7 ligand stimulation is also
impaired by SCARB2 knockdown. However, SCARB2 is not essential for influenza
virus or HSV-induced IFN-I production. These findings suggest that SCARB2
regulates TLR9-dependent IFN-I production of pDCs by mediating endosomal
translocation of TLR9 and nuclear translocation of IFN regulatory factor 7.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4506778
PMID: 25862818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Immunol. 2015 May 15;194(10):4924-30. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401362. Epub 2015 
Apr 6.

CCL7 and IRF-7 Mediate Hallmark Inflammatory and IFN Responses following
Rhinovirus 1B Infection.

Girkin J(1), Hatchwell L(1), Foster P(2), Johnston SL(3), Bartlett N(3), Collison
A(1), Mattes J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Translational Respiratory Medicine Group, University of
Newcastle and Hunter Medical Research Institute, Newcastle, New South Wales 2305,
Australia; Priority Research Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Diseases,
University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales 2305, Australia; (2)Priority 
Research Centre for Asthma and Respiratory Diseases, University of Newcastle,
Newcastle, New South Wales 2305, Australia; (3)Airway Disease Infection Section, 
National Heart and Lung Institute, Medical Research Council and Asthma UK Centre 
in Allergic Mechanisms of Asthma, Imperial College London, London W2 1PG, United 
Kingdom; and. (4)Experimental and Translational Respiratory Medicine Group,
University of Newcastle and Hunter Medical Research Institute, Newcastle, New
South Wales 2305, Australia; Priority Research Centre for Asthma and Respiratory 
Diseases, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, New South Wales 2305, Australia;
Paediatric Respiratory and Sleep Medicine Unit, Newcastle Children's Hospital,
Kaleidoscope, Newcastle, New South Wales 2305, Australia
Joerg.Mattes@newcastle.edu.au.

Rhinovirus (RV) infections are common and have the potential to exacerbate
asthma. We have determined the lung transcriptome in RV strain 1B-infected naive 
BALB/c mice (nonallergic) and identified CCL7 and IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-7
among the most upregulated mRNA transcripts in the lung. To investigate their
roles we employed anti-CCL7 Abs and an IRF-7-targeting small interfering RNA in
vivo. Neutralizing CCL7 or inhibiting IRF-7 limited neutrophil and macrophage
influx and IFN responses in nonallergic mice. Neutralizing CCL7 also reduced
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and p50 subunits, as well as airway hyperreactivity (AHR)
in nonallergic mice. However, neither NF-<U+03BA>B subunit activation nor AHR was
abolished with infection of allergic mice after neutralizing CCL7, despite a
reduction in the number of neutrophils, macrophages, and eosinophils. IRF-7 small
interfering RNA primarily suppressed IFN-a and IFN-ß levels during infection of
allergic mice. Our data highlight a pivotal role of CCL7 and IRF-7 in RV-induced 
inflammation and IFN responses and link NF-<U+03BA>B signaling to the development of
AHR.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4417644
PMID: 25847975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Rev Med Virol. 2015 May;25(3):187-201. doi: 10.1002/rmv.1836. Epub 2015 Apr 1.

Herpesviruses: interfering innate immunity by targeting viral sensing and
interferon pathways.

Kumari P(1), Narayanan S, Kumar H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Biological Sciences, Indian Institute 
of Science Education and Research (IISER), Bhopal, India.

Type I-interferon (IFN-I) induction pathway is one of the most commonly
stimulated signaling pathways in response to viral infection. During viral
infection this pathway is stimulated by various pattern-recognition receptors,
which recognize different pathogen-associated molecular patterns. The pathways
stimulated by different pattern-recognition receptors merge into common
transcription factors IRF3 and IRF7, lead to the production of IFN-I. The
secreted IFN-I stimulates JAK-STAT pathway leading to induction of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). The ISGs along with IFN-I create antiviral
state to eliminate the virus from host. HHV infection enhances IFN-I-mediated
innate antiviral response during both de novo infection and lytic reactivation
from latency. However, HHV developed various molecular strategies to evade the
sudden upsurge of the IFN-I and IFN-I-mediated antiviral response to establish a 
successful infection. Here, we focus on IFN-I induction and signaling pathways
induced by three representative HHVs from each sub-family of HHV and strategies
acquired by these HHVs to subvert the induction of IFN-I and ISGs to evade the
host innate immunity. These fundamental understanding provides the clue for viral
targets for pharmacological manipulation to develop potential therapeutics for
broad subtypes of HHVs.

Copyright © 2015 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25847408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Alzheimers Dis. 2015;46(3):655-63. doi: 10.3233/JAD-142718.

Variants in Antiviral Genes are Risk Factors for Cognitive Decline and Dementia.

Licastro F, Raschi E, Carbone I, Porcellini E.

A gene association study of factors regulating antiviral response such as
interferon (IFN)-<U+03BB>3, also known as IL-28B, mediator complex (Med) 23, and
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 7 with cognitive deterioration and Alzheimer's
disease (AD) was performed. Differences in the TT genotype distribution of IL-28B
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) between AD patients and controls were found.
The GG genotype of Med23 gene appeared to influence the progression of the
disease, being more frequent in the APOE <U+025B>4 negative elderly that developed AD
during the five year follow-up. Leukocyte positivity for Epstein Barr virus (EBV)
and human herpes virus (HHV)-6 DNA was analyzed. Med23 GG genotype correlated
with the positivity to HHV-6 DNA. EBV and HHV-6 plasma IgG levels were also
investigated and EBV IgG levels were increased in AD with the IRF7 GG genotype. A
differential genetic background in genes regulating anti-virus responses was
associated with an increased risk of cognitive decline and AD. EBV and HHV-6
appeared to be risk factors for AD in genetically susceptible elderly.

PMID: 25835418  [PubMed - in process]


84. Science. 2015 Apr 24;348(6233):448-53. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa1578. Epub 2015
Mar 26.

Infectious disease. Life-threatening influenza and impaired interferon
amplification in human IRF7 deficiency.

Ciancanelli MJ(1), Huang SX(2), Luthra P(3), Garner H(4), Itan Y(1), Volpi S(5), 
Lafaille FG(1), Trouillet C(4), Schmolke M(3), Albrecht RA(6), Israelsson E(7),
Lim HK(1), Casadio M(1), Hermesh T(1), Lorenzo L(8), Leung LW(3), Pedergnana
V(8), Boisson B(1), Okada S(9), Picard C(10), Ringuier B(11), Troussier F(12),
Chaussabel D(13), Abel L(14), Pellier I(15), Notarangelo LD(16), García-Sastre
A(17), Basler CF(3), Geissmann F(4), Zhang SY(14), Snoeck HW(2), Casanova JL(18).

Author information: 
(1)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. (2)Columbia Center for
Translational Immunology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA. 
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, USA. (4)Centre for Molecular and Cellular Biology of Inflammation (CMCBI),
King's College London, London SE1 1UL, UK. (5)Division of Immunology and Manton
Center for Orphan Disease Research, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA, USA. Department of Neuroscience, Rehabilitation, Ophthalmology,
Genetics, Maternal and Child Health, University of Genoa, 16132 Genoa, Italy.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
NY, USA. Global Health and Emerging Pathogens Institute, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (7)Department of Systems Immunology, Benaroya 
Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, WA, USA. (8)Laboratory of Human
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM UMR1163, Paris, France.
University Paris Descartes, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. (9)St. Giles
Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The
Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. Department of Pediatrics, Hiroshima
University Graduate School of Biomedical & Health Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.
(10)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller
Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. Laboratory of Human
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM UMR1163, Paris, France.
University Paris Descartes, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. Study Centre for
Primary Immunodeficiencies, AP-HP, Necker Hospital, Paris, France. (11)Pediatric 
Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital, Angers, France. (12)General Pediatrics 
Unit, University Hospital, Angers, France. (13)Department of Systems Immunology, 
Benaroya Research Institute at Virginia Mason, Seattle, WA, USA. Department of
Systems Biology, Sidra Medical and Research Center, Doha, Qatar. (14)St. Giles
Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The
Rockefeller University, New York, NY, USA. Laboratory of Human Genetics of
Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, INSERM UMR1163, Paris, France. University
Paris Descartes, Imagine Institute, Paris, France. (15)Pediatric Immunology,
Hematology and Oncology Unit, University Hospital Centre of Angers, Angers,
France. INSERM U892, CNRS U6299, Angers, France. (16)Division of Immunology and
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA. (17)Department of Microbiology, Icahn School of Medicine
at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. Global Health and Emerging Pathogens
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY, USA. Department
of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, NY, USA. (18)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of
Infectious Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, New York,
NY, USA. Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch,
INSERM UMR1163, Paris, France. University Paris Descartes, Imagine Institute,
Paris, France. Pediatric Immuno-Hematology Unit, Necker Hospital for Sick
Children, AP-HP, Paris, France. Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York, NY,
USA. jean-laurent.casanova@rockefeller.edu.

Severe influenza disease strikes otherwise healthy children and remains
unexplained. We report compound heterozygous null mutations in IRF7, which
encodes the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 7, in an otherwise 
healthy child who suffered life-threatening influenza during primary infection.
In response to influenza virus, the patient's leukocytes and plasmacytoid
dendritic cells produced very little type I and III interferons (IFNs). Moreover,
the patient's dermal fibroblasts and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived
pulmonary epithelial cells produced reduced amounts of type I IFN and displayed
increased influenza virus replication. These findings suggest that IRF7-dependent
amplification of type I and III IFNs is required for protection against primary
infection by influenza virus in humans. They also show that severe influenza may 
result from single-gene inborn errors of immunity.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4431581 [Available on 2016-04-24]
PMID: 25814066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 26;10(3):e0121117. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121117.
eCollection 2015.

Dual RNA sequencing reveals the expression of unique transcriptomic signatures in
lipopolysaccharide-induced BV-2 microglial cells.

Das A(1), Chai JC(2), Kim SH(2), Park KS(2), Lee YS(2), Jung KH(3), Chai YG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bionanotechnology, Hanyang University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Molecular & Life Sciences, Hanyang University, Ansan, Republic
of Korea. (3)Institute of Natural Science & Technology, Hanyang University,
Ansan, Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Bionanotechnology, Hanyang University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea; Department of Molecular & Life Sciences, Hanyang
University, Ansan, Republic of Korea.

Microglial cells become rapidly activated through interactions with pathogens,
and the persistent activation of these cells is associated with various
neurodegenerative diseases. Previous studies have investigated the transcriptomic
signatures in microglia or macrophages using microarray technologies. However,
this method has numerous restrictions, such as spatial biases, uneven probe
properties, low sensitivity, and dependency on the probes spotted. To overcome
this limitation and identify novel transcribed genes in response to LPS, we used 
RNA Sequencing (RNA-Seq) to determine the novel transcriptomic signatures in BV-2
microglial cells. Sequencing assessment and quality evaluation showed that
approximately 263 and 319 genes (= 1.5 log2-fold), such as cytokines and
chemokines, were strongly induced after 2 and 4 h, respectively, and the
induction of several genes with unknown immunological functions was also
observed. Importantly, we observed that previously unidentified transcription
factors (TFs) (irf1, irf7, and irf9), histone demethylases (kdm4a) and DNA
methyltransferases (dnmt3l) were significantly and selectively expressed in BV-2 
microglial cells. The gene expression levels, transcription start sites (TSS),
isoforms, and differential promoter usage revealed a complex pattern of
transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene regulation upon infection with LPS.
In addition, gene ontology, molecular networks and pathway analyses identified
the top significantly regulated functional classification, canonical pathways and
network functions at each activation status. Moreover, we further analyzed
differentially expressed genes to identify transcription factor (TF) motifs (-950
to +50 bp of the 5' upstream promoters) and epigenetic mechanisms. Furthermore,
we confirmed that the expressions of key inflammatory genes as well as
pro-inflammatory mediators in the supernatants were significantly induced in LPS 
treated primary microglial cells. This transcriptomic analysis is the first to
show a comparison of the family-wide differential expression of most known immune
genes and also reveal transcription evidence of multiple gene families in BV-2
microglial cells. Collectively, these findings reveal unique transcriptomic
signatures in BV-2 microglial cells required for homeostasis and effective immune
responses.

PMCID: PMC4374676
PMID: 25811458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2015 Oct;29(10):1951-7. doi: 10.1111/jdv.13091.
Epub 2015 Mar 23.

Antiviral gene expression in psoriasis.

Raposo RA(1,)(2), Gupta R(3), Abdel-Mohsen M(4,)(5), Dimon M(3), Debbaneh M(3),
Jiang W(3), York VA(1), Leadabrand KS(1), Brown G(3), Malakouti M(3), Arron S(3),
Kuebler PJ(1), Wu JJ(6), Pillai SK(4,)(5), Nixon DF(1,)(2), Liao W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Tropical
Medicine, The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA. (3)Department of
Dermatology, University of California San Francisco, USA. (4)Department of
Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, USA. (5)Blood
Systems Research Institute, San Francisco, CA, USA. (6)Department of Dermatology,
Kaiser Permanente Los Angeles Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis patients have relatively infrequent cutaneous viral
infections compared to atopic dermatitis patients. Increased expression of four
antiviral proteins (MX1, BST2, ISG15 and OAS2) has been reported in psoriatic
skin and genetic studies of psoriasis have identified susceptibility genes in
antiviral pathways.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if psoriasis is associated with pervasive expression of
antiviral genes in skin and blood.
METHODS: We performed RNA sequencing on skin samples of 18 subjects with chronic 
plaque psoriasis and 16 healthy controls. We examined the expression of a
predefined set of 42 antiviral genes, each of which has been shown in previous
studies to inhibit viral replication. In parallel, we examined antiviral gene
expression in atopic dermatitis, non-lesional psoriatic skin and psoriatic blood.
We performed HIV-1 infectivity assays in CD4+ peripheral blood T cells from
psoriatic and healthy individuals.
RESULTS: We observed significant overexpression of 16 antiviral genes in lesional
psoriatic skin, with a greater than two-fold increase in ISG15, RSAD2, IRF7, MX2 
and TRIM22 (P < 1E-07). None of these genes was overexpressed in atopic
dermatitis skin (P < 0.0001) or non-lesional psoriatic skin. In contrast to the
skin compartment, no differences in antiviral gene expression were detected in
the peripheral blood of psoriasis cases compared to healthy controls. CD4+ T
cells from both psoriatic and healthy patients supported HIV-1 infection at a
similar rate.
CONCLUSION: Our findings highlight psoriasis as an inflammatory disease with
cutaneous but not systemic immune activation against viral pathogens.

© 2015 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

PMCID: PMC4580491 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25809693  [PubMed - in process]


87. J Gen Virol. 2015 Jul;96(Pt 7):1732-45. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.000129. Epub 2015 Mar 
24.

A comparison of the impact of Shimen and C strains of classical swine fever virus
on Toll-like receptor expression.

Cao Z(1), Guo K(1), Zheng M(1), Ning P(1), Li H(1), Kang K(1), Lin Z(1), Zhang
C(1), Liang W(1), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi 712100, PR
China.

Classical swine fever is one of the most important swine diseases worldwide and
has tremendous socioeconomic impact. In this study, we focused on the signalling 
pathways of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) because of their roles in the detection
and response to viral infections. To this end, two classical swine fever virus
(CSFV) strains, namely the highly virulent CSFV Shimen strain and the avirulent C
strain (a vaccine strain), were employed, and the expression of 19 immune
effector genes was analysed by real-time PCR, Western blot analyses, ELISA and
flow cytometry analyses. In vitro experiments were conducted with porcine
monocyte-derived macrophages (pMDMs). The results showed that the mRNA and
protein levels of TLR2, TLR4 and TLR7 were upregulated in response to CSFV
infection, but TLR3 remained unchanged, and was downregulated after infection
with the C strain and the Shimen virus, respectively. Furthermore, TLR3-mediated 
innate immune responses were inhibited in Shimen-strain-infected pMDMs by
stimulation with poly(I : C). Accordingly, comprehensive analyses were performed 
to detect TLR-dependent cytokine responses and the activation of TLR signalling
elements. CSFV infection induced mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, but
did not elicit NF<U+03BA>B activation, thereby affecting the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines. The Shimen strain infection resulted in a significant
activation of IFN regulatory factor IRF7 and suppression of IRF3. These data
provided clues for understanding the effect of CSFV infection on the TLR-mediated
innate immune response and associated pathological changes.

PMID: 25805409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. DNA Cell Biol. 2015 Jun;34(6):391-9. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2711. Epub 2015 Mar
24.

Differential responses of normal human melanocytes to intra- and extracellular
dsRNA.

Wang S(1), Liu D(1), Jin R(1), Zhu Y(1), Xu A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Third People's Hospital of Hangzhou, Hangzhou,
Zhejiang Province, China.

Viral factor has been implicated in the etiopathogenesis of vitiligo. To
elucidate the effects of viral double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) on melanocytes and to 
explore the underlying mechanisms, primary cultured normal human melanocytes were
treated with synthetic viral dsRNA analog poly(I:C). The results demonstrated
that poly(I:C)-triggered apoptosis when transfected into melanocytes, while
extracellular poly(I:C) did not have that effect. Intracellular poly(I:C)-induced
melanocyte death was decreased by RIG-I or MDA5 siRNA, but not by TLR3 siRNA.
Both intracellular and extracellular poly(I:C) induced the expression of IFNB,
TNF, IL6, and IL8. However, extracellular poly(I:C) demonstrated a much weaker
induction capacity of cytokine genes than intracellular poly(I:C). Further
analysis revealed that phosphorylation of TBK1, IRF3, IRF7, and TAK1 was
differentially induced by intra- or extracellular poly(I:C). NF<U+03BA>B inhibitor Bay
11-7082 decreased the induction of all the cytokines by poly(I:C), suggesting the
ubiquitous role of NF<U+03BA>B in the process. Poly(I:C) treatment also induced the
phosphorylation of p38 and JNK in melanocytes. Both JNK and p38 inhibitors showed
suppression on the cytokine induction by intra- or extracellular poly(I:C).
However, only the JNK inhibitor decreased the intracellular poly(I:C)-induced
melanocyte death. Taken together, this study provides the possible mechanism of
viral factor in the pathogenesis of vitiligo.

PMCID: PMC4485883 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25803620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0119235. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119235.
eCollection 2015.

Analyses of the pathways involved in early- and late-phase induction of IFN-beta 
during C. muridarum infection of oviduct epithelial cells.

Hu S(1), Hosey KL(2), Derbigny WA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America; College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.

We previously reported that the IFN-ß secreted by Chlamydia muridarum-infected
murine oviduct epithelial cells (OE cells) was mostly dependent on the TLR3
signaling pathway. To further characterize the mechanisms of IFN-ß synthesis
during Chlamydia infection of OE cells in vitro, we utilized specific inhibitory 
drugs to clarify the roles of IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B on both early- and late-phase C.
muridarum infections. Our results showed that the pathways involved in the
early-phase of IFN-ß production were distinct from that in the late-phase of
IFN-ß production. Disruption of IRF3 activation using an inhibitor of TBK-1 at
early-phase Chlamydia infection had a significant impact on the overall synthesis
of IFN-ß; however, disruption of IRF3 activation at late times during infection
had no effect. Interestingly, inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B early during Chlamydia
infection also had a negative effect on IFN-ß production; however, its impact was
not significant. Our data show that the transcription factor IRF7 was induced
late during Chlamydia infection, which is indicative of a positive feedback
mechanism of IFN-ß synthesis late during infection. In contrast, IRF7 appears to 
play little or no role in the early synthesis of IFN-ß during Chlamydia
infection. Finally, we demonstrate that antibiotics that target chlamydial DNA
replication are much more effective at reducing IFN-ß synthesis during infection 
versus antibiotics that target chlamydial transcription. These results provide
evidence that early- and late-phase IFN-ß production have distinct signaling
pathways in Chlamydia-infected OE cells, and suggest that Chlamydia DNA
replication might provide a link to the currently unknown chlamydial PAMP for
TLR3.

PMCID: PMC4370658
PMID: 25798928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 May;44(1):365-81. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.02.032.
Epub 2015 Feb 28.

Characterization and expression analyses of five interferon regulatory factor
transcripts (Irf4a, Irf4b, Irf7, Irf8, Irf10) in Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua).

Inkpen SM(1), Hori TS(2), Gamperl AK(3), Nash GW(4), Rise ML(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ocean Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, NL, A1C
5S7, Canada. Electronic address: s.inkpen@mun.ca. (2)Department of Ocean
Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada. Electronic
address: thori@aquatechcenter.com. (3)Department of Ocean Sciences, Memorial
University of Newfoundland, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada. Electronic address:
kgamperl@mun.ca. (4)Department of Ocean Sciences, Memorial University of
Newfoundland, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada. Electronic address: z12gwn@mun.ca.
(5)Department of Ocean Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, NL, A1C
5S7, Canada. Electronic address: mrise@mun.ca.

The interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of genes encodes a group of
transcription factors that have important roles not only in regulating the
expression of Type I interferons (IFNs) and other genes in the IFN pathway, but
also in growth, development and the regulation of oncogenesis. In this study,
several IRF family members (Irf4a, Irf4b, Irf7, Irf8, Irf10) in Atlantic cod
(Gadus morhua) were characterized at the cDNA and putative amino acid levels,
allowing for phylogenetic analysis of these proteins in teleost fish, as well as 
the development of gene-specific primers used in RT-PCR and quantitative PCR
(QPCR) analyses. Two Atlantic cod Irf10 splice variants were identified and their
presence confirmed by sequencing of the Irf10 genomic region. RT-PCR showed that 
Irf7, Irf8 and both Irf10 transcripts were expressed in all 15 cod tissues
tested, while Irf4a and Irf4b were absent in some tissues. QPCR analysis of
spleen expression expanded upon this, and upon previous work. All IRF transcripts
in the study were responsive to stimulation by the viral mimic poly(I:C), and all
except Irf4a were responsive to exposure to formalin-killed Aeromonas salmonicida
(ASAL). These IRF genes, thus, are likely important in the cod immune response to
both viral and bacterial infections. Increased temperature (10 °C to 16 °C) was
also observed to modulate the antibacterial responses of all IRF transcripts, and
the antiviral responses of Irf4b and Irf10-v2. This research supports earlier
studies which reported that elevated temperature modulates the expression of many
immune genes in Atlantic cod.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25731920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 May;44(1):272-82. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.02.033.
Epub 2015 Feb 28.

Molecular characterization and expression analysis of eleven interferon
regulatory factors in half-smooth tongue sole, Cynoglossus semilaevis.

Zhang J(1), Li YX(2), Hu YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, China. (2)Taishan Vocational
College of Nursing, 8 Ying Sheng East Road, Tai'an, 271000, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Experimental Marine Biology, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, 266071, China. Electronic address:
huyonghua@qdio.ac.cn.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) act as transcription mediators in virus-,
bacteria-, and interferon (IFN)-induced signaling pathways and play diverse
functions in antimicrobial defense, immune modulation, hematopoietic
differentiation, and cell apoptosis. In this study, we described for the first
time eleven IRFs (IRF1, IRF1L, IRF2X1, IRF3, IRF4a, IRF4b, IRF5, IRF6, IRF7,
IRF8, and IRF9) from half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis) and
examined their tissue distributions and expression patterns under different
conditions. The deduced protein sequences of these IRFs (except IRF1) share high 
identities (71.8-86.6%) with other corresponding IRFs in other teleosts, whereas 
the sequence identity of IRF1 with the corresponding IRF1 in other teleosts is
only 58.1%. A conserved N-terminal DNA binding domain (DBD), which is
characterized by a winged type helix-loop-helix motif with four to six tryptophan
repeats, is present in all IRFs. Another conserved IRF associated domain (IAD),
which mediates the interactions in the C-terminal part of the protein, is present
in all IRFs except IRF1 and IRF2X1, which instead contain the IAD2 domain.
Several special domains also were found, including a serine-rich domain (SRD) in 
IRF3, IRF4a, IRF4b, and IRF7; a proline-rich domain (PRD) in IRF9; nuclear
localization signals (NLSs) in IRF5, IRF8, and IRF9; and a virus activated domain
(VAD) in IRF5. Quantitative real time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) analysis showed that
expression of all IRFs occurred in multiple tissues. IRF1, IRF2X1, IRF4a, IRF5,
IRF7, and IRF8 exhibited relatively high levels of expression in immune organs,
whereas the other five IRFs displayed high levels of expression in non-immune
organs. Infection with extracellular and intracellular bacterial pathogens and
virus upregulated the expression of IRFs in a manner that depended on tissue
type, pathogen, and infection stage. Specifically, IRF1 and IRF2X1 were highly
induced by bacterial and viral pathogens; IRF1L and IRF6 responded mainly to
extracellular and intracellular bacterial pathogens; IRF3, IRF5, IRF7, IRF8, and 
IRF9 were markedly induced by intracellular bacterial pathogen and virus; IRF4a
and IRF4b were mainly induced by virus and intracellular bacterial pathogen
respectively. These results indicate that the IRFs of C. semilaevis can be
categorized into several groups which exhibit different expression patterns in
response to the infection of different microbial pathogens. These results provide
new insights into the roles of teleost IRFs in antimicrobial immunity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25731919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Virol. 2015 May;89(9):4880-93. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02493-14. Epub 2015 Feb 18.

Oncogenic human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 tax suppression of primary
innate immune signaling pathways.

Hyun J(1), Ramos JC(2), Toomey N(2), Balachandran S(3), Lavorgna A(4), Harhaj
E(4), Barber GN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University 
of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA. (2)Department of
Medicine, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA. (3)Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (4)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (5)Department of Cell Biology, Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, Florida, USA gbarber@med.miami.edu.

Human T-cell lymphotropic virus type I (HTLV-1) is an oncogenic retrovirus
considered to be the etiological agent of adult T-cell leukemia (ATL). The viral 
transactivator Tax is regarded as the oncoprotein responsible for contributing
toward the transformation process. Here, we demonstrate that Tax potently
inhibits the activity of DEx(D/H) box helicases RIG-I and MDA5 as well as
Toll-dependent TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-ß (TRIF), which 
function as cellular sensors or mediators of viral RNA and facilitate innate
immune responses, including the production of type I IFN. Tax manifested this
function by binding to the RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM) domains of TRIF
and RIP1 to disrupt interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) activity, a critical
type I IFN transcription factor. These data provide further mechanistic insight
into HTLV-1-mediated subversion of cellular host defense responses, which may
help explain HTLV-1-related pathogenesis and oncogenesis.IMPORTANCE: It is
predicted that up to 15% of all human cancers may involve virus infection. For
example, human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1 (HTLV-1) has been reported to
infect up to 25 million people worldwide and is the causative agent of adult
T-cell leukemia (ATL). We show here that HTLV-1 may be able to successfully
infect the T cells and remain latent due to the virally encoded product Tax
inhibiting a key host defense pathway. Understanding the mechanisms by which Tax 
subverts the immune system may lead to the development of a therapeutic treatment
for HTLV-1-mediated disease.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4403453
PMID: 25694597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jul;36(7):5561-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3226-4. Epub 2015 Feb
14.

IRF7 promotes glioma cell invasion by inhibiting AGO2 expression.

Kim JK(1), Jin X, Ham SW, Lee SY, Seo S, Kim SC, Kim SH, Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea 
University, Seoul, 136-713, Republic of Korea.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is the master transcription factor that
plays a pivotal role in the transcriptional activation of type I interferon genes
in the inflammatory response. Our previous study revealed that IRF7 is an
important regulator of tumor progression via the expression of inflammatory
cytokines in glioma. Here, we report that IRF7 promotes glioma invasion and
confers resistance to both chemotherapy and radiotherapy by inhibiting expression
of argonaute 2 (AGO2), a regulator of microRNA biogenesis. We found that IRF7 and
AGO2 expression levels were negatively correlated in patients with glioblastoma
multiforme. Ectopic IRF7 expression led to a reduction in AGO2 expression, while 
depletion of IRF7 resulted in increased AGO2 expression in the LN-229 glioma cell
line. In an in vitro invasion assay, IRF7 overexpression enhanced glioma cell
invasion. Furthermore, reconstitution of AGO2 expression in IRF7-overexpressing
cells led to decreased cell invasion, whereas the reduced invasion due to IRF7
depletion was rescued by AGO2 depletion. In addition, IRF7 induced
chemoresistance and radioresistance of glioma cells by diminishing AGO2
expression. Finally, AGO2 depletion alone was sufficient to accelerate glioma
cell invasion in vitro and in vivo, indicating that AGO2 regulates cancer cell
invasion. Taken together, our results indicate that IRF7 promotes glioma cell
invasion and both chemoresistance and radioresistance through AGO2 inhibition.

PMID: 25680411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Hum Vaccin Immunother. 2014;10(12):3711-21. doi: 10.4161/21645515.2014.980682.

Gene expression profiles identify both MyD88-independent and MyD88-dependent
pathways involved in the maturation of dendritic cells mediated by heparan
sulfate: a novel adjuvant.

Wu M(1), Wang H, Shi J, Sun J, Duan Z, Li Y, Li J, Hu N, Wei Y, Chen Y, Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Medical Biology; Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking
Union Medical College ; Kunming , China.

The traditional vaccine adjuvant research is mainly based on the trial and error 
method, and the mechanisms underlying the immune system stimulation remaining
largely unknown. We previously demonstrated that heparan sulfate (HS), a TLR-4
ligand and endogenous danger signal, effectively enhanced humoral and cellular
immune responses in mice immunized by HBsAg. This study aimed to evaluate whether
HS induces better humoral immune responses against inactivated Hepatitis A or
Rabies Vaccines, respectively, compared with traditional adjuvants (e.g. Alum and
complete Freund's adjuvant). In order to investigate the molecular mechanisms of 
its adjuvanticity, the gene expression pattern of peripheral blood monocytes
derived DCs (dendritic cells) stimulated with HS was analyzed at different times 
points. Total RNA was hybridized to Agilent SurePrint G3 Human Gene Expression
8×60 K one-color oligo-microarray. Through intersection analysis of the
microarray results, we found that the Toll-like receptor signaling pathway was
significantly activated, and NF-kB, TRAF3 and IRF7 were activated as early as 12 
h, and MyD88 was activated at 48 h post-stimulation. Furthermore, the expression 
of the surface marker CD83 and the co-stimulatory molecules CD80 and CD86 was
up-regulated as early as 24 h. Therefore, we speculated that HS-induced human
monocyte-derived DC maturation may occur through both MyD88-independent and
dependent pathways, but primarily through the former (TRIF pathway). These data
provide an important basis for understanding the mechanisms underlying HS
enhancement of the immune response.

PMCID: PMC4514065
PMID: 25668674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 May;44(1):88-99. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2015.01.024.
Epub 2015 Feb 7.

Isolation and expression of grass carp toll-like receptor 5a (CiTLR5a) and 5b
(CiTLR5b) gene involved in the response to flagellin stimulation and grass carp
reovirus infection.

Jiang Y(1), He L(2), Ju C(3), Pei Y(1), Ji M(4), Li Y(2), Liao L(2), Jang S(3),
Zhu Z(2), Wang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China; University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology
and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 
430072, China; Department of Zoology, College of Life Sciences, Kim Il Song
University, Pyongyang, Democratic People's Republic of Korea. (4)Department of
Zoology, College of Life Sciences, Kim Il Song University, Pyongyang, Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea. (5)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and
Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan
430072, China. Electronic address: wangyp@ihb.ac.cn.

Toll-like receptor 5 (TLR5), a member of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) family and is
responsible for the bacterial <U+FB02>agellin recognition in vertebrates, play an
important role in innate immunity. In the study, two TLR5 genes of grass carp
(Ctenopharyngodon idellus), named CiTLR5a and CiTLR5b, were cloned and analyzed. 
Both CiTLR5a and CiTLR5b are typical TLR proteins, including LRR motif,
transmembrane region and TIR domain. The full-length cDNA of CiTLR5a is 3054 bp
long, with a 2646 bp open reading frame (ORF), 78 bp 5' untranslated regions
(UTR), and 330 bp 3' UTR. The full-length cDNA of CiTLR5b is 3326 bp, with a 2627
bp ORF, 95 bp 5' UTR, and 594 bp 3' UTR. Phylogenetic analysis showed that
CiTLR5a and CiTLR5b were closed to the TLR5 of cirrhinus mrigala,
cyprinus_carpio, and danio rerio. Subcellular localization indicated that CiTLR5a
and CiTLR5b shared similar localization pattern and may locate in the plasma
membrane of transfected cells. Real-time quantitative PCR revealed CiTLR5a and
CiTLR5b were constitutively expressed in all examined tissues, whereas the
highest expressed tissue differed. Following exposure to flagellin and GCRV,
CiTLR5a and CiTLR5b were up-regulated significantly. Moreover, the downstream
genes of TLR5 signal pathway such as MyD88, NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF7, IL-1ß, and TNF-a also
up-regulated significantly, whereas the I<U+03BA>B gene was down-regulated, suggesting
that CiTLR5a and CiTLR5b involved in response to flagellin stimulation and GCRV
infection. The results obtained in the study would provide a new insight for
further understand the function of TLR5 in teleost fish.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25665802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2015 Feb 15;163(3-4):157-63. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2014.12.005. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Expression profiles of antiviral response genes in chicken bursal cells
stimulated with Toll-like receptor ligands.

Alkie TN(1), St Paul M(2), Barjesteh N(1), Brisbin J(1), Sharif S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, 
Guelph, ON N1G 2W1, Canada. (2)Immunology and Medical Biophysics, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5G 2M9, Canada. (3)Department of
Pathobiology, Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON N1G
2W1, Canada. Electronic address: shayan@uoguelph.ca.

Cells of the adaptive immune system express Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and are
able to respond to TLR ligands. With this in mind, the goal of the current study 
was to determine the expression of antiviral response genes in the cells of the
chicken bursa of Fabricius (BF) to stimulation with TLR ligands. We investigated 
initially the response of bursal B cells to CpG-ODN, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
poly(I:C) treatment. The expression level of type I interferons (IFNs) and
interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) did not differ between CpG-ODN and LPS
treated groups compared to the non-stimulated cells. Poly(I:C) was the only TLR
ligand, which has induced significant expression of antiviral innate immune
response genes from bursal cells. Further in vitro and in vivo studies need to
examine the efficacy of these antiviral responses against avian viruses.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25618589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Virol. 2015 Apr;89(7):3819-32. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03061-14. Epub 2015 Jan 21.

Interleukin-1- and type I interferon-dependent enhanced immunogenicity of an
NYVAC-HIV-1 Env-Gag-Pol-Nef vaccine vector with dual deletions of type I and type
II interferon-binding proteins.

Delaloye J(1), Filali-Mouhim A(2), Cameron MJ(2), Haddad EK(2), Harari A(3),
Goulet JP(2), Gomez CE(4), Perdiguero B(4), Esteban M(4), Pantaleo G(3), Roger
T(1), Sékaly RP(2), Calandra T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Diseases Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland. (2)Vaccine and Gene Therapy
Institute, Port St. Lucie, Florida, USA. (3)Division of Immunology and Allergy,
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, and University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland. (4)Centro Nacional de Biotecnología, CSIC, Madrid, Spain.
(5)Infectious Diseases Service, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, and
University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland Thierry.Calandra@chuv.ch.

NYVAC, a highly attenuated, replication-restricted poxvirus, is a safe and
immunogenic vaccine vector. Deletion of immune evasion genes from the poxvirus
genome is an attractive strategy for improving the immunogenic properties of
poxviruses. Using systems biology approaches, we describe herein the enhanced
immunological profile of NYVAC vectors expressing the HIV-1 clade C env, gag,
pol, and nef genes (NYVAC-C) with single or double deletions of genes encoding
type I (<U+0394>B19R) or type II (<U+0394>B8R) interferon (IFN)-binding proteins.
Transcriptomic analyses of human monocytes infected with NYVAC-C, NYVAC-C with
the B19R deletion (NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B19R), or NYVAC-C with B8R and B19R deletions
(NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B8RB19R) revealed a concerted upregulation of innate immune pathways
(IFN-stimulated genes [ISGs]) of increasing magnitude with NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B19R and
NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B8RB19R than with NYVAC-C. Deletion of B8R and B19R resulted in an
enhanced activation of IRF3, IRF7, and STAT1 and the robust production of type I 
IFNs and of ISGs, whose expression was inhibited by anti-type I IFN antibodies.
Interestingly, NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B8RB19R induced the production of much higher levels of
proinflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor [TNF], interleukin-6 [IL-6], and
IL-8) than NYVAC-C or NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B19R as well as a strong inflammasome response
(caspase-1 and IL-1ß) in infected monocytes. Top network analyses showed that
this broad response mediated by the deletion of B8R and B19R was organized around
two upregulated gene expression nodes (TNF and IRF7). Consistent with these
findings, monocytes infected with NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B8RB19R induced a stronger type I
IFN-dependent and IL-1-dependent allogeneic CD4(+) T cell response than monocytes
infected with NYVAC-C or NYVAC-C-<U+0394>B19R. Dual deletion of type I and type II IFN
immune evasion genes in NYVAC markedly enhanced its immunogenic properties via
its induction of the increased expression of type I IFNs and IL-1ß and make it an
attractive candidate HIV vaccine vector.IMPORTANCE: NYVAC is a
replication-deficient poxvirus developed as a vaccine vector against HIV. NYVAC
expresses several genes known to impair the host immune defenses by interfering
with innate immune receptors, cytokines, or interferons. Given the crucial role
played by interferons against viruses, we postulated that targeting the type I
and type II decoy receptors used by poxvirus to subvert the host innate immune
response would be an attractive approach to improve the immunogenicity of NYVAC
vectors. Using systems biology approaches, we report that deletion of type I and 
type II IFN immune evasion genes in NYVAC poxvirus resulted in the robust
expression of type I IFNs and interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), a strong
activation of the inflammasome, and upregulated expression of IL-1ß and
proinflammatory cytokines. Dual deletion of type I and type II IFN immune evasion
genes in NYVAC poxvirus improves its immunogenic profile and makes it an
attractive candidate HIV vaccine vector.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4403427
PMID: 25609807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Infect Immun. 2015 Mar;83(3):1172-80. doi: 10.1128/IAI.02796-14. Epub 2015 Jan
12.

Innate immunity induced by Plasmodium liver infection inhibits malaria
reinfections.

Liehl P(1), Meireles P(2), Albuquerque IS(2), Pinkevych M(3), Baptista F(2), Mota
MM(2), Davenport MP(3), Prudêncio M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal pliehl@medicina.ulisboa.pt
mprudencio@medicina.ulisboa.pt. (2)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de 
Medicina, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. (3)Centre for Vascular
Research, UNSW Australia, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Following transmission through a mosquito bite to the mammalian host, Plasmodium 
parasites first invade and replicate inside hepatocytes before infecting
erythrocytes and causing malaria. The mechanisms limiting Plasmodium reinfections
in humans living in regions of malaria endemicity have mainly been explored by
studying the resistance induced by the blood stage of infection. However,
epidemiologic studies have suggested that in high-transmission areas,
preerythrocytic stages also activate host resistance to reinfection. This, along 
with the recent discovery that liver infections trigger a specific and effective 
type I interferon (IFN) response, prompted us to hypothesize that this
pre-erythrocyte-stage-induced resistance is linked to liver innate immunity.
Here, we combined experimental approaches and mathematical modeling to
recapitulate field studies and understand the molecular basis behind such
resistance. We present a newly established mouse reinfection model and
demonstrate that rodent malaria liver-stage infection inhibits reinfection. This 
protection relies on the activation of innate immunity and involves the type I
IFN response and the antimicrobial cytokine gamma IFN (IFN-<U+03B3>). Importantly,
mathematical simulations indicate that the predictions based on our experimental 
murine reinfection model fit available epidemiological data. Overall, our study
revealed that liver-stage-induced innate immunity may contribute to the
preerythrocytic resistance observed in humans in regions of malaria
hyperendemicity.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4333462
PMID: 25583524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Microvasc Res. 2015 Mar;98:68-73. doi: 10.1016/j.mvr.2015.01.003. Epub 2015 Jan
9.

Poly I:C enhances production of nitric oxide in response to interferon-<U+03B3> via
upregulation of interferon regulatory factor 7 in vascular endothelial cells.

Mori D(1), Koide N(2), Tsolmongyn B(2), Nagata H(1), Sano T(1), Nonami T(1),
Yokochi T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, 
Aichi 480-1195, Japan. (2)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi
Medical University School of Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan.
(3)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Aichi Medical University School of 
Medicine, Nagakute, Aichi 480-1195, Japan. Electronic address:
yokochi@aichi-med-u.ac.jp.

The effect of poly I:C on interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3>-induced nitric oxide (NO) production
in vascular endothelial cells was examined using murine aortic endothelial END-D 
cells. Poly I:C augmented IFN-<U+03B3>-induced NO production although it alone did not
induce the NO production. Poly I:C augmented the NO production via enhanced
expression of an inducible NO synthase protein. Poly I:C did not affect the
activation of Janus kinase (JAK) 1/2, and signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 1 in IFN-<U+03B3> signaling. Moreover, there was no significant
difference in the IFN-<U+03B3>-induced interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 1 expression
between the presence and absence of poly I:C. Poly I:C led to the activation of
IRF7 in END-D cells. Inhibition of poly I:C signaling by amlexanox, an inhibitor 
of TANK-binding kinase (TBK) 1 and I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK) e, abolished the augmentation
of IFN-<U+03B3>-induced NO production. Therefore, poly I:C was suggested to augment
IFN-<U+03B3>-induced NO production at the transcriptional level via enhanced IRF7
activation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25582076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Jan 8;11(1):e1004005. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004005.
eCollection 2015.

Systems level analysis of systemic sclerosis shows a network of immune and
profibrotic pathways connected with genetic polymorphisms.

Mahoney JM(1), Taroni J(1), Martyanov V(1), Wood TA(1), Greene CS(1), Pioli
PA(2), Hinchcliff ME(3), Whitfield ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hannover, New 
Hampshire, United States of America. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hannover, New Hampshire, United States of
America. (3)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Mar;11(3):e1004133.

Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a rare systemic autoimmune disease characterized by
skin and organ fibrosis. The pathogenesis of SSc and its progression are poorly
understood. The SSc intrinsic gene expression subsets (inflammatory,
fibroproliferative, normal-like, and limited) are observed in multiple clinical
cohorts of patients with SSc. Analysis of longitudinal skin biopsies suggests
that a patient's subset assignment is stable over 6-12 months. Genetically, SSc
is multi-factorial with many genetic risk loci for SSc generally and for specific
clinical manifestations. Here we identify the genes consistently associated with 
the intrinsic subsets across three independent cohorts, show the relationship
between these genes using a gene-gene interaction network, and place the genetic 
risk loci in the context of the intrinsic subsets. To identify gene expression
modules common to three independent datasets from three different clinical
centers, we developed a consensus clustering procedure based on mutual
information of partitions, an information theory concept, and performed a
meta-analysis of these genome-wide gene expression datasets. We created a
gene-gene interaction network of the conserved molecular features across the
intrinsic subsets and analyzed their connections with SSc-associated genetic
polymorphisms. The network is composed of distinct, but interconnected,
components related to interferon activation, M2 macrophages, adaptive immunity,
extracellular matrix remodeling, and cell proliferation. The network shows
extensive connections between the inflammatory- and fibroproliferative-specific
genes. The network also shows connections between these subset-specific genes and
30 SSc-associated polymorphic genes including STAT4, BLK, IRF7, NOTCH4, PLAUR,
CSK, IRAK1, and several human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes. Our analyses suggest
that the gene expression changes underlying the SSc subsets may be long-lived,
but mechanistically interconnected and related to a patients underlying genetic
risk.

PMCID: PMC4288710
PMID: 25569146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Bing Du Xue Bao. 2014 Sep;30(5):579-86.

[Current research on picornavirus 3C protease].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang H(1), Xie GC, Duan ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Viral Disease Control and Prevention, Beijing, China.

The picornavirus family comprises many small viruses, several of which are
important pathogens of humans and livestock. The 3C protease (3Cpro) of different
species and genera of picornavirus contains the classic G-X-C-G motif and
Cys-His-Asp/Glu catalytic triad. 3Cpro conducts maturation cleavage in the
regions of VP2-VP3 and VP3-VP1 in P1, 2A-2B and 2B-2C in P2 and the whole P3.
Picornavirus 3Cpro has been shown to have significant substrate preference in
Q-G/S/A/V/H/R and E-S/G/R/M as well as species and genera specificity through
analyses of the maturation cleavage of picornavirus polyproteins. Innate immune
adaptors such as TRIF, MAVS, IRF3, IRF7 and NEMO have various potential cleavage 
sites in picornavirus 3Cpro (TRIF and NEMO show considerable diversity in their
cleavage sites). Useful information will be provided for the development of
broad-spectrum antiviral agents as well as evasion mechanisms of the innate
immune system against picornavirus 3Cpro through continued research of
picornavirus 3Cpro.

PMID: 25562970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Virus Genes. 2015 Apr;50(2):189-99. doi: 10.1007/s11262-014-1151-z. Epub 2015 Jan
4.

Comparative analysis of selected innate immune-related genes following infection 
of immortal DF-1 cells with highly pathogenic (H5N1) and low pathogenic (H9N2)
avian influenza viruses.

Liu AL(1), Li YF, Qi W, Ma XL, Yu KX, Huang B, Liao M, Li F, Pan J, Song MX.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Animal Resistance Biology of Shandong, College of Life
Sciences, Shandong Normal University, 88, East Culture Road, Jinan, 250014,
Shandong, China.

H5N1 and H9N2 viruses are important causes of avian influenza in China. H5N1 is
typically associated with severe to fatal disease in poultry, while H9N2 is
usually associated with mild disease. Differences in viral virulence prompted us 
to investigate whether innate immune responses would be differentially regulated 
following infection by H5N1 and H9N2 viruses. To address this hypothesis,
expression of a panel of innate immune-related genes including IFN-a, IFN-ß, Mx1,
OASL, ISG12, IFIT5, IRF7, USP18, SST, and KHSRP in immortal DF-1 cells following 
H5N1 and H9N2 infection was analyzed and compared by real-time quantitative
RT-PCR. Cells infected by either virus overall exhibited a similar expression
profile for four ISGs (Mx1, OASL, ISG12, and IFIT5), IFN-a, IFN-ß, and SST gene. 
However, two immune-regulatory genes (IRF7 and KHSRP) were not responsive to
highly pathogenic H5N1 infection but were strongly up-regulated in DF-1 cells
infected with low pathogenic H9N2 infection. The subtype-dependent host response 
observed in this study offers new insights into the potential roles of IRF7 and
KHSRP in control and modulation of the replication and virulence of different
subtypes or strains of avian influenza A virus.

PMCID: PMC4381041
PMID: 25557928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Gene. 2015 Mar 10;558(2):278-86. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.12.063. Epub 2014 Dec
28.

A novel siRNA validation system for functional screening of effective RNAi
targets in mammalian cells and development of a derivative lentivirus delivery
system.

Huang G(1), Gao Q(2), Zhao Y(3), Dong Z(3), Li T(3), Guan X(4), Jiang J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, College of Basic Medicine, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China; State Key Laboratory of Trauma,
Burns and Combined Injury, Institute of Surgery Research, Daping Hospital, Third 
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400042, China. (2)Department of Cell
Biology, College of Basic Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 
400038, China. (3)Department of General Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China. (4)Department of Medical
Genetics, College of Basic Medicine, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400038, China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury,
Institute of Surgery Research, Daping Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400042, China. Electronic address: hellojjx@126.com.

RNA interference technology is a widely used tool for the regulation of gene
expression at the post-transcriptional level. One major challenge is to find the 
effective short interfering (si)RNA for target gene rapidly and easily, and then 
to deliver the siRNA into cells or tissues with high efficiency. Here, we
designed a novel siRNA validation vector using a dual luciferase reporter system 
for the functional screening of effective RNAi targets in mammalian cells. Then, 
based on a siRNA expression cassette, we developed a derivative lentivirus
delivery system to infect the appropriate cells or tissues for the efficient
knockdown of target gene expression. Based on this system, we used human IRF7
gene, a key regulatory factor for the differentiation of monocytes to
macrophages, as an example. We screened for the optimal siRNA, then packaged it
into a lentiviral siRNA expression system. Then, monocytes were infected and we
confirmed the knockdown of IRF7 expression could inhibit the differentiation of
monocytes to macrophages. To validate our method further, we also screened and
identified optimal siRNA for human TLR4 gene. In summary, we developed a novel
siRNA validation system to identify optimal siRNA to target genes rapidly. In
addition, the lentivirus system is an efficient tool for siRNA delivery for the
further study of target gene function. Taken together, this represents an
efficient and user-friendly strategy to validate and deliver siRNAs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25550051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Medicine (Baltimore). 2014 Dec;93(29):e349. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000349.

IFNAR1 is a predictor for overall survival in colorectal cancer and its mRNA
expression correlated with IRF7 but not TLR9.

Chang LC(1), Fan CW, Tseng WK, Chein HP, Hsieh TY, Chen JR, Hwang CC, Hua CC.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology (L-CC, T-YH, H-PC, J-RC, C-CH); Division of
Colon and Rectal Surgery (C-WF, W-KT); and Department of Internal Medicine
(C-CH), Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Keelung, and Chang Gung University,
Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) 9 plays a role in intestinal inflammation that, in turn,
is related to the tumorigenesis of colorectal cancer. Nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF<U+03BA>B),
and interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 5 and IRF7 can be activated by TLR9 and
induce the production of proinflammatory cytokines and type I interferon,
respectively. This study investigated the mRNA expressions of TLR9 and its
downstream signaling molecules in both the tumor and the normal tissues of
colorectal cancer. Eighty-four subjects with colorectal cancer were consecutively
recruited at a community-based hospital, and the mRNA expression of TLR9, NF<U+03BA>B,
IRF5, IRF7, interleukin 6 (IL6), and interferon a/ß/<U+03C9> receptor 1 (IFNAR1) in the 
tumor and normal tissue were determined by real-time reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction using TaqMan FAM-labeled MGB probes (Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, CA). The tumor had higher percentages of detection of TLR9, IFNAR1, and
IL6 mRNA expressions than normal tissue. The absence of detectable TLR9 mRNA
expression was associated with an absence of significance in the correlation
between IL6 and NF<U+03BA>B or IRF5, but not that between IRF7 and IFNAR1 in both the
tumor and the normal tissues. An absence of detectable IFNAR1 mRNA expression in 
the tumor (hazard ratio: 3.77; 95% confidence interval: 1.22-11.60) and advanced 
stage (stages III and IV, 7.86; 1.76-35.40) were significant predictors for
overall survival. IFNAR1 is a predictor for overall survival and mRNA expression 
is correlated to IRF7, but not TLR9 in colorectal cancer. The results cast doubt 
on the usefulness of TLR9 agonist in treating colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC4602595
PMID: 25546690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 29;9(12):e115708. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0115708.
eCollection 2014.

Citrate synthase expression affects tumor phenotype and drug resistance in human 
ovarian carcinoma.

Chen L(1), Liu T(1), Zhou J(1), Wang Y(1), Wang X(1), Di W(1), Zhang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 200127, P. R. China; Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, Shanghai, 200127, P. R. China.

Citrate synthase (CS), one of the key enzymes in the tricarboxylic acid (TCA)
cycle, catalyzes the reaction between oxaloacetic acid and acetyl coenzyme A to
generate citrate. Increased CS has been observed in pancreatic cancer. In this
study, we found higher CS expression in malignant ovarian tumors and ovarian
cancer cell lines compared to benign ovarian tumors and normal human ovarian
surface epithelium, respectively. CS knockdown by RNAi could result in the
reduction of cell proliferation, and inhibition of invasion and migration of
ovarian cancer cells in vitro. The drug resistance was also inhibited possibly
through an excision repair cross complementing 1 (ERCC1)-dependent mechanism.
Finally, upon CS knockdown we observed significant increase expression of
multiple genes, including ISG15, IRF7, CASP7, and DDX58 in SKOV3 and A2780 cells 
by microarray analysis and real-time PCR. Taken together, these results suggested
that CS might represent a potential therapeutic target for ovarian carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4278743
PMID: 25545012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 22;9(12):e114854. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114854.
eCollection 2014.

Deficiency in either 4E-BP1 or 4E-BP2 augments innate antiviral immune responses.

Nehdi A(1), Sean P(2), Linares I(3), Colina R(4), Jaramillo M(5), Alain T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Goodman Cancer Center, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada; College of medicine, King Saud Bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences, King Abdullah International Medical Research
Center, King Abdulaziz Medical City, National Guard Health Affairs, P.O. Box
22490, Riyadh 11426, Mail Code 1515, Saudi Arabia. (2)Department of Biochemistry 
and Goodman Cancer Center, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 1A3, Canada.
(3)Children's Hospital of Eastern Ontario Research Institute, Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,
Canada. (4)Universidad de la República, Laboratorio de Virología Molecular-PDU,
Regional Norte Rivera 1350, CP 50000, Salto, Uruguay. (5)INRS Institut
Armand-Frappier Research Centre, 531, boulevard des Prairies, Laval, Quebec,
Canada.

Genetic deletion of both 4E-BP1 and 4E-BP2 was found to protect cells against
viral infections. Here we demonstrate that the individual loss of either 4E-BP1
or 4E-BP2 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) is sufficient to confer viral
resistance. shRNA-mediated silencing of 4E-BP1 or 4E-BP2 renders MEFs resistant
to viruses, and compared to wild type cells, MEFs knockout for either 4E-BP1 or
4E-BP2 exhibit enhanced translation of Irf-7 and consequently increased innate
immune response to viruses. Accordingly, the replication of vesicular stomatitis 
virus, encephalomyocarditis virus, influenza virus and Sindbis virus is markedly 
suppressed in these cells. Importantly, expression of either 4E-BP1 or 4E-BP2 in 
double knockout or respective single knockout cells diminishes their resistance
to viral infection. Our data show that loss of 4E-BP1 or 4E-BP2 potentiates
innate antiviral immunity. These results provide further evidence for
translational control of innate immunity and support targeting translational
effectors as an antiviral strategy.

PMCID: PMC4273997
PMID: 25531441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Apr;45(4):1159-69. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445132. Epub 2015 Feb 
5.

TLR9 and STING agonists synergistically induce innate and adaptive type-II IFN.

Temizoz B(1), Kuroda E, Ohata K, Jounai N, Ozasa K, Kobiyama K, Aoshi T, Ishii
KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Vaccine Science, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center
(iFReC), Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Agonists for TLR9 and Stimulator of IFN Gene (STING) act as vaccine adjuvants
that induce type-1 immune responses. However, currently available CpG
oligodeoxynucleotide (ODN) (K-type) induces IFNs only weakly and STING ligands
rather induce type-2 immune responses, limiting their potential therapeutic
applications. Here, we show a potent synergism between TLR9 and STING agonists.
Together, they make an effective type-1 adjuvant and an anticancer agent. The
synergistic effect between CpG ODN (K3) and STING-ligand cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP), 
culminating in NK cell IFN-<U+03B3> (type-II IFN) production, is due to the concurrent
effects of IL-12 and type-I IFNs, which are differentially regulated by IRF3/7,
STING, and MyD88. The combination of CpG ODN with cGAMP is a potent type-1
adjuvant, capable of inducing strong Th 1-type responses, as demonstrated by
enhanced antigen-specific IgG2c and IFN-<U+03B3> production, as well as cytotoxic CD8(+)
T-cell responses. In our murine tumor models, intratumoral injection of CpG ODN
and cGAMP together reduced tumor size significantly compared with the singular
treatments, acting as an antigen-free anticancer agent. Thus, the combination of 
CpG ODN and a STING ligand may offer therapeutic application as a potent type-II 
IFN inducer.

© 2014 The Authors. European Journal of Immunology published by WILEY-VCH Verlag 
GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4671267
PMID: 25529558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Reproduction. 2015 Mar;149(3):281-91. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0538. Epub 2014 Dec 19.

Exosomes, endogenous retroviruses and toll-like receptors: pregnancy recognition 
in ewes.

Ruiz-González I(1), Xu J(1), Wang X(1), Burghardt RC(1), Dunlap KA(1), Bazer
FW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Animal ScienceRoom 442 KlebergVeterinary Integrative
Biosciences2471 Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA.
(2)Departments of Animal ScienceRoom 442 KlebergVeterinary Integrative
Biosciences2471 Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA
fbazer@cvm.tamu.edu.

Conceptus-endometrial communication during the peri-implantation period of
pregnancy ensures establishment of pregnancy. We hypothesized that this dialog
involves exosomes, ovine endogenous jaagsiekte retroviruses (enJSRV) and
toll-like receptors (TLR) which regulate the secretion of interferon tau (IFNT), 
the pregnancy recognition signal in ruminants. First, exosomes isolated from
uterine flushings from cyclic and pregnant ewes were analyzed for exosomal
content and uterine expression of heat shock protein 70 (HSC70). Then, conceptus 
trophectoderm cells (oTr1) treated with different doses of exosomes were analyzed
for the expression of genes involved in TLR-mediated cell signaling. The results 
revealed that exosomes contain mRNAs for enJSRV-ENV, HSC70, interleukins, and
interferon (IFN)-regulatory factors. Exosomal content of enJSRV-ENV mRNA and
protein decreased from days 10 and 12 to day 16 of gestation, and uterine
expression of HSC70 increased in pregnant ewes compared with cyclic ewes. The
oTr1 cells proliferated and secreted IFNT in a dose-dependent manner in response 
to exosomes from cyclic ewes. The expression of CD14, CD68, IRAK1, TRAF6, IRF6,
and IRF7 mRNAs that are key to TLR-mediated expression of type 1 IFNs was
significantly influenced by day of pregnancy. This study demonstrated that
exosomes are liberated into the uterine lumen during the estrous cycle and early 
pregnancy; however, in pregnant ewes, exosomes stimulate trophectoderm cells to
proliferate and secrete IFNT coordinately with regulation of TLR-mediated cell
signaling. These results support our hypothesis that free and/or exosomal enJSRV 
act on the trophectoderm via TLR to induce the secretion of IFNT in a manner
similar to that for innate immune responses of macrophages and plasmacytoid
dendritic cells to viral pathogens.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25526899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2015 Mar;43(1):13-24. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.12.001.
Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Higher antiviral response of RIG-I through enhancing RIG-I/MAVS-mediated
signaling by its long insertion variant in zebrafish.

Zou PF(1), Chang MX(2), Li Y(3), Huan Zhang S(4), Fu JP(4), Chen SN(4), Nie P(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Jimei University, 43 Yindou Road, Xiamen, Fujian
Province, 361021, China; State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and
Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan,
Hubei Province, 430072, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and 
Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan,
Hubei Province, 430072, China. Electronic address: mingxianchang@ihb.ac.cn.
(3)School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, 430074, China. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei Province, 430072, China. (5)State Key
Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei Province, 430072, China. Electronic
address: pinnie@ihb.ac.cn.

As an intracellular pattern recognition receptor (PRR), the retinoic
acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I) is responsible for the recognition of cytosolic
viral nucleic acids and the production of type I interferons (IFNs). In the
present study, an insertion variant of RIG-I with 38 amino acids inserted in the 
N-terminal CARD2 domain, as well as the typical type, named as RIG-Ia and RIG-Ib 
respectively were identified in zebrafish. RIG-Ia and RIG-Ib were all
up-regulated following the infection of a negative ssRNA virus, the Spring
Viremia of Carp Virus (SVCV), and an intracellular Gram-negative bacterial
pathogen Edwardsiella tarda, indicating the RLR may have a role in the
recognition of both viruses and bacteria. The over-expression of RIG-Ib in
cultured fish cells resulted in significant increase in type I IFN promoter
activity, and in protection against SVCV infection, whereas the over-expression
of RIG-Ia had no direct effect on IFN activation nor antiviral response.
Furthermore, it was revealed that both RIG-Ia and RIG-Ib were associated with the
downstream molecular mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein, MAVS, and
interestingly RIG-Ia when co-transfected with RIG-Ib or MAVS, induced a
significantly higher level of type I IFN promoter activity and the expression
level of Mx and IRF7, implying that the RIG-Ia may function as an enhancer in the
RIG-Ib/MAVS-mediated signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25524497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Virol. 2015 Mar;89(5):2628-42. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02458-14. Epub 2014 Dec 17.

Ataxia telangiectasia mutated kinase mediates NF-<U+03BA>B serine 276 phosphorylation
and interferon expression via the IRF7-RIG-I amplification loop in paramyxovirus 
infection.

Fang L(1), Choudhary S(2), Tian B(2), Boldogh I(3), Yang C(4), Ivanciuc T(5), Ma 
Y(5), Garofalo RP(6), Brasier AR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas Medical 
Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Institute for
Translational Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
USA. (3)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston, Texas, USA Institute for Translational Sciences, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. (4)Department of
Radiation Oncology, Houston Methodist Research Institute, Weill Cornell
University, Houston, Texas, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA. (6)Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Institute for
Translational Sciences, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA
Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas,
USA. (7)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch,
Galveston, Texas, USA Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, University of Texas
Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA Institute for Translational Sciences,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, USA arbrasie@utmb.edu.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is a primary etiological agent of childhood
lower respiratory tract disease. Molecular patterns induced by active infection
trigger a coordinated retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-Toll-like receptor
(TLR) signaling response to induce inflammatory cytokines and antiviral mucosal
interferons. Recently, we discovered a nuclear oxidative stress-sensitive pathway
mediated by the DNA damage response protein, ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM),
in cytokine-induced NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA Ser 276 phosphorylation. Here we observe that ATM 
silencing results in enhanced single-strand RNA (ssRNA) replication of RSVand
Sendai virus, due to decreased expression and secretion of type I and III
interferons (IFNs), despite maintenance of IFN regulatory factor 3
(IRF3)-dependent IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). In addition to enhanced oxidative
stress, RSV replication enhances foci of phosphorylated histone 2AX variant
(<U+03B3>H2AX), Ser 1981 phosphorylation of ATM, and IKK<U+03B3>/NEMO-dependent ATM nuclear
export, indicating activation of the DNA damage response. ATM-deficient cells
show defective RSV-induced mitogen and stress-activated kinase 1 (MSK-1) Ser 376 
phosphorylation and reduced RelA Ser 276 phosphorylation, whose formation is
required for IRF7 expression. We observe that RelA inducibly binds the native IFN
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) promoter in an ATM-dependent manner, and IRF7
inducibly binds to the endogenous retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)
promoter. Ectopic IRF7 expression restores RIG-I expression and type I/III IFN
expression in ATM-silenced cells. We conclude that paramyxoviruses trigger the
DNA damage response, a pathway required for MSK1 activation of phospho Ser 276
RelA formation to trigger the IRF7-RIG-I amplification loop necessary for mucosal
IFN production. These data provide the molecular pathogenesis for defects in the 
cellular innate immunity of patients with homozygous ATM mutations.IMPORTANCE:
RNA virus infections trigger cellular response pathways to limit spread to
adjacent tissues. This "innate immune response" is mediated by germ line-encoded 
pattern recognition receptors that trigger activation of two, largely
independent, intracellular NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 transcription factors. Downstream,
expression of protective antiviral interferons is amplified by positive-feedback 
loops mediated by inducible interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) and retinoic
acid inducible gene (RIG-I). Our results indicate that a nuclear oxidative
stress- and DNA damage-sensing factor, ATM, is required to mediate a cross talk
pathway between NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF7 through mediating phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B. Our
studies provide further information about the defects in cellular and innate
immunity in patients with inherited ATM mutations.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4325710
PMID: 25520509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Cytokine. 2015 Feb;71(2):413-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2014.11.021. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

The choroid plexus and the paradox of interferons in the aging brain.

Dhib-Jalbut S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, RUTGERS-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 125
Paterson Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, United States. Electronic address:
jalbutsu@rutgers.edu.

The choroid plexus (CP) function is largely viewed as the source of cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) and as a barrier between the blood and the CSF. Other functions of
the CP are becoming increasingly recognized as in the recent publication by
Baruch et. al. who demonstrate increased expression of interferon type I mRNA
signature (irf7, ifnß and ifit1) in CP of aged brains compared to younger brains,
whereas interferon type II dependent genes (icam1, cxcl10, and ccl17) are reduced
in the aging CP. The authors speculate an IFN-dependent mechanism that plays a
role in the aging process and cognitive decline. This short communication
summarizes the findings by the authors and highlights the seemingly paradoxical
roles of IFN type I and type II in neuroinflammation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25510902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 30;290(5):3172-82. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.619890. Epub 2014 
Dec 10.

p53 degradation by a coronavirus papain-like protease suppresses type I
interferon signaling.

Yuan L(1), Chen Z(2), Song S(3), Wang S(3), Tian C(3), Xing G(3), Chen X(2), Xiao
ZX(4), He F(3), Zhang L(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center,
Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Cancer Medicine, Beijing 100850, China, the Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian
Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning Province 116044, China. (2)the Division of
Infection and Immunity, Department of Electromagnetic and Laser Biology, Beijing 
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China, and. (3)From the State
Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute
of Radiation Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine,
Beijing 100850, China. (4)the School of Life Sciences, Sichuan University,
Sichuan Province, 610065, China. (5)From the State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, 
Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer Medicine, Beijing 100850, China, the
Institute of Cancer Stem Cell, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning
Province 116044, China, zhanglq@nic.bmi.ac.cn.

Infection by human coronaviruses is usually characterized by rampant viral
replication and severe immunopathology in host cells. Recently, the coronavirus
papain-like proteases (PLPs) have been identified as suppressors of the innate
immune response. However, the molecular mechanism of this inhibition remains
unclear. Here, we provide evidence that PLP2, a catalytic domain of the
nonstructural protein 3 of human coronavirus NL63 (HCoV-NL63), deubiquitinates
and stabilizes the cellular oncoprotein MDM2 and induces the proteasomal
degradation of p53. Meanwhile, we identify IRF7 (interferon regulatory factor 7) 
as a bona fide target gene of p53 to mediate the p53-directed production of type 
I interferon and the innate immune response. By promoting p53 degradation, PLP2
inhibits the p53-mediated antiviral response and apoptosis to ensure viral growth
in infected cells. Thus, our study reveals that coronavirus engages PLPs to
escape from the innate antiviral response of the host by inhibiting p53-IRF7-IFNß
signaling.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4317044
PMID: 25505178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Dec 4;5:e1557. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.502.

Analysis of gene expression array in TSC2-deficient AML cells reveals IRF7 as a
pivotal factor in the Rheb/mTOR pathway.

Makovski V(1), Jacob-Hirsch J(2), Gefen-Dor C(2), Shai B(3), Ehrlich M(3),
Rechavi G(4), Kloog Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, The George S Wise Faculty of Life Sciences,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. (2)Department of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology, Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer, Israel. (3)Department of Cell Research and Immunology, The George S
Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel. (4)1]
Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, Safra Children's Hospital, Sheba
Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel [2] Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

Mutations in tuberous sclerosis (TSC) genes cause the genetic disorder TSC, as
well as other neoplasms, including lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM) and
angiomyolipomas (AMLs). AMLs are benign renal tumors occur both in sporadic LAM
and in TSC. As they carry the same mutations, AML cell lines serve as a model for
TSC and LAM. Rheb/mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) pathway is
chronically activated in TSC-deficient cells, and this activation can be
diminished using the appropriate inhibitors. Rapamycin (sirolimus) is a known
specific inhibitor of mTORC1, whereas S-trans,trans-farnesylthiosalicylic acid
(FTS; salirasib) has been shown to inhibit Rheb. To examine the effect of the
Rheb/mTOR inhibition pathway, we used human TSC2-deficient AML cells, derived
from a LAM patient. FTS indeed inhibited Rheb in these cells and attenuated their
proliferation. After comparative treatments with FTS or rapamycin or by
re-expression of TSC2, we carried out a gene array analysis. This yielded a
substantial number of commonly altered genes, many of which we identified as
downstream targets of the interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)
transcription factor, a central activator of the IFN type 1 immune response.
Furthermore, nuclear localization of IRF7 was impaired by each of the three
treatments. Interestingly, the phenomena seen on FTS or rapamycin treatment were 
selective for TSC2-deficient cells. Moreover, knockdown of IRF7 by siRNA mimicked
the decrease in number of the abovementioned genes and also inhibited AML cell
proliferation. Altogether, these findings support FTS as a potential treatment
for TSC and its related pathologies and IRF7 as a novel target for treatment.

PMCID: PMC4649829
PMID: 25476905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Leukoc Biol. 2015 Feb;97(2):307-20. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2A0114-059RR. Epub 2014
Dec 3.

MAP kinase p38a regulates type III interferon (IFN-<U+03BB>1) gene expression in human
monocyte-derived dendritic cells in response to RNA stimulation.

Jiang M(1), Österlund P(2), Fagerlund R(2), Rios DN(2), Hoffmann A(2), Poranen
MM(2), Bamford DH(2), Julkunen I(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Virology Unit, Department of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control,
National Institute for Health and Welfare, Helsinki, Finland; Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
California, USA; Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, 
Institute for Quantitative and Computational Biosciences, University of
California, Los Angeles, California, USA; Institute of Biotechnology and
Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Finland; and Department of
Virology, University of Turku, Finland miao.jiang@helsinki.fi miao.jiang@thl.fi
ilkka.julkunen@thl.fi ilkka.julkunen@utu.fi. (2)*Virology Unit, Department of
Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control, National Institute for Health and
Welfare, Helsinki, Finland; Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University 
of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA; Department of Microbiology, 
Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, Institute for Quantitative and Computational 
Biosciences, University of California, Los Angeles, California, USA; Institute of
Biotechnology and Department of Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Finland; and
Department of Virology, University of Turku, Finland.

Recognition of viral nucleic acids leads to type I and type III IFN gene
expression and activation of host antiviral responses. At present, type III IFN
genes are the least well-characterized IFN types. Here, we demonstrate that the
p38 MAPK signaling pathway is involved in regulating IFN-<U+03BB>1 gene expression in
response to various types of RNA molecules in human moDCs. Inhibition of p38 MAPK
strongly reduced IFN gene expression, and overexpression of p38a MAPK enhanced
IFN-<U+03BB>1 gene expression in RNA-stimulated moDCs. The regulation of IFN gene
expression by p38 MAPK signaling was independent of protein synthesis and thus, a
direct result of RNA stimulation. Moreover, the RIG-I/MDA5-MAVS-IRF3 pathway was 
required for p38a MAPK to up-regulate IFN-<U+03BB>1 promoter activation, whereas the
MyD88-IRF7 pathway was not needed, and the regulation was not involved directly
in IRF7-dependent IFN-a1 gene expression. The stimulatory effect of p38a MAPK on 
IFN-<U+03BB>1 mRNA expression in human moDCs did not take place directly via the
activating TBK1/IKKe complex, but rather, it occurred through some other parallel
pathways. Furthermore, mutations in ISRE and NF-<U+03BA>B binding sites in the promoter 
region of the IFN-<U+03BB>1 gene led to a significant reduction in p38a MAPK-mediated
IFN responses after RNA stimulation. Altogether, our data suggest that the p38a
MAPK pathway is linked with RLR signaling pathways and regulates the expression
of early IFN genes after RNA stimulation cooperatively with IRF3 and NF-<U+03BA>B to
induce antiviral responses further.

© Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMID: 25473098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Antiviral Res. 2014 Dec;112:103-12. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.10.008. Epub
2014 Oct 23.

Toll-like receptor 3 signaling inhibits simian immunodeficiency virus replication
in macrophages from rhesus macaques.

Sang M(1), Liu JB(2), Dai M(3), Wu JG(4), Ho WZ(5).

Author information: 
(1)ABSL-III Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan University
School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China; State Key
Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China;
Hubei Key Laboratory of Wudang Local Chinese Medicine Research, College of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Hubei University of Medicine, Shiyan, People's Republic of
China. (2)ABSL-III Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan
University School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China;
State Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of
China. (3)ABSL-III Laboratory at the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan
University School of Basic Medical Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China;
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, United States. (4)State Key Laboratory of Virology,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China. (5)ABSL-III Laboratory at
the Center for Animal Experiment, Wuhan University School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Wuhan, People's Republic of China; State Key Laboratory of Virology,
Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China; Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA,
United States. Electronic address: wenzheho@temple.edu.

Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) recognizes double-stranded RNA and induces multiple
intracellular events responsible for innate antiviral immunity against viral
infections. Here we demonstrate that TLR3 signaling of monocyte-derived
macrophages (MDM) from rhesus monkeys by poly I:C inhibited simian
immunodeficiency virus (SIV) infection and replication. Investigation of the
mechanisms showed that TLR3 activation resulted in the induction of type I and
type III interferons (IFNs) and IFN-inducible antiviral factors, including
APOBEC3G (A3G), tetherin and SAMHD1. In addition, poly I:C-treated macaque
macrophages expressed increased levels of CC chemokines including CCL3, CCL4 and 
CCL5, the ligands for HIV or SIV coreceptor CCR5. Furthermore, TLR3 signaling of 
macaque macrophages induced the expression of cellular microRNAs (miR-29a, -29b, 
-146a and -9), the newly identified intracellular SIV restriction factors. TLR3
activation-mediated anti-SIV effect could be compromised by the knockdown of IRF3
and IRF7. These findings indicate that TLR3-mediated induction of multiple viral 
restriction factors contribute to the inhibition of SIV infection in macaque
macrophages, which support future preclinical studies using rhesus macaques to
determine whether in vivo TLR3 activation is safe and beneficial for treating
people infected with HIV.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4258448
PMID: 25453343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Afr J Tradit Complement Altern Med. 2014 Jan 28;11(2):367-76. eCollection 2014.

Genes underlying positive influence of prenatal environmental enrichment and
negative influence of prenatal earthquake simulation and corrective influence of 
Chinese herbal medicine on rat offspring: Irf7 and Ninj2.

Zhang XG(1), Zhang H(1), Lin L(2), Yang YQ(1), Deng TT(1), Liu Q(1), Liang XL(1),
Wang MQ(3), Peng de Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)The School of Nursing, Chengdu University of T.C.M., Chengdu, 610075, China.
(2)The School of Nursing, Chengdu Medical University, Chengdu, 610083, China.
(3)Molecular Laboratory of T.C.M., Chengdu University of T.C.M., Chengdu, 610075,
China. (4)The School of Acupuncture and Moxibustion, Chengdu University of
T.C.M., Chengdu, 610075, China.

BACKGROUND: Prenatal environmental enrichment (EE) has been proven to positively 
affect but prenatal stress negatively influence the physiological and
psychological processes in animals, whose trans-generational genetic mechanism
remains unclearly defined. We aimed to investigate and find out key genes
underlying the positive-negative effects derived from prenatal interventions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pregnant rats were randomized into EE group (EEG),
earthquake simulation group (ESG), herbal group (HG) received herbal supplements 
in feed after earthquake simulation, and control group (CG).
RESULTS: Light Box Defecation Test (LBDT) showed EEG offspring presented less
fecal pellets than CG offspring, ESG's more than CG's, and HG's less than ESG
(p's<0.05). Open-field Test (OFT) score of EEG was higher than CG offspring, of
ESG's was lower than CG's, and HG's higher than ESG's. Irf7 and Ninj were
screened, which were up-regulated in EEG, down-regulated in ESG (FC<0.5), and
were neutralized in HG. Prenatal EE could positively promote the nervous system
development, prenatal earthquake simulation could retard the nervous system
development and Chinese herbal remedy (JKSQW) which could correct the
retardation.
CONCLUSION: The negative-positive prenatal effect could contribute to altered
gene expression of Irf7 and Ninj2 which also could play a key role in the
improving function of JKSQW for the kidneys.

PMCID: PMC4202648
PMID: 25435624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Age (Dordr). 2014;36(6):9734. doi: 10.1007/s11357-014-9734-0. Epub 2014 Nov 27.

Role of Toll-like receptor 2 and 4 signaling pathways on the inflammatory
response to resistance training in elderly subjects.

Rodriguez-Miguelez P(1), Fernandez-Gonzalo R, Almar M, Mejías Y, Rivas A, de Paz 
JA, Cuevas MJ, González-Gallego J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine (IBIOMED), University of León, Campus Vegazana s/n,
24071, León, Spain.

This study assessed the effects of a resistance exercise training program on the 
inflammatory response associated with Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and TLR4
signaling pathways in senior participants. Twenty-six healthy subjects (age,
69.5<U+2009>±<U+2009>1.3) were randomized to a training (TG; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>16) or a control (CG; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10) 
group. TG performed an 8-week resistance training program, while CG followed
their daily routines. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were isolated from blood
samples obtained before and after the intervention, and levels of proteins
involved in the TLR2, TLR4, and myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 
(MyD88)-dependent and MyD88-independent pathways were analyzed. The inflammatory 
status was evaluated through messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein content of
interleukin (IL)-10 and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) and plasma levels of 
C-reactive protein (CRP). After the 8-week resistance training, TLR2 and TLR4
protein expression was reduced in TG. MyD88, p65, phospho-p38, TIR
domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon (TRIF), IKKi/IKKe,
phospho-interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3, and phosho-IRF7 were also
downregulated in TG after the intervention. The training program induced an
increase of phospho-extracellular signal-regulated kinases 1 and 2 (ERK1/2) and
Hsp70 and a reduction of Hsp60. While TNF-a mRNA and protein values remained
unchanged in both TG and CG, IL-10 mRNA and protein content were upregulated in
TG after the intervention. CRP values decreased in TG only. The increase in Hsp70
negatively correlated with TLR2 and TLR4 downregulation. These data suggest that 
resistance exercise may represent an effective tool to ameliorate the
pro-inflammatory status of old participants through an attenuation of
MyD88-dependent and MyD88-independent TLR2 and TLR4 signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC4245402
PMID: 25427999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Glia. 2015 Apr;63(4):595-610. doi: 10.1002/glia.22770. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 participates in the M1-like microglial
polarization switch.

Tanaka T(1), Murakami K, Bando Y, Yoshida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Functional Anatomy and Neuroscience, Asahikawa Medical
University, Hokkaido, Japan.

Microglia are generally considered the immune cells of the central nervous
system. Recent studies have demonstrated that under specific polarization
conditions, microglia develop into two different phenotypes, termed M1-like and
M2-like microglia. However, the phenotypic characteristics of M1-like- and
M2-like-polarized microglia and the mechanisms that regulate polarization are
largely unknown. In this study, we characterized lipopolysaccharide-treated
M1-like and IL-4-treated M2-like microglia and investigated the mechanisms that
regulate phenotypic switching. The addition of M2-like microglial conditioned
medium (CM) to primary neurons resulted in an increase in neurite length when
compared with neurons treated with M1-like microglial CM, possibly because of the
enhanced secretion of neurotrophic factors by M2-like microglia. M1-like
microglia were morphologically characterized by larger soma, whereas M2-like
microglia were characterized by long processes. M2-like microglia exhibited
greater phagocytic capacity than M1-like microglia. These features switched in
response to polarization cues. We found that expression of interferon regulatory 
factor 7 (IRF7) increased during the M2-like to M1-like switch in microglia in
vitro and in vivo. Knockdown of IRF7 using siRNA suppressed the expression of M1 
marker mRNA and reduced phosphorylation of STAT1. Our findings suggest that IRF7 
signaling may play an important role in microglial polarization switching.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25422089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Vet Res Commun. 2015 Mar;39(1):73-8. doi: 10.1007/s11259-014-9621-2. Epub 2014
Nov 23.

TLR-4 signalling pathway: MyD88 independent pathway up-regulation in chicken
breeds upon LPS treatment.

Karnati HK(1), Pasupuleti SR, Kandi R, Undi RB, Sahu I, Kannaki TR, Subbiah M,
Gutti RK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), D. No. 1-121/1, 4th and 5th
Floors, Axis Clinicals Building, Opp. to Talkie Town, Miyapur, Hyderabad, 500049,
AP, India.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) that sense the microbial pathogens are important
components of host immune system. TLRs play key roles in the innate defence
mechanism against pathogens, in the development of adaptive immunity, and are
possibly the major determinants of the susceptibility to infections. To study the
resistance pattern in different breeds of chicken, a comprehensive understanding 
of TLR4 signalling pathways is required. We investigated the TLR-4 pathway
regulated gene expressions in PBMCs of chicken breeds of Broiler (Cobb), Aseel,
Dahlem Red and Ghagus upon LPS treatment using Quantitative RT-PCR approach.
Several genes were found to be up regulated in both TLR-induced MyD88-dependent
and MyD88-independent pathways. These genes include TLR4 (Toll-like receptor 4), 
MyD88 (Myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88), TRAF6 (TNF receptor
associated factor 6), TRIF (TIR domain containing adapter inducing interferon
beta), the transcription factors NFkB (Nuclear factor kappa B), IRF7 (Interferon 
regulatory factor 7) and IFN ß (Interferon beta). We have also studied
inflammatory cytokines such as IL2, IL6, IL8, IL1 ß and TNF a to further
understand the downstream signalling of TLR4 pathway. These results showed that
higher expression of TLR signalling activation via both MyD88-dependent and
TRIF-dependent pathways are more beneficial to chicken mononuclear cells mediated
innate immunity. We observed TRIF dependent pathway in Aseel and Ghagus breeds.
Our results are in concurrent with general observation that Aseel breed is
comparatively more resistant, Ghagus and broilers are moderately resistant and
Dahlem Red is comparatively more susceptible to bacterial infections.

PMID: 25417198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Acta Vet Hung. 2014 Dec;62(4):500-11. doi: 10.1556/AVet.2014.023.

Interferon regulatory factor 7- (IRF7-) mediated immune response affects
Newcastle disease virus replication in chicken embryo fibroblasts.

Wang Z(1), Ning Z(2), Sun M(2), Gao S(2), Kang Y(2), Xie P(2), Ren T(2).

Author information: 
(1)South China Agricultural University Key Laboratory of Animal Diseases Control 
and Prevention of the Ministry of Agriculture College of Veterinary Medicine 483 
Wu Shan Road Tian He District, Guangzhou 510642 P. R. China Yangtze University
College of Animal Science Jingzhou, Hubei P. R. China. (2)South China
Agricultural University Key Laboratory of Animal Diseases Control and Prevention 
of the Ministry of Agriculture College of Veterinary Medicine 483 Wu Shan Road
Tian He District, Guangzhou 510642 P. R. China.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is essential for the induction of an
antiviral response. Previous studies have shown that virus replication causes the
activation or expression of Type I interferon (IFN) in cells, which further
activates IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) to retard virus growth. In this study,
after infection of chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEFs) with the lentogenic
Newcastle disease virus (NDV) strain LaSota or the velogenic NDV strain GM, the
mRNA and protein levels of IRF7 showed a significant increase, and part of the
IRF7 protein was translocated from the cytoplasm to the nucleus. In order to
further explore the effect of IRF7-mediated innate immune response on the
replication of NDV in CEFs, the mRNA levels of IFN-a, IFN-ß and STAT1 were
measured and the replication kinetics of NDV determined. The results showed that 
specific siRNA could inhibit the expression of IRF7 and limit the mRNA level of
IFN-a, IFN-ß and STAT1 and, accordingly, the replication kinetics of both NDVs
were enhanced after the inhibition of IRF7. In conclusion, IRF7 is an important
nuclear transcription factor for the induction of Type I IFNs during the
antiviral response, which can affect the replication of NDV and spread to CEFs in
the early phase of viral infection.

PMID: 25410392  [PubMed - in process]


121. Parasite Immunol. 2015 Feb;37(2):70-8. doi: 10.1111/pim.12162.

Tick salivary cystatin sialostatin L2 suppresses IFN responses in mouse dendritic
cells.

Lieskovská J(1), Páleníková J, irmarová J, Elsterová J, Kotsyfakis M, Campos
Chagas A, Calvo E, Ruek D, Kopecký J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science, University of South Bohemia, Ceské Budejovice, Czech
Republic; Institute of Parasitology, Biology Centre of the Academy of Sciences of
the Czech Republic, Ceské Budejovice, Czech Republic.

Type I interferon (IFN), mainly produced by dendritic cells (DCs), is critical in
the host defence against tick-transmitted pathogens. Here, we report that
salivary cysteine protease inhibitor from the hard tick Ixodes scapularis,
sialostatin L2, affects IFN-ß mediated immune reactions in mouse dendritic cells.
Following IFN receptor ligation, the Janus activated kinases/signal transducer
and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway is activated. We show that
sialostatin L2 attenuates phosphorylation of STATs in spleen dendritic cells upon
addition of recombinant IFN-ß. LPS-stimulated dendritic cells release IFN-ß which
in turn leads to the induction of IFN-stimulated genes (ISG) through JAK/STAT
pathway activation. The induction of two ISG, interferon regulatory factor 7
(IRF-7) and IP-10, was suppressed by sialostatin L2 in LPS-stimulated dendritic
cells. Finally, the interference of sialostatin L2 with IFN action led to the
enhanced replication of tick-borne encephalitis virus in DC. In summary, we
present here that tick salivary cystatin negatively affects IFN-ß responses which
may consequently increase the pathogen load after transmission via tick saliva.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25408129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Viral Immunol. 2015 Feb;28(1):10-8. doi: 10.1089/vim.2014.0066.

Immune evasion in ebolavirus infections.

Audet J(1), Kobinger GP.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Manitoba , Winnipeg,
Manitoba, Canada .

Ebola virus (EBOV) infects humans as well as several animal species. It can lead 
to a highly lethal disease, with mortality rates approaching 90% in primates.
Recent advances have deepened our understanding of how this virus is able to
prevent the development of protective immune responses. The EBOV genome encodes
eight proteins, four of which were shown to interact with the host in ways that
counteract the immune response. The viral protein 35 (VP35) is capable of capping
dsRNA and interacts with IRF7 to prevent detection of the virus by immune cells. 
The main role of the soluble glycoprotein (sGP) is still unclear, but it is
capable of subverting the anti-GP1,2 antibody response. The GP1,2 protein has
shown anti-tetherin activity and the ability to hide cell-surface proteins.
Finally, VP24 interferes with the production of interferons (IFNs) and with IFN
signaling in infected cells. Taken together, these data point to extensive
adaptation of EBOV to evade the immune system of dead end hosts. While our
understanding of the interactions between the human and viral proteins increases,
details of those interactions in other hosts remain largely unclear and represent
a gap in our knowledge.

PMID: 25396298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2885-6. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490345. Epub 2014 Nov
13.

Burning down the house: IRF7 makes the difference for microglia.

Hagemeyer N(1), Prinz M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Institute of Neuropathology, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany BIOSS
Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, Freiburg,
Germany.

Comment on
    EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2906-21.

PMCID: PMC4282636
PMID: 25394636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2906-21. doi: 10.15252/embj.201489293. Epub 2014 Nov
10.

Chronic exposure to TGFß1 regulates myeloid cell inflammatory response in an
IRF7-dependent manner.

Cohen M(1), Matcovitch O(2), David E(3), Barnett-Itzhaki Z(3), Keren-Shaul H(3), 
Blecher-Gonen R(3), Jaitin DA(3), Sica A(4), Amit I(5), Schwartz M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
(3)Department of Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
(4)Humanitas Clinical and Research Center, Rozzano Milan, Italy DiSCAFF,
University of Piemonte Orientale A. Avogadro, Novara, Italy. (5)Department of
Immunology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
ido.amit@weizmann.ac.il michal.schwartz@weizmann.ac.il. (6)Department of
Neurobiology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
ido.amit@weizmann.ac.il michal.schwartz@weizmann.ac.il.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Dec 17;33(24):2885-6.

Tissue microenvironment influences the function of resident and infiltrating
myeloid-derived cells. In the central nervous system (CNS), resident microglia
and freshly recruited infiltrating monocyte-derived macrophages (mo-MF) display
distinct activities under pathological conditions, yet little is known about the 
microenvironment-derived molecular mechanism that regulates these differences.
Here, we demonstrate that long exposure to transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGFß1) 
impaired the ability of myeloid cells to acquire a resolving anti-inflammatory
phenotype. Using genome-wide expression analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by next-generation sequencing, we show that the
capacity to undergo pro- to anti-inflammatory (M1-to-M2) phenotype switch is
controlled by the transcription factor interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) that
is down-regulated by the TGFß1 pathway. RNAi-mediated perturbation of Irf7
inhibited the M1-to-M2 switch, while IFNß1 (an IRF7 pathway activator) restored
it. In vivo induction of Irf7 expression in microglia, following spinal cord
injury, reduced their pro-inflammatory activity. These results highlight the key 
role of tissue-specific environmental factors in determining the fate of resident
myeloid-derived cells under both physiological and pathological conditions.

© 2014 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4282639
PMID: 25385836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 15;193(12):6090-102. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401605. Epub 2014
Nov 10.

TRAM is required for TLR2 endosomal signaling to type I IFN induction.

Stack J(1), Doyle SL(2), Connolly DJ(1), Reinert LS(3), O'Keeffe KM(1),
McLoughlin RM(1), Paludan SR(3), Bowie AG(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; (2)School of Medicine, Trinity College
Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; The National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's
Children's Hospital, Crumlin, Dublin 12, Ireland; and. (3)Department of
Biomedicine, Aarhus University, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. (4)School of
Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland; agbowie@tcd.ie.

Detection of microbes by TLRs on the plasma membrane leads to the induction of
proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-a, via activation of NF-<U+03BA>B. Alternatively, 
activation of endosomal TLRs leads to the induction of type I IFNs via IFN
regulatory factors (IRFs). TLR4 signaling from the plasma membrane to NF-<U+03BA>B via
the Toll/IL-1R (TIR) adaptor protein MyD88 requires the TIR sorting adaptor Mal, 
whereas endosomal TLR4 signaling to IRF3 via the TIR domain-containing
adaptor-inducing IFN-ß (TRIF) requires the TRIF-related adaptor molecule (TRAM). 
Similar to TLR4 homodimers, TLR2 heterodimers can also induce both
proinflammatory cytokines and type I IFNs. TLR2 plasma membrane signaling to
NF-<U+03BA>B is known to require MyD88 and Mal, whereas endosomal IRF activation by TLR2
requires MyD88. However, it was unclear whether TLR2 requires a sorting adaptor
for endosomal signaling, like TLR4 does. In this study, we show that
TLR2-dependent IRF7 activation at the endosome is both Mal- and TRAM-dependent,
and that TRAM is required for the TLR2-dependent movement of MyD88 to endosomes
following ligand engagement. TRAM interacted with both TLR2 and MyD88, suggesting
that TRAM can act as a bridging adapter between these two molecules. Furthermore,
infection of macrophages lacking TRAM with herpes viruses or the bacterium
Staphylococcus aureus led to impaired induction of type I IFN, indicating a role 
for TRAM in TLR2-dependent responses to human pathogens. Our work reveals that
TRAM acts as a sorting adaptor not only for TLR4, but also for TLR2, to
facilitate signaling to IRF7 at the endosome, which explains how TLR2 is capable 
of causing type I IFN induction.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4258402
PMID: 25385819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Lab Invest. 2015 Jan;95(1):92-9. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2014.134. Epub 2014 Nov
10.

Development of non-traumatic osteonecrosis of the femoral head requires toll-like
receptor 7 and 9 stimulations and is boosted by repression on nuclear factor
kappa B in rats.

Okazaki S(1), Nagoya S(2), Matsumoto H(3), Mizuo K(3), Sasaki M(4), Watanabe
S(3), Yamashita T(5), Inoue H(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Musculoskeletal Biomechanics and Surgical Development,
Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan [2] Department of
Legal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
(2)Department of Musculoskeletal Biomechanics and Surgical Development, Sapporo
Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (3)Department of Legal
Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan. (4)1]
Department of Musculoskeletal Biomechanics and Surgical Development, Sapporo
Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan [2] Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, Sapporo,
Japan. (5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Sapporo Medical University School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

Non-traumatic osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH) often occurs after
corticosteroid therapy in patients with inflammatory diseases. Recent studies
suggest that toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling may contribute to the
pathogenesis of inflammatory diseases, and that the reason for corticosteroid
therapy for inflammatory diseases is related to the anti-inflammatory activities 
of corticosteroids through the reduction of NF-<U+03BA>B. We hypothesized that the
administration of TLR ligands in combination with corticosteroid causes ONFH and 
that transcription factors may contribute to the pathogenesis of ONFH. The aim of
the study was to evaluate (1) the incidence of ONFH in rats after the
administration of TLR7 or TLR9 ligands together with methylprednisolone (MPSL)
and (2) whether transcription factors contribute to the development of ONFH. Male
Wistar rats (n=148) were divided into five groups as follows: Group 1:
Saline+MPSL, Group 2: Imiquimod+Saline, Group 3: Imiquimod+MPSL, Group 4:
CpG-C+MPSL, Group 5: Imiquimod+BAY11-7082+MPSL. As a result, ONFH was observed in
0 of 12 rats in Group 1, in 1 of 10 in Group 2, in 6 of 12 in Group 3, in 4 of 12
in Group 4, in 0 of 9 in Group 5. MPSL treatment did not significantly affect
IRF7 activity, whereas NF-<U+03BA>B activity was significantly repressed in Group 2 and 
Group 3. Furthermore, the repression in interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)
activity by BAY11-7082 interfered with the development of ONFH simultaneously
with the MPSL treatment-induced repression in NF-<U+03BA>B activity. In conclusion, in
the present study, corticosteroid treatment after the administration of TLR7 or
TLR9 ligands caused ONFH. Repression in NF-<U+03BA>B activity by corticosteroid
treatment boosted the development of ONFH.

PMID: 25384124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 28;9(10):e111061. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111061.
eCollection 2014.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms within interferon signaling pathway genes are
associated with colorectal cancer susceptibility and survival.

Lu S(1), Pardini B(2), Cheng B(1), Naccarati A(3), Huhn S(1), Vymetalkova V(4),
Vodickova L(5), Buchler T(6), Hemminki K(7), Vodicka P(4), Försti A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Human Genetics Foundation (HuGeF), Turin, Italy. 
(3)Human Genetics Foundation (HuGeF), Turin, Italy; Department of Molecular
Biology of Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. (4)Department of Molecular Biology of
Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Prague, Czech Republic; Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st 
Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic. (5)Department of
Molecular Biology of Cancer, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic; Institute of Biology and 
Medical Genetics, 1st Medical Faculty, Charles University, Prague, Czech
Republic; Biomedical Centre, Faculty of Medicine in Pilsen, Charles University in
Prague, Pilsen, Czech Republic. (6)Department of Oncology, Thomayer Hospital,
Prague, Czech Republic. (7)Division of Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; Center of Primary Health Care
Research, Clinical Research Center, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

Interferon (IFN) signaling has been suggested to play an important role in
colorectal carcinogenesis. Our study aimed to examine potentially functional
genetic variants in interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), IRF5, IRF7, type I and
type II IFN and their receptor genes with respect to colorectal cancer (CRC) risk
and clinical outcome. Altogether 74 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
covered by the 34 SNPs genotyped in a hospital-based case-control study of 1327
CRC cases and 758 healthy controls from the Czech Republic. We also analyzed
these SNPs in relation to overall survival and event-free survival in a subgroup 
of 483 patients. Seven SNPs in IFNA1, IFNA13, IFNA21, IFNK, IFNAR1 and IFNGR1
were associated with CRC risk. After multiple testing correction, the
associations with the SNPs rs2856968 (IFNAR1) and rs2234711 (IFNGR1) remained
formally significant (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0015 and P<0.0001, respectively). Multivariable
survival analyses showed that the SNP rs6475526 (IFNA7/IFNA14) was associated
with overall survival of the patients (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.041 and event-free survival among
patients without distant metastasis at the time of diagnosis, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.034). The
hazard ratios (HRs) for rs6475526 remained statistically significant even after
adjustment for age, gender, grade and stage (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.029 and P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.036,
respectively), suggesting that rs6475526 is an independent prognostic marker for 
CRC. Our data suggest that genetic variation in the IFN signaling pathway genes
may play a role in the etiology and survival of CRC and further studies are
warranted.

PMCID: PMC4211713
PMID: 25350395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Jan;45(1):130-41. doi: 10.1002/eji.201444824. Epub 2014 Nov
13.

Spatiotemporal requirements for IRF7 in mediating type I IFN-dependent
susceptibility to blood-stage Plasmodium infection.

Edwards CL(1), Best SE, Gun SY, Claser C, James KR, de Oca MM, Sebina I, Rivera
Fde L, Amante FH, Hertzog PJ, Engwerda CR, Renia L, Haque A.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Immunology Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Institute, Brisbane, Australia.

Type I IFN signaling suppresses splenic T helper 1 (Th1) responses during
blood-stage Plasmodium berghei ANKA (PbA) infection in mice, and is crucial for
mediating tissue accumulation of parasites and fatal cerebral symptoms via
mechanisms that remain to be fully characterized. Interferon regulatory factor 7 
(IRF7) is considered to be a master regulator of type I IFN responses. Here, we
assessed IRF7 for its roles during lethal PbA infection and nonlethal Plasmodium 
chabaudi chabaudi AS (PcAS) infection as two distinct models of blood-stage
malaria. We found that IRF7 was not essential for tissue accumulation of
parasites, cerebral symptoms, or brain pathology. Using timed administration of
anti-IFNAR1 mAb, we show that late IFNAR1 signaling promotes fatal disease via
IRF7-independent mechanisms. Despite this, IRF7 significantly impaired early
splenic Th1 responses and limited control of parasitemia during PbA infection.
 Finally, IRF7 also suppressed antiparasitic immunity and Th1 responses during
nonlethal PcAS infection. Together, our data support a model in which IRF7
suppresses antiparasitic immunity in the spleen, while IFNAR1-mediated, but
IRF7-independent, signaling contributes to pathology in the brain during
experimental blood-stage malaria.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25319247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Am Heart Assoc. 2014 Oct 10;3(5):e001309. doi: 10.1161/JAHA.114.001309.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 protects against vascular smooth muscle cell
proliferation and neointima formation.

Huang L(1), Zhang SM(1), Zhang P(1), Zhang XJ(2), Zhu LH(1), Chen K(3), Gao L(4),
Zhang Y(1), Kong XJ(1), Tian S(1), Zhang XD(3), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
(L.H., S.M.Z., P.Z., L.H.Z., Y.Z., X.J.K., S.T., H.L.) Cardiovascular Research
Institute of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China (L.H., S.M.Z., P.Z., L.H.Z., Y.Z.,
X.J.K., S.T., H.L.). (2)State Key Laboratory of Quality Research in Chinese
Medicine, Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, University of Macau, Macao,
China (X.J.Z.). (3)College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
(K.C., X.D.Z.). (4)Department of Cardiology, Institute of Cardiovascular Disease,
Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, China (L.G.).

BACKGROUND: Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a member of the interferon
regulatory factor family, plays important roles in innate immunity and immune
cell differentiation. However, the role of IRF7 in neointima formation is
currently unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Significant decreases in IRF7 expression were observed in
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) following carotid artery injury in vivo and 
platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB) stimulation in vitro. Compared with
non-transgenic (NTG) controls, SMC-specific IRF7 transgenic (IRF7-TG) mice
displayed reduced neointima formation and VSMC proliferation in response to
carotid injury, whereas a global knockout of IRF7 (IRF7-KO) resulted in the
opposite effect. Notably, a novel IRF7-KO rat strain was successfully generated
and used to further confirm the effects of IRF7 deletion on the acceleration of
intimal hyperplasia based on a balloon injury-induced vascular lesion model.
Mechanistically, IRF7's inhibition of carotid thickening and the expression of
VSMC proliferation markers was dependent on the interaction of IRF7 with
activating transcription factor 3 (ATF3) and its downstream target, proliferating
cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). The evidence that IRF7/ATF3-double-TG (DTG) and
IRF7/ATF3-double-KO (DKO) mice abolished the regulatory effects exhibited by the 
IRF7-TG and IRF7-KO mice, respectively, validated the underlying molecular events
of IRF7-ATF3 interaction.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrated that IRF7 modulated VSMC proliferation
and neointima formation by interacting with ATF3, thereby inhibiting the
ATF3-mediated induction of PCNA transcription. The results of this study indicate
that IRF7 is a novel modulator of neointima formation and VSMC proliferation and 
may represent a promising target for vascular disease therapy.

© 2014 The Authors. Published on behalf of the American Heart Association, Inc., 
by Wiley Blackwell.

PMCID: PMC4323813
PMID: 25304854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Virus Res. 2015 Jan 2;195:112-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2014.09.005. Epub 2014
Oct 7.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 is involved in the growth of Epstein-Barr
virus-transformed human B lymphocytes.

Xu D(1), Zhang Y(2), Zhao L(3), Cao M(4), Lingel A(4), Zhang L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroimmunology and Regenerative Therapy, Shanghai Tenth People's
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, PR China; State Key
Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072,
PR China; Nebraska Center for Virology, School of Biological Sciences, University
of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, United States. Electronic address:
dxu0927@gmail.com. (2)Center for Neuroimmunology and Regenerative Therapy,
Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
PR China. (3)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health
Sciences Center, St. Louis, Missouri 63104, United States. (4)Nebraska Center for
Virology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln,
Nebraska 68588, United States. (5)Nebraska Center for Virology, School of
Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska 68588, United
States. Electronic address: lzhang2@unl.edu.

The cellular interferon (IFN) regulatory factor-7 (IRF7) is closely associated
with the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-mediated transformation of B lymphocytes in
vitro and in vivo. However, the exact role of IRF7 in viral transformation is not
clear. We have found that knockdown of IRF7 leads to growth inhibition of
EBV-transformed cells, and restoration of IRF7 by exogenous plasmid correlates
with growth recovery of the viral transformed cells. In addition, IRF7-knockdown 
cells have a lower proliferation but a higher apoptotic rate than control cells. 
Moreover, reduction of IRF7 leads to reduction of major viral oncoprotein, latent
membrane protein 1 (LMP1). Our data suggest that IRF7 may be a factor in EBV
transformation and a useful target in the therapy of EBV-mediated neoplasia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25300801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 3;5:5074. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6074.

Fucose-based PAMPs prime dendritic cells for follicular T helper cell
polarization via DC-SIGN-dependent IL-27 production.

Gringhuis SI(1), Kaptein TM(1), Wevers BA(1), van der Vlist M(1), Klaver EJ(2),
van Die I(2), Vriend LE(1), de Jong MA(1), Geijtenbeek TB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam,The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU University Medical Center, Van der
Boechorststraat 7, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Dendritic cells (DCs) orchestrate antibody-mediated responses to combat
extracellular pathogens including parasites by initiating T helper cell
differentiation. Here we demonstrate that carbohydrate-specific signalling by
DC-SIGN drives follicular T helper cell (TFH) differentiation via IL-27
expression. Fucose, but not mannose, engagement of DC-SIGN results in activation 
of IKKe, which collaborates with type I IFNR signalling to induce formation and
activation of transcription factor ISGF3. Notably, ISGF3 induces expression of
IL-27 subunit p28, and subsequent IL-27 secreted by DC-SIGN-primed DCs is pivotal
for the induction of Bcl-6(+)CXCR5(+)PD-1(hi)Foxp1(lo) TFH cells, IL-21 secretion
by TFH cells and T-cell-dependent IgG production by B cells. Thus, we have
identified an essential role for DC-SIGN-induced ISGF3 by fucose-based PAMPs in
driving IL-27 and subsequent TFH polarization, which might be harnessed for
vaccination design.

PMID: 25278262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Physiol Genomics. 2014 Nov 15;46(22):821-32. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00091.2014. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Identification of genes whose expression is altered by obesity throughout the
arterial tree.

Padilla J(1), Jenkins NT(2), Thorne PK(3), Martin JS(4), Rector RS(5), Davis
JW(6), Laughlin MH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Nutrition and Exercise Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri;
Child Health, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; Dalton Cardiovascular
Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri;
padillaja@missouri.edu. (2)Kinesiology, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia;
(3)Biomedical Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; (4)Biomedical
Sciences, Quinnipiac University, Hamden, Connecticut; (5)Nutrition and Exercise
Physiology, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; Research Service-Harry S 
Truman Memorial VA Medical Center, Columbia, Missouri; Medicine-Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri;
(6)Health Management and Informatics, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri;
Statistics, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; MU Informatics Institute,
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; and. (7)Dalton Cardiovascular
Research Center, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; Biomedical Sciences,
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri; Medical Pharmacology and Physiology, 
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri.

We used next-generation RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) technology on the whole
transcriptome to identify genes whose expression is consistently affected by
obesity across multiple arteries. Specifically, we examined transcriptional
profiles of the iliac artery as well as the feed artery, first, second, and third
branch order arterioles in the soleus, gastrocnemius, and diaphragm muscles from 
obese Otsuka Long-Evans Tokushima Fatty (OLETF) and lean Long-Evans Tokushima
Otsuka (LETO) rats. Within the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles, the number of
genes differentially expressed with obesity tended to increase with increasing
branch order arteriole number (i.e., decreasing size of the artery). This trend
was opposite in the diaphragm. We found a total of 15 genes that were
consistently upregulated with obesity (MIS18A, CTRB1, FAM151B, FOLR2, PXMP4,
OAS1B, SREBF2, KLRA17, SLC25A44, SNX10, SLFN3, MEF2BNB, IRF7, RAD23A, LGALS3BP)
and five genes that were consistently downregulated with obesity (C2, GOLGA7,
RIN3, PCP4, CYP2E1). A small fraction (~9%) of the genes affected by obesity was 
modulated across all arteries examined. In conclusion, the present study
identifies a select number of genes (i.e., 20 genes) whose expression is
consistently altered throughout the arterial network in response to obesity and
provides further insight into the heterogeneous vascular effects of obesity.
Although there is no known direct function of the majority of 20 genes related to
vascular health, the obesity-associated upregulation of SREBF2, LGALS3BP, IRF7,
and FOLR2 across all arteries is suggestive of an unfavorable vascular phenotypic
alteration with obesity. These data may serve as an important resource for
identifying novel therapeutic targets against obesity-related vascular
complications.

PMCID: PMC4233283
PMID: 25271210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2015 Feb;35(2):108-15. doi: 10.1089/jir.2014.0091.
Epub 2014 Sep 22.

Modulation of interferon activity-associated soluble molecules by appendicitis
and appendectomy limits colitis-identification of novel anti-colitic targets.

Cheluvappa R(1), Eri R, Luo AS, Grimm MC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medicine, St. George Clinical School, University of New South 
Wales , Sydney, Australia .

The therapeutic efficacy of interferons (IFNs) in ulcerative colitis is minimal. 
However, IFN activity-associated molecules have been inadequately investigated.
Appendicitis and appendectomy (AA), when done while young, protect against
colitis development later. Our novel murine AA model protects against colitis.
This therapeutic target-identifying study enumerates IFN activity-associated
molecules involved in this protection. Mice with 2 laparotomies were controls
(sham-sham/SS). Distal colons were harvested (4 AA-group colons and 4 SS-group
colons). Microarray-analysis/reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction-validation was done from RNA from each (3-days/28-days-post-AA). Gene
set enrichment analysis (GSEA) software was used to analyze distal colonic gene
sets associated with 46 IFN activity-related genes. More AA-upregulated gene sets
were associated with IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3, IRF7, IFI35, and IFI44 (False Discovery
Rate-FDR <5% and P<0.001), although only IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3, and IFI44 showed
individual gene upregulation (P<0.05). More AA-downregulated gene sets were
associated with IRF1, IRF2, IRF4, IRF8, IRF9, IRF2BP1, IFRD1, IFRD2, and IFIH1
(FDR <5%/P<0.001); although only IRF2BP1 showed individual gene downregulation
(P<0.05). There was significant upregulation (P<0.05) of IFNZ; and downregulation
of IRF2BP2 and IFI30, despite no major associated GSEA differences. IFIT1, IFIT2,
IFIT3, and IFI44, with profound AA-induced individual/GSEA upregulation, and
their immunomodulatory/ antiproliferative activity, are the best molecules to
investigate therapeutic potential. IRF4, IRF8, IRF2BP1, IFRD1, and IFRD2, owing
to their profound AA-induced gene set downregulation, and because of their
diverse lymphocytic activity, are good targets to competitively inhibit or to
treat with exogenous products in knockout animals.

PMCID: PMC4312794
PMID: 25243802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):375-88. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.08.011.

The histidine transporter SLC15A4 coordinates mTOR-dependent inflammatory
responses and pathogenic antibody production.

Kobayashi T(1), Shimabukuro-Demoto S(2), Yoshida-Sugitani R(2), Furuyama-Tanaka
K(2), Karyu H(2), Sugiura Y(3), Shimizu Y(4), Hosaka T(5), Goto M(4), Kato N(6), 
Okamura T(4), Suematsu M(7), Yokoyama S(5), Toyama-Sorimachi N(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology and Inflammation, Research Institute,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8655, Japan. Electronic address: tkobayashi@ri.ncgm.go.jp. (2)Department of
Molecular Immunology and Inflammation, Research Institute, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; JST Precursory Research for
Embryonic Science and Technology (PRESTO) Project, 4-1-8 Honcho Kawaguchi,
Saitama, 332-0012, Japan. (4)Department of Infectious Disease, National Center
for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655,
Japan. (5)RIKEN Systems and Structural Biology Center, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan. (6)Department of Gene Diagnostics and
Therapeutics, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8655, Japan. (7)Department of Biochemistry, Keio
University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582,
Japan; Japan Science and Technology Agency, Exploratory Research for Advanced
Technology (ERATO) Suematsu Gas Biology Project, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.
(8)Department of Molecular Immunology and Inflammation, Research Institute,
National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8655, Japan. Electronic address: nsorima@ri.ncgm.go.jp.

SLC15A4 is a lysosome-resident, proton-coupled amino-acid transporter that moves 
histidine and oligopeptides from inside the lysosome to the cytosol of eukaryotic
cells. SLC15A4 is required for Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7)- and TLR9-mediated
type I interferon (IFN-I) productions in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) and 
is involved in the pathogenesis of certain diseases including lupus-like
autoimmunity. How SLC15A4 contributes to diseases is largely unknown. Here we
have shown that B cell SLC15A4 was crucial for TLR7-triggered IFN-I and
autoantibody productions in a mouse lupus model. SLC15A4 loss disturbed the
endolysosomal pH regulation and probably the v-ATPase integrity, and these
changes were associated with disruption of the mTOR pathway, leading to failure
of the IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)-IFN-I regulatory circuit. Importantly,
SLC15A4's transporter activity was necessary for the TLR-triggered cytokine
production. Our findings revealed that SLC15A4-mediated optimization of the
endolysosomal state is integral to a TLR7-triggered, mTOR-dependent IRF7-IFN-I
circuit that leads to autoantibody production.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25238095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Immunol. 2014 Oct 15;193(8):4137-48. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401290. Epub 2014
Sep 15.

Serine cluster phosphorylation liberates the C-terminal helix of IFN regulatory
factor 7 to bind histone acetyltransferase p300.

Lee KJ(1), Ye JS(1), Choe H(2), Nam YR(1), Kim N(1), Lee U(1), Joo CH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul
138-736, Korea; (2)Bio-Medical Institute of Technology, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea; Department of Physiology, University
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea; and. (3)Department of
Microbiology, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea; Cell
Dysfunction Research Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul
138-736, Korea chjoo@amc.seoul.kr.

IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a major regulator of type I (aß) IFN secretion.
A growing body of evidence shows that IRF7 is involved in a wide variety of
pathologic conditions in addition to infections; however, the detailed mechanism 
of IRF7 transactivation remains elusive. Our current knowledge of IRF7
transactivation is based on studies of IRF3, another major regulator of IFN-ß
secretion. IRF3 and IRF7 are closely related homologs with high sequence
similarity in their C-terminal regions, and both proteins are activated by
phosphorylation of a specific serine cluster (SC). Nevertheless, the functional
domains of the two proteins are arranged in an inverted manner. We generated a
model structure of the IRF7 C-terminal region using homology modeling and used it
to guide subsequent functional domain studies. The model structure led to the
identification of a tripod-helix structure containing the SC. Based on the model 
and experimental data, we hypothesized that phosphorylation-mediated IRF7
transactivation is controlled by a tripod-helix structure. Inducible I<U+03BA>B kinase
binds a tripod-helix structure. Serial phosphorylation of the SC by the kinase
liberates C-terminal helix from an inhibitory hydrophobic pocket. A histone
acetyltransferase P300 binds the liberated helix. The difference in the P300
binding sites explains why the domain arrangement of IRF7 is inverted relative to
that of IRF3.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25225665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 9;9(9):e106501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106501. eCollection
2014.

Asthma is associated with multiple alterations in anti-viral innate signalling
pathways.

Pritchard AL(1), White OJ(1), Burel JG(1), Carroll ML(1), Phipps S(2), Upham
JW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Lung and Allergy Research Group, School of Medicine, The University of
Queensland, Translational Research Institute (TRI), Woolloongabba, Brisbane,
Australia. (2)School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Queensland,
Brisbane, Australia. (3)Lung and Allergy Research Group, School of Medicine, The 
University of Queensland, Translational Research Institute (TRI), Woolloongabba, 
Brisbane, Australia; Department of Respiratory Medicine, Princess Alexandra
Hospital, Brisbane, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Human rhinovirus (HRV) infection is a major trigger for asthma
exacerbations. Anti-viral immunity appears to be abnormal in asthma, with immune 
dysfunction reported in both airway structural cells and migratory, bone marrow
derived cells. Though decreased capacity to produce anti-viral interferons (IFNs)
has been reported in asthma, a detailed analysis of the molecular events involved
has not been undertaken.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the molecular pathway controlling type I IFN synthesis in
HRV-stimulated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) from asthmatic and
healthy subjects.
METHODS: PBMC from 22 allergic asthmatics and 20 healthy donors were cultured
with HRV for 24 hours. Multiple components of the Toll-like receptor (TLR), IFN
regulatory and NF<U+03BA>ß pathways were compared at the mRNA and protein level.
RESULTS: Multiple deficiencies in the innate immune response to HRV were
identified in asthma, with significantly lower expression of IFNa, IFNß and
interferon stimulated genes than in healthy subjects. This was accompanied by
reduced expression of intra-cellular signalling molecules including interferon
regulatory factors (IRF1, IRF7), NF-<U+03BA>B family members (p50, p52, p65 and I<U+03BA>Ka)
and STAT1, and by reduced responsiveness to TLR7/TLR8 activation. These
observations could not be attributed to alterations in the numbers of dendritic
cell (DC) subsets in asthma or baseline expression of the viral RNA sensing
receptors TLR7/TLR8. In healthy subjects, blocking the activity of type-I IFN or 
depleting plasmacytoid DC recapitulated many of the abnormalities observed in
asthma.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple abnormalities in innate anti-viral signalling pathways were
identified in asthma, with deficiencies in both IFN-dependent and IFN-independent
molecules identified.

PMCID: PMC4159236
PMID: 25203745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Virology. 2014 Nov;468-470:133-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2014.07.019. Epub 2014 Aug
28.

Aedes aegypti salivary protein "aegyptin" co-inoculation modulates dengue virus
infection in the vertebrate host.

McCracken MK(1), Christofferson RC(1), Grasperge BJ(1), Calvo E(2), Chisenhall
DM(1), Mores CN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Skip Bertman Drive, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, United
States. (2)Laboratory of Malaria and Vector Research, National Institutes of
Health, 12735 Twinbrook Parkway, Rockville, MD 20852, United States.
(3)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine,
Louisiana State University, Skip Bertman Drive, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, United
States. Electronic address: cmores@lsu.edu.

Dengue virus (DENV) is transmitted in the saliva of the mosquito vector Aedes
aegypti during blood meal acquisition. This saliva is composed of numerous
proteins with the capacity to disrupt hemostasis or modulate the vertebrate
immune response. One such protein, termed "aegyptin," is an allergen and
inhibitor of clot formation, and has been found in decreased abundance in the
saliva of DENV-infected mosquitoes. To examine the influence of aegyptin on DENV 
infection of the vertebrate, we inoculated IRF-3/7(-/- -/-) mice with DENV
serotype 2 strain 1232 with and without co-inoculation of aegyptin. Mice that
received aegyptin exhibited decreased DENV titers in inoculation sites and in
circulation, as well as increased concentrations of GM-CSF, IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-5, and
IL-6, at 48 h post-inoculation when compared to mice that received inoculation of
DENV alone. These and other data suggest that aegyptin impacts DENV perpetuation 
via elevated induction of the immune response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4254699
PMID: 25173089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 29;9(8):e106418. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106418.
eCollection 2014.

HIV-1 Vpr induces interferon-stimulated genes in human monocyte-derived
macrophages.

Zahoor MA(1), Xue G(1), Sato H(2), Murakami T(2), Takeshima SN(2), Aida Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Viral Infectious Diseases Unit, RIKEN, Wako, Saitama, Japan; Japanese
Foundation of AIDS Prevention, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Viral Infectious Diseases Unit,
RIKEN, Wako, Saitama, Japan.

Macrophages act as reservoirs of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and 
play an important role in its transmission to other cells. HIV-1 Vpr is a
multi-functional protein involved in HIV-1 replication and pathogenesis; however,
its exact role in HIV-1-infected human macrophages remains poorly understood. In 
this study, we used a microarray approach to explore the effects of HIV-1 Vpr on 
the transcriptional profile of human monocyte-derived macrophages (MDMs). More
than 500 genes, mainly those involved in the innate immune response, the type I
interferon pathway, cytokine production, and signal transduction, were
differentially regulated (fold change >2.0) after infection with a recombinant
adenovirus expressing HIV-1 Vpr protein. The differential expression profiles of 
select interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) and genes involved in the innate immune
response, including STAT1, IRF7, MX1, MX2, ISG15, ISG20, IFIT1, IFIT2, IFIT3,
IFI27, IFI44L, APOBEC3A, DDX58 (RIG-I), TNFSF10 (TRAIL), and RSAD2 (viperin) were
confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR and were consistent with the microarray
data. In addition, at the post-translational level, HIV-1 Vpr induced the
phosphorylation of STAT1 at tyrosine 701 in human MDMs. These results demonstrate
that HIV-1 Vpr leads to the induction of ISGs and expand the current
understanding of the function of Vpr and its role in HIV-1 immune pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4149569
PMID: 25170834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. MBio. 2014 Aug 26;5(5):e01476-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.01476-14.

Viral pathogen-associated molecular patterns regulate blood-brain barrier
integrity via competing innate cytokine signals.

Daniels BP(1), Holman DW(2), Cruz-Orengo L(2), Jujjavarapu H(2), Durrant DM(2),
Klein RS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(3)rklein@dom.wustl.edu.

Pattern recognition receptor (PRR) detection of pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs), such as viral RNA, drives innate immune responses against West 
Nile virus (WNV), an emerging neurotropic pathogen. Here we demonstrate that WNV 
PAMPs orchestrate endothelial responses to WNV via competing innate immune
cytokine signals at the blood-brain barrier (BBB), a multicellular interface with
highly specialized brain endothelial cells that normally prevents pathogen entry.
While Th1 cytokines increase the permeability of endothelial barriers, type I
interferon (IFN) promoted and stabilized BBB function. Induction of innate
cytokines by pattern recognition pathways directly regulated BBB permeability and
tight junction formation via balanced activation of the small GTPases Rac1 and
RhoA, which in turn regulated the transendothelial trafficking of WNV. In vivo,
mice with attenuated type I IFN signaling or IFN induction (Ifnar(-/-) Irf7(-/-))
exhibited enhanced BBB permeability and tight junction dysregulation after WNV
infection. Together, these data provide new insight into host-pathogen
interactions at the BBB during neurotropic viral infection.IMPORTANCE: West Nile 
virus (WNV) is an emerging pathogen capable of infecting the central nervous
system (CNS), causing fatal encephalitis. However, the mechanisms that control
the ability of WNV to cross the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and access the CNS are 
unclear. In this study, we show that detection of WNV by host tissues induces
innate immune cytokine expression at the BBB, regulating BBB structure and
function and impacting transendothelial trafficking of WNV. This regulatory
effect is shown to happen rapidly following exposure to virus, to occur
independently of viral replication within BBB cells, and to require the signaling
of cytoskeletal regulatory Rho GTPases. These results provide new understanding
of host-pathogen interactions at the BBB during viral encephalitis.

Copyright © 2014 Daniels et al.

PMCID: PMC4173776
PMID: 25161189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2014 Oct;134(4):848-55. doi: 10.1016/j.jaci.2014.07.018. 
Epub 2014 Aug 23.

Identification of novel gene signatures in patients with atopic dermatitis
complicated by eczema herpeticum.

Bin L(1), Edwards MG(2), Heiser R(1), Streib JE(1), Richers B(1), Hall CF(1),
Leung DY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish Health, Denver, Colo. (2)Division of
Pulmonary Sciences and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, University
of Colorado Denver, Aurora, Colo. (3)Department of Pediatrics, National Jewish
Health, Denver, Colo; Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of 
Medicine, Aurora, Colo. Electronic address: leungd@njhealth.org.

BACKGROUND: A subset of patients with atopic dermatitis (AD) is prone to
disseminated herpes simplex virus (HSV) infection (ie, atopic dermatitis with a
history of eczema herpeticum [ADEH+]). Biomarkers that identify ADEH+ are
lacking.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to search for novel ADEH+ gene signatures in PBMCs.
METHODS: An RNA-sequencing approach was applied to evaluate global
transcriptional changes by using PBMCs from patients with ADEH+ and patients with
atopic dermatitis without a history of eczema herpeticum (ADEH-). Candidate genes
were confirmed by means of quantitative PCR or ELISA.
RESULTS: PBMCs from patients with ADEH+ had distinct changes to the transcriptome
when compared with those from patients with ADEH- after HSV-1 stimulation: 792
genes were differentially expressed at a false discovery rate of less than 0.05
(ANOVA), and 15 type I and type III interferon genes were among the top 20 most
downregulated genes in patients with ADEH+. We further validated that IFN-a and
IL-29 mRNA and protein levels were significantly decreased in HSV-1-stimulated
PBMCs from patients with ADEH+ compared with those from patients with ADEH- and
healthy subjects. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis demonstrated that the upstream
regulators of type I and type III interferons, interferon regulatory factor (IRF)
3 and IRF7, were significantly inhibited in patients with ADEH+ based on the
downregulation of their target genes. Furthermore, we found that gene expression 
of IRF3 and IRF7 was significantly decreased in HSV-1-stimulated PBMCs from
patients with ADEH+.
CONCLUSIONS: PBMCs from patients with ADEH+ have a distinct immune response after
HSV-1 exposure compared with those from patients with ADEH-. Inhibition of the
IRF3 and IRF7 innate immune pathways in patients with ADEH+ might be an important
mechanism for increased susceptibility to disseminated viral infection.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4186924
PMID: 25159465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Virol. 2014 Nov;88(21):12765-76. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02037-14. Epub 2014 Aug 20.

Lysine 63-linked TANK-binding kinase 1 ubiquitination by mindbomb E3 ubiquitin
protein ligase 2 is mediated by the mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein.

Ye JS(1), Kim N(1), Lee KJ(1), Nam YR(1), Lee U(1), Joo CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Cell Dysfunction Research Center, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Microbiology, Cell Dysfunction Research Center, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea chjoo@amc.seoul.kr.

Beta interferon (IFN-ß) is involved in a wide range of cellular functions, and
its secretion must be tightly controlled to inhibit viral spreading while
minimizing cellular damage. Intracellular viral replication triggers cellular
signaling cascades leading to the activation of the transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B
and interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7 (IRF3/7), which
synergistically bind to the IFN-ß gene promoter to induce its expression. The
mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) is a governing adaptor protein
that mediates signaling communications between virus-sensing proteins and
transcription factors. The activity of MAVS in the regulation of IFN-ß secretion 
is affected by many cellular factors. However, the mechanism of MAVS-mediated
IRF3/7 activation is not completely understood. Here, we identified a highly
conserved DLAIS motif at amino acid positions 438 to 442 of MAVS that is
indispensable for IRF3/7 activation. Specifically, the L439S and A440R mutations 
suppress IRF3/7 activation. Pulldown experiments using wild-type and mutant MAVS 
showed that mindbomb E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 2 (MIB2) binds to the DLAIS
motif. Furthermore, the DLAIS motif was found to be critical for MIB2 binding,
the ligation of K63-linked ubiquitin to TANK-binding kinase 1, and
phosphorylation-mediated IRF3/7 activation. Our results suggest that MIB2 plays a
putative role in MAVS-mediated interferon signaling.IMPORTANCE: Mitochondrial
antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) mediates signaling from virus-sensing proteins
to transcription factors for the induction of beta interferon. However, the
mechanism underlying activation of MAVS-mediated interferon regulatory factors 3 
and 7 (IRF3/7) is not completely understood. We found a highly conserved DLAIS
motif in MAVS that is indispensable for IRF3/7 activation through TANK-binding
kinase 1 (TBK1) and identified it as the binding site for mindbomb E3 ubiquitin
protein ligase 2 (MIB2). The mutations that targeted the DLAIS motif abolished
MIB2 binding, attenuated the K63-linked ubiquitination of TBK1, and decreased the
phosphorylation-mediated activation of IRF3/7.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4248951
PMID: 25142606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Innate Immun. 2015;7(1):47-58. doi: 10.1159/000365113. Epub 2014 Aug 8.

A MAVS/TICAM-1-independent interferon-inducing pathway contributes to regulation 
of hepatitis B virus replication in the mouse hydrodynamic injection model.

Leong CR(1), Oshiumi H, Okamoto M, Azuma M, Takaki H, Matsumoto M, Chayama K,
Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and cytoplasmic RNA sensors have been reported to be
involved in the regulation of hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication, but remain
controversial due to the lack of a natural infectious model. Our current study
sets out to characterize aspects of the role of the innate immune system in
eliminating HBV using hydrodynamic-based injection of HBV replicative plasmid and
knockout mice deficient in specific pathways of the innate system. The evidence
indicated that viral replication was not affected by MAVS or TICAM-1 knockout,
but absence of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and IRF-7 transcription
factors, as well as the interferon (IFN) receptor, had an adverse effect on the
inhibition of HBV replication, demonstrating the dispensability of MAVS and
TICAM-1 pathways in the early innate response against HBV. Myd88(-/-) mice did
not have a significant increase in the initial viremia, but substantial viral
antigen persisted in the mice sera, a response similar to Rag2(-/-) mice,
suggesting that the MyD88-dependent pathway participated in evoking an adaptive
immune response against the clearance of intrahepatic HBV. Taken together, we
show that the RNA-sensing pathways do not participate in the regulation of HBV
replication in a mouse model; meanwhile MyD88 is implicated in the HBV clearance.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25115498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. BMC Med Genomics. 2014 Aug 9;7:49. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-49.

Global transcriptome-wide analysis of CIK cells identify distinct roles of IL-2
and IL-15 in acquisition of cytotoxic capacity against tumor.

Wang W, Meng M, Zhang Y, Wei C, Xie Y, Jiang L, Wang C, Yang F, Tang W, Jin X,
Chen D, Zong J, Hou Z(1), Li R.

Author information: 
(1)Yan'an Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical University, Kunming 650051,
Yunnan, People's Republic of China. hzl579@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Cytokine-induced killer (CIK) cells are an emerging approach of
cancer treatment. Our previous study have shown that CIK cells stimulated with
combination of IL-2 and IL-15 displayed improved proliferation capacity and tumor
cytotoxicity. However, the mechanisms of CIK cell proliferation and acquisition
of cytolytic function against tumor induced by IL-2 and IL-15 have not been well 
elucidated yet.
METHODS: CIK(IL-2) and CIK(IL-15) were generated from peripheral blood
mononuclear cells primed with IFN-<U+03B3>, and stimulated with IL-2 and IL-15 in
combination with OKT3 respectively. RNA-seq was performed to identify
differentially expressed genes, and gene ontology and pathways based analysis
were used to identify the distinct roles of IL-2 and IL-15 in CIK preparation.
RESULTS: The results indicated that CIKIL-15 showed improved cell proliferation
capacity compared to CIK(IL-2). However, CIK(IL-2) has exhibited greater tumor
cytotoxic effect than CIKIL-15. Employing deep sequencing, we sequenced mRNA
transcripts in CIK(IL-2) and CIK(IL-15). A total of 374 differentially expressed 
genes (DEGs) were identified including 175 up-regulated genes in CIK(IL-15) and
199 up-regulated genes in CIK(IL-2)). Among DEGs in CIK(IL-15), Wnt signaling and
cell adhesion were significant GO terms and pathways which related with their
functions. In CIK(IL-2, type I interferon signaling and cytokine-cytokine
receptor interaction were significant GO terms and pathways. We found that the
up-regulation of Wnt 4 and PDGFD may contribute to enhanced cell proliferation
capacity of CIK(IL-15), while inhibitory signal from interaction between CTLA4
and CD80 may be responsible for the weak proliferation capacity of CIK(IL-2).
Moreover, up-regulated expressions of CD40LG and IRF7 may make for improved tumor
cytolytic function of CIK(IL-2) through type I interferon signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Through our findings, we have preliminarily elucidated the cells
proliferation and acquisition of tumor cytotoxicity mechanism of CIK(IL-15) and
CIK(IL-2). Better understanding of these mechanisms will help to generate novel
CIK cells with greater proliferation potential and improved tumor cytolytic
function.

PMCID: PMC4134122
PMID: 25108500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 6;9(8):e103875. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103875. eCollection
2014.

IRF7 in the Australian black flying fox, Pteropus alecto: evidence for a unique
expression pattern and functional conservation.

Zhou P(1), Cowled C(1), Mansell A(2), Monaghan P(1), Green D(1), Wu L(3), Shi
Z(3), Wang LF(4), Baker ML(1).

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.
(2)Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, Monash Institute of
Medical Research-Prince Henry Institute of Medical Research, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria, Australia. (3)Center for Emerging Infectious Diseases, Wuhan
Institute of Virology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China. (4)CSIRO,
Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong, Victoria, Australia; Program in
Emerging Infectious Diseases, Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate
Medical School, Singapore.

As the only flying mammal, bats harbor a number of emerging and re-emerging
viruses, many of which cause severe diseases in humans and other mammals yet
result in no clinical symptoms in bats. As the master regulator of the interferon
(IFN)-dependent immune response, IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) plays a central
role in innate antiviral immunity. To explore the role of bat IRF7 in the
regulation of the IFN response, we performed sequence and functional analysis of 
IRF7 from the pteropid bat, Pteropus alecto. Our results demonstrate that bat
IRF7 retains the ability to bind to MyD88 and activate the IFN response despite
unique changes in the MyD88 binding domain. We also demonstrate that bat IRF7 has
a unique expression pattern across both immune and non-immune related tissues and
is inducible by double-strand RNA. The broad tissue distribution of IRF7 may
provide bats with an enhanced ability to rapidly activate the IFN response in a
wider range of tissues compared to other mammals. The importance of IRF7 in
antiviral activity against the bat reovirus, Pulau virus was confirmed by siRNA
knockdown of IRF7 in bat cells resulting in enhanced viral replication. Our
results highlight the importance of IRF7 in innate antiviral immunity in bats.

PMCID: PMC4123912
PMID: 25100081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 12;289(37):25405-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.558817. Epub
2014 Jul 27.

Phospholipase D facilitates efficient entry of influenza virus, allowing escape
from innate immune inhibition.

Oguin TH 3rd(1), Sharma S(2), Stuart AD(3), Duan S(4), Scott SA(5), Jones CK(6), 
Daniels JS(6), Lindsley CW(7), Thomas PG(8), Brown HA(9).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, Tennessee 38105-3678, Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Memphis, Memphis, Tennessee 38152. (2)Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Biochemistry, Lala Lajpat Rai University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Hisar
125004, Haryana, India. (3)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QP, United Kingdom. (4)From the Department of Immunology, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105-3678. (5)Departments of
Pharmacology and. (6)Departments of Pharmacology and Vanderbilt Center for
Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-0697. (7)Departments of Pharmacology and Vanderbilt Center for
Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-0697 Department of Chemistry and The Vanderbilt Institute of
Chemical Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, and. (8)From
the Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105-3678, Paul.Thomas@stjude.org. (9)Departments of Pharmacology and 
Department of Chemistry and The Vanderbilt Institute of Chemical Biology,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, and Biochemistry, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-6600,
alex.brown@vanderbilt.edu.

Lipid metabolism plays a fundamental role during influenza virus replication,
although key regulators of lipid-dependent trafficking and virus production
remain inadequately defined. This report demonstrates that infection by influenza
virus stimulates phospholipase D (PLD) activity and that PLD co-localizes with
influenza during infection. Both chemical inhibition and RNA interference of PLD 
delayed viral entry and reduced viral titers in vitro. Although there may be
contributions by both major isoenzymes, the effects on viral infectivity appear
to be more dependent on the PLD2 isoenzyme. In vivo, PLD2 inhibition reduced
virus titer and correlated with significant increases in transcription of innate 
antiviral effectors. The reduction in viral titer downstream of PLD2 inhibition
was dependent on Rig-I (retinoic acid-inducible gene-1), IRF3, and MxA (myxovirus
resistance gene A) but not IRF7. Inhibition of PLD2 accelerated the accumulation 
of MxA in foci as early as 30 min postinfection. Together these data suggest that
PLD facilitates the rapid endocytosis of influenza virus, permitting viral escape
from innate immune detection and effectors that are capable of limiting lethal
infection.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4162146
PMID: 25065577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Nat Commun. 2014 Jul 18;5:4447. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5447.

A micro-sterile inflammation array as an adjuvant for influenza vaccines.

Wang J(1), Shah D(1), Chen X(1), Anderson RR(2), Wu MX(2).

Author information: 
(1)Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General Hospital (MGH),
Department of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School (HMS), Boston, Massachusetts
02114, USA. (2)1] Wellman Center for Photomedicine, Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH), Department of Dermatology, Harvard Medical School (HMS), Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114, USA [2] Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and
Technology (HST), Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

There is an urgent need of adjuvants for cutaneous vaccination. Here, we report
that micro-sterile inflammation induced at inoculation sites can augment immune
responses to influenza vaccines in animal models. The inoculation site is briefly
illuminated with a handheld, non-ablative fractional laser before the vaccine is 
intradermally administered, which creates an array of self-healing microthermal
zones (MTZs) in the skin. The dying cells in the MTZs send 'danger' signals that 
attract a large number of antigen-presenting cells, in particular, plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs) around each MTZ forming a micro-sterile inflammation
array. A pivotal role for pDCs in the adjuvanticity is ascertained by significant
abrogation of the immunity after systemic depletion of pDCs, local application of
a TNF-a inhibitor or null mutation of IFN regulatory factor7 (IRF7). In contrast 
to conventional adjuvants that cause persistent inflammation and skin lesions,
micro-sterile inflammation enhances efficacy of influenza vaccines, yet with
diminished adverse effects.

PMCID: PMC4391636
PMID: 25033973  [PubMed - in process]


147. J Virol. 2014 Oct;88(19):11007-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01545-14. Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Interferon regulatory factor 5-dependent immune responses in the draining lymph
node protect against West Nile virus infection.

Thackray LB(1), Shrestha B(1), Richner JM(1), Miner JJ(1), Pinto AK(1), Lazear
HM(1), Gale M Jr(2), Diamond MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
Missouri, USA. (2)Department of Immunology, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA. (3)Department of Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA Department of Molecular
Microbiology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri,
USA Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA The Center for Human Immunology and
Immunotherapy Programs, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis,
Missouri, USA diamond@borcim.wustl.edu.

Upon activation of Toll-like and RIG-I-like receptor signaling pathways, the
transcription factor IRF5 translocates to the nucleus and induces antiviral
immune programs. The recent discovery of a homozygous mutation in the
immunoregulatory gene guanine exchange factor dedicator of cytokinesis 2
(Dock2mu/mu) in several Irf5-/- mouse colonies has complicated interpretation of 
immune functions previously ascribed to IRF5. To define the antiviral functions
of IRF5 in vivo, we infected backcrossed Irf5-/-×Dock2wt/wt mice (here called
Irf5-/- mice) and independently generated CMV-Cre Irf5fl/fl mice with West Nile
virus (WNV), a pathogenic neurotropic flavivirus. Compared to congenic wild-type 
animals, Irf5-/- and CMV-Cre Irf5fl/fl mice were more vulnerable to WNV
infection, and this phenotype was associated with increased infection in
peripheral organs, which resulted in higher virus titers in the central nervous
system. The loss of IRF5, however, was associated with only small differences in 
the type I interferon response systemically and in the draining lymph node during
WNV infection. Instead, lower levels of several other proinflammatory cytokines
and chemokines, as well as fewer and less activated immune cells, were detected
in the draining lymph node 2 days after WNV infection. WNV-specific antibody
responses in Irf5-/- mice also were blunted in the context of live or inactivated
virus infection and this was associated with fewer antigen-specific memory B
cells and long-lived plasma cells. Our results with Irf5-/- mice establish a key 
role for IRF5 in shaping the early innate immune response in the draining lymph
node, which impacts the spread of virus infection, optimal B cell immunity, and
disease pathogenesis.IMPORTANCE: Although the roles of IRF3 and IRF7 in
orchestrating innate and adaptive immunity after viral infection are established,
the function of the related transcription factor IRF5 remains less certain. Prior
studies in Irf5-/- mice reported conflicting results as to the contribution of
IRF5 in regulating type I interferon and adaptive immune responses. The lack of
clarity may stem from a recently discovered homozygous loss-of-function mutation 
of the immunoregulatory gene Dock2 in several colonies of Irf5-/- mice. Here,
using a mouse model with a deficiency in IRF5 and wild-type Dock2 alleles, we
investigated how IRF5 modulates West Nile virus (WNV) pathogenesis and host
immune responses. Our in vivo studies indicate that IRF5 has a key role in
shaping the early proinflammatory cytokine response in the draining lymph node,
which impacts immunity and control of WNV infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178807
PMID: 25031348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Virol. 2014 Oct;88(19):11140-53. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00372-14. Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Expression of porcine fusion protein IRF7/3(5D) efficiently controls
foot-and-mouth disease virus replication.

Ramírez-Carvajal L(1), Díaz-San Segundo F(2), Hickman D(2), Long CR(3), Zhu J(2),
Rodríguez LL(2), de los Santos T(4).

Author information: 
(1)ORISE-Plum Island Animal Disease Center Research Participation Program, Oak
Ridge, Tennessee, USA College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA. (2)Plum Island Animal Disease 
Center, ARS, USDA, Greenport, New York, USA. (3)College of Veterinary Medicine
and Biomedical Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA.
(4)Plum Island Animal Disease Center, ARS, USDA, Greenport, New York, USA
teresa.delossantos@ars.usda.gov.

Several studies have demonstrated that the delivery of type I, II, or III
interferons (IFNs) by inoculation of a replication-defective human adenovirus 5
(Ad5) vector expressing IFNs can effectively control foot-and-mouth disease (FMD)
in cattle and swine during experimental infections. However, relatively high
doses are required to achieve protection. In this study, we identified the
functional properties of a porcine fusion protein, poIRF7/3(5D), as a
biotherapeutic and enhancer of IFN activity against FMD virus (FMDV). We showed
that poIRF7/3(5D) is a potent inducer of type I IFNs, including alpha IFN
(IFN-a), IFN-ß, and IFN-<U+03C9> but not type III IFN (interleukin-28B), without
inducing cytotoxicity. Expression of poIRF7/3(5D) significantly and steadily
reduced FMDV titers by up to 6 log10 units in swine and bovine cell lines.
Treatment with an IFN receptor inhibitor (B18R) combined with an anti-IFN-a
antibody neutralized the antiviral activity in the supernatants of cells
transduced with an Ad5 vector expressing poIRF7/3(5D) [Ad5-poIRF7/3(5D)].
However, several transcripts with known antiviral function, including type I
IFNs, were still highly upregulated (range of increase, 8-fold to over 500-fold) 
by poIRF7/3(5D) in the presence of B18R. Furthermore, the sera of mice treated
with Ad5-poIRF7/3(5D) showed antiviral activity that was associated with the
induction of high levels of IFN-a and resulted in complete protection against
FMDV challenge at 6, 24, or 48 h posttreatment. This study highlights for the
first time the antiviral potential of Ad5-poIRF7/3(5D) in vitro and in vivo
against FMDV.IMPORTANCE: FMD remains one of the most devastating diseases that
affect livestock worldwide. Effective vaccine formulations are available but are 
serotype specific and require approximately 7 days before they are able to elicit
protective immunity. We have shown that vector-delivered IFN is an option to
protect animals against many FMDV serotypes as soon as 24 h and for about 4 days 
postadministration. Here we demonstrate that delivery of a constitutively active 
transcription factor that induces the production of endogenous IFNs and
potentially other antiviral genes is a viable strategy to protect against FMD.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4178809
PMID: 25031341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2014 Aug;7(4):444-54. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.114.000505. Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Bioinformatics multivariate analysis determined a set of phase-specific biomarker
candidates in a novel mouse model for viral myocarditis.

Omura S(1), Kawai E(1), Sato F(1), Martinez NE(1), Chaitanya GV(1), Rollyson
PA(1), Cvek U(1), Trutschl M(1), Alexander JS(1), Tsunoda I(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Microbiology and Immunology (S.O., E.K., F.S., N.E.M.,
I.T.) and Molecular and Cellular Physiology (G.V.C., J.S.A.), Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center, Shreveport; and Department of Computer
Science, Louisiana State University Shreveport (P.A.R., U.C., M.T.). (2)From the 
Departments of Microbiology and Immunology (S.O., E.K., F.S., N.E.M., I.T.) and
Molecular and Cellular Physiology (G.V.C., J.S.A.), Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, Shreveport; and Department of Computer Science, Louisiana
State University Shreveport (P.A.R., U.C., M.T.). itsuno@lsuhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Myocarditis is an inflammatory disease of the cardiac muscle and is
mainly caused by viral infections. Viral myocarditis has been proposed to be
divided into 3 phases: the acute viral phase, the subacute immune phase, and the 
chronic cardiac remodeling phase. Although individualized therapy should be
applied depending on the phase, no clinical or experimental studies have found
biomarkers that distinguish between the 3 phases. Theiler's murine
encephalomyelitis virus belongs to the genus Cardiovirus and can cause
myocarditis in susceptible mouse strains.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using this novel model for viral myocarditis induced with
Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus, we conducted multivariate analysis
including echocardiography, serum troponin and viral RNA titration, and
microarray to identify the biomarker candidates that can discriminate the 3
phases. Using C3H mice infected with Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus on 
4, 7, and 60 days post infection, we conducted bioinformatics analyses, including
principal component analysis and k-means clustering of microarray data, because
our traditional cardiac and serum assays, including 2-way comparison of
microarray data, did not lead to the identification of a single biomarker.
Principal component analysis separated heart samples clearly between the groups
of 4, 7, and 60 days post infection. Representative genes contributing to the
separation were as follows: 4 and 7 days post infection, innate immunity-related 
genes, such as Irf7 and Cxcl9; 7 and 60 days post infection, acquired
immunity-related genes, such as Cd3g and H2-Aa; and cardiac remodeling-related
genes, such as Mmp12 and Gpnmb.
CONCLUSIONS: Sets of molecules, not single molecules, identified by unsupervised 
principal component analysis, were found to be useful as phase-specific
biomarkers.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4332820
PMID: 25031303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Int Immunopharmacol. 2014 Sep;22(1):266-72. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2014.07.001.
Epub 2014 Jul 12.

Dihydroartemisinin inhibits activation of the Toll-like receptor 4 signaling
pathway and production of type I interferon in spleen cells from lupus-prone
MRL/lpr mice.

Huang X(1), Xie Z(1), Liu F(1), Han C(1), Zhang D(1), Wang D(1), Bao X(1), Sun
J(2), Wen C(3), Fan Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)College of Basic Medical Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310053, PR China. (2)Xinhua Hospital, Second Affiliated
Hospital Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310005, PR
China. (3)College of Basic Medical Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University, 
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310053, PR China. Electronic address: wenchengping@126.com.
(4)College of Basic Medical Science, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310053, PR China. Electronic address: fyszjtcm@163.com.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a multisystem autoimmune disease
characterized by various immunological abnormalities. Dihydroartemisinin (DHA), a
metabolite of artemisinin, has been recently reported to exhibit
immunosuppressive properties. The present study aims to determine the effects of 
DHA on spleen cell activation triggered by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
investigate the effects of DHA on LPS-induced activation of the Toll-like
receptor 4 (TLR4)/interferon regulatory factor (IRF) signaling pathway. Spleen
cells from lupus-prone MRL/lpr mice were isolated, prepared and cultured. Cells
were treated with LPS alone or LPS with DHA, and spleen cell proliferation was
analyzed using MTS assay. Protein expressions of TLR4, IRF3, and IRF7 were
analyzed by Western blot. IRF3 phosphorylation was also determined. Gene
expression levels of IFN-a and IFN-ß were measured using real-time PCR, and
protein levels in cells' supernatants were determined by ELISA. DHA was found to 
inhibit LPS-induced spleen cell proliferation, decrease LPS-induced protein
expression of TLR4, and inhibit IRF3 phosphorylation. Furthermore, LPS
significantly induced IRF3 expression and slightly increased IRF7 expression in
the nucleus of spleen cells, which was accompanied by enhanced IFN-a and IFN-ß
production. DHA inhibited the effects of LPS in spleen cells of MRL/lpr mice.
Taken together, the data obtained reveal that DHA inhibits LPS-induced cell
activation possibly by suppressing the TLR4/IRF/IFN pathway in spleen cells of
MRL/lpr mice. These data suggest that DHA has the potential therapeutic utility
for the treatment of SLE.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25027631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Immunol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;92(9):761-9. doi: 10.1038/icb.2014.51. Epub 2014 Jul 
15.

STAT1 plays a role in TLR signal transduction and inflammatory responses.

Luu K(1), Greenhill CJ(1), Majoros A(2), Decker T(2), Jenkins BJ(1), Mansell
A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Innate Immunity and Infectious Diseases, MIMR-PHI Institute of
Medical Research, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. (2)Max F.
Perutz Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and Immunobiology,
University of Vienna, Dr Bohr-Gasse 9/4, Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Immunol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;92(9):737-8.

Activation of the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family of innate immune sensors
stimulates multiple signal transduction pathways. Previous studies have suggested
that TLR2, TLR4 and TLR9 induce serine phosphorylation of Signal Transducers and 
Activators of Transcription-1 (STAT1) at residue 727 (S727), although its role in
TLR signaling was unclear. We report here that STAT1 rapidly undergoes
phosphorylation following TLR4 challenge with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in a model
of LPS hypersensitivity in vivo. Importantly, genetic ablation of STAT1 protected
against LPS-induced lethality suggesting that STAT1 may have a key role in
TLR-induced inflammation. We have found that multiple TLRs induce Ser727
phosphorylation of STAT1, which is dependent on MyD88 and TRIF signaling, but
independent of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF)-3, IRF7 and the IFN
receptor complex, suggesting that activation is a direct TLR response rather than
autocrine activation via IFN. Importantly, we found that STAT1 interacts with
tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor-6 (TRAF6), a key mediator 
of TLR signaling after TLR challenge and that following activation, STAT1
translocates to the nucleus. Critically, macrophages generated from mice in which
the S727 residue was replaced with alanine (STAT1 S727A mice) display
significantly reduced TNFa protein production, but not reduced interleukin-6 or
RANTES protein in response to multiple TLR challenges, as compared with wild-type
macrophages. These results clearly demonstrate cross-talk between the TLR and
JAK/STAT signaling pathways with direct recruitment of STAT1 by TRAF6 and that
the direct activation of STAT1 by TLR signaling suggests a crucial role for STAT1
in TLR-induced inflammation.

PMID: 25027037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Antiviral Res. 2014 Sep;109:116-24. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2014.06.020. Epub
2014 Jul 9.

Analysis of the transcriptome and immune function of monocytes during IFNa-based 
therapy in chronic HCV revealed induction of TLR7 responsiveness.

Hou J(1), Groothuismink ZM(1), Koning L(1), Roomer R(1), van IJcken WF(2),
Kreefft K(1), Liu BS(1), Janssen HL(3), de Knegt RJ(1), Boonstra A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC, University Medical 
Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Center for Biomics, Erasmus MC, University 
Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Gastroenterology and 
Hepatology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
Liver Clinic University Health Network, Division of Gastroenterology, University 
of Toronto, Canada. (4)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC,
University Medical Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
p.a.boonstra@erasmusmc.nl.

Although in vitro studies have been performed to dissect the mechanism of action 
of IFNa, detailed in vivo studies on the long-term effects of IFNa on monocytes
have not been performed. Here we examined peripheral blood from 14 chronic HCV
patients at baseline and 12 weeks after start of IFNa-based therapy. Monocytes
were phenotyped by flow-cytometry and their function evaluated upon TLR
stimulation and assessed by multiplex cytokine assays. During therapy of HCV
patients, monocytes displayed a hyperactive state as evidenced by increased
TLR-induced pro-inflammatory cytokine levels, as well as enhanced CD69 and CD83
mRNA and protein expression. Moreover, monocytes from 8 patients at baseline and 
12 weeks after start of IFNa-based therapy were transcriptomically profiled by
high throughput RNA-sequencing. Detailed RNA-seq analysis of monocytes showed
significant ISG mRNA induction during therapy. Importantly, IFNa-based therapy
activated TLR7 signaling pathways, as demonstrated by up-regulated expression of 
TLR7, MyD88, and IRF7 mRNA, whereas other TLR family members as well as CD1c,
CLEC4C, and CLEC9A were not induced. The induction of TLR7 responsiveness of
monocytes by IFNa in vivo in HCV patients is relevant for the development of TLR7
agonists that are currently under development as a promising immunotherapeutic
compounds to treat chronic viral hepatitis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25014880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 10;9(7):e101835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0101835.
eCollection 2014.

System vaccinology for the evaluation of influenza vaccine safety by multiplex
gene detection of novel biomarkers in a preclinical study and batch release test.

Mizukami T(1), Momose H(1), Kuramitsu M(1), Takizawa K(1), Araki K(1), Furuhata
K(1), Ishii KJ(2), Hamaguchi I(1), Yamaguchi K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Blood and Vaccine safety, Department of Safety Research on Blood
and Biologicals, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Adjuvant Innovation, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation
(NIBIO), Osaka, Japan; Laboratory of Vaccine Science, WPI Immunology Frontier
Research Center (WPI-IFREC), Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Vaccines are beneficial and universal tools to prevent infectious disease. Thus, 
safety of vaccines is strictly evaluated in the preclinical phase of trials and
every vaccine batch must be tested by the National Control Laboratories according
to the guidelines published by each country. Despite many vaccine production
platforms and methods, animal testing for safety evaluation is unchanged thus
far. We recently developed a systems biological approach to vaccine safety
evaluation where identification of specific biomarkers in a rat pre-clinical
study evaluated the safety of vaccines for pandemic H5N1 influenza including
Irf7, Lgals9, Lgalsbp3, Cxcl11, Timp1, Tap2, Psmb9, Psme1, Tapbp, C2, Csf1, Mx2, 
Zbp1, Ifrd1, Trafd1, Cxcl9, ß2m, Npc1, Ngfr and Ifi47. The current study
evaluated whether these 20 biomarkers could evaluate the safety, batch-to-batch
and manufacturer-to-manufacturer consistency of seasonal trivalent influenza
vaccine using a multiplex gene detection system. When we evaluated the influenza 
HA vaccine (HAv) from four different manufactures, the biomarker analysis
correlated to findings from conventional animal use tests, such as abnormal
toxicity test. In addition, sensitivity of toxicity detection and differences in 
HAvs were higher and more accurate than with conventional methods. Despite a
slight decrease in body weight caused by HAv from manufacturer B that was not
statistically significant, our results suggest that HAv from manufacturer B is
significantly different than the other HAvs tested with regard to Lgals3bp,
Tapbp, Lgals9, Irf7 and C2 gene expression in rat lungs. Using the biomarkers
confirmed in this study, we predicted batch-to-batch consistency and safety of
influenza vaccines within 2 days compared with the conventional safety test,
which takes longer. These biomarkers will facilitate the future development of
new influenza vaccines and provide an opportunity to develop in vitro methods of 
evaluating batch-to-batch consistency and vaccine safety as an alternative to
animal testing.

PMCID: PMC4092028
PMID: 25010690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014 Oct;97(2):234-40. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2014.07.001. Epub
2014 Jul 2.

TLR3/4 signaling is mediated via the NF<U+03BA>B-CXCR4/7 pathway in human alcoholic
hepatitis and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis which formed Mallory-Denk bodies.

Liu H(1), Li J(1), Tillman B(1), Morgan TR(2), French BA(1), French SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)LA BioMed at Harbor UCLA Medical Center, Department of Pathology, Torrance, CA
90509, USA. (2)VA Medical Center, Department of Medicine, Long Beach, CA, USA.
(3)LA BioMed at Harbor UCLA Medical Center, Department of Pathology, Torrance, CA
90509, USA. Electronic address: sfrench@labiomed.org.

Activation of Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling which stimulates inflammatory
and proliferative pathways is the key element in the pathogenesis of Mallory-Denk
bodies (MDBs) in mice fed DDC. However, little is known as to how TLR signaling
is regulated in MDB formation during chronic liver disease development. The first
systematic study of TLR signaling pathway transcript regulation in human archived
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) liver biopsies with MDB formation is
presented here. When compared to the activation of Toll-like signaling in
alcoholic hepatitis (AH) and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) patients,
striking similarities and obvious differences were observed. Similar TLRs (TLR3
and TLR4, etc.), TLR downstream adaptors (MyD88 and TRIF, etc.) and transcript
factors (NF<U+03BA>B and IRF7, etc.) were all upregulated in the patients' livers.
MyD88, TLR3 and TLR4 were significantly induced in the livers of AH and NASH
compared to normal subjects, while TRIF and IRF7 mRNA were only slightly
upregulated in AH patients. This is a different pathway from the induction of the
TLR4-MyD88-independent pathway in the AH and NASH patients with MDBs present.
Importantly, chemokine receptor 4 and 7 (CXCR4/7) mRNAs were found to be induced 
in the patients livers in FAT10 positive hepatocytes. The CXCR7 pathway was
significantly upregulated in patients with AH and the CXCR4 was markedly
upregulated in patients with NASH, indicating that CXCR4/7 is crucial in liver
MDB formation. This data constitutes the first demonstration of the upregulation 
of the MyD88-dependent TLR4/NF<U+03BA>B pathway in AH and NASH where MDBs formed, via
the NF<U+03BA>B-CXCR4/7 pathway, and provides further insight into the mechanism of MDB 
formation in human liver diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4177360
PMID: 24997224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 18;9(6):e100169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100169.
eCollection 2014.

GADD45a promoter regulation by a functional genetic variant associated with acute
lung injury.

Mitra S(1), Wade MS(1), Sun X(1), Moldobaeva N(1), Flores C(2), Ma SF(3), Zhang
W(4), Garcia JG(5), Jacobson JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and Allergy, Department of
Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of 
America. (2)Centro de Investigacion Biomedica en red Enfermedades Respiratorias, 
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain; Research Unit, Hospital
Universitario Nuestra Senora de Candelaria, Tenerife, Spain. (3)Division of
Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
United States of America. (4)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care, Sleep and
Allergy, Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America; Department of Pediatrics, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America. (5)Arizona
Health Sciences Center, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona, United States of 
America.

RATIONALE: Growth arrest DNA damage inducible alpha (GADD45a) is a stress-induced
gene we have shown to participate in the pathophysiology of ventilator-induced
lung injury (VILI) via regulation of mechanical stress-induced Akt ubiquitination
and phosphorylation. The regulation of GADD45a expression by mechanical stress
and its relationship with acute lung injury (ALI) susceptibility and severity,
however, remains unknown.
OBJECTIVES: We examined mechanical stress-dependent regulatory elements (MSRE) in
the GADD45a promoter and the contribution of promoter polymorphisms in GADD45a
expression and ALI susceptibility.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Initial studies in GADD45a knockout and heterozygous mice
confirmed the relationship of GADD45a gene dose to VILI severity. Human lung
endothelial cells (EC) transfected with a luciferase vector containing the full
length GADD45a promoter sequence (-771 to +223) demonstrated a >4 fold increase
in GADD45a expression in response to 18% cyclic stretch (CS, 4 h) compared to
static controls while specific promoter regions harboring CS-dependent MSRE were 
identified using vectors containing serial deletion constructs of the GADD45a
promoter. In silico analyses of GADD45a promoter region (-371 to -133) revealed a
potential binding site for specificity protein 1 (SP1), a finding supported by
confirmed SP1 binding with the GADD45a promoter and by the significant
attenuation of CS-dependent GADD45a promoter activity in response to SP1
silencing. Separately, case-control association studies revealed a significant
association of a GADD45a promoter SNP at -589 (rs581000, G>C) with reduced ALI
susceptibility. Subsequently, we found allelic variation of this SNP is
associated with both differential GADD45a expression in mechanically stressed EC 
(18% CS, 4 h) and differential binding site of interferon regulatory factor 7
(IRF7) at this site.
CONCLUSION: These results strongly support a functional role for GADD45a in
ALI/VILI and identify a specific gene variant that confers risk for ALI.

PMCID: PMC4062486
PMID: 24940746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Immunity. 2014 Jun 19;40(6):936-48. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.05.007. Epub 2014 
Jun 12.

Antiviral activity of human OASL protein is mediated by enhancing signaling of
the RIG-I RNA sensor.

Zhu J(1), Zhang Y(1), Ghosh A(1), Cuevas RA(1), Forero A(1), Dhar J(2), Ibsen
MS(3), Schmid-Burgk JL(4), Schmidt T(4), Ganapathiraju MK(5), Fujita T(6),
Hartmann R(3), Barik S(2), Hornung V(4), Coyne CB(1), Sarkar SN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Virology Program, University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University
of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (2)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease,
and Department of Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences,
Cleveland State University, Cleveland, OH 44115, USA. (3)Department of Molecular 
Biology, Aarhus University, Aarhus 8000, Denmark. (4)Institute for Clinical
Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University of Bonn, Bonn 53127, Germany.
(5)Department of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh School of
Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. (6)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (7)Cancer Virology Program, University of
Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA; Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.
Electronic address: saumen@pitt.edu.

Virus infection is sensed in the cytoplasm by retinoic acid-inducible gene I
(RIG-I, also known as DDX58), which requires RNA and polyubiquitin binding to
induce type I interferon (IFN) and activate cellular innate immunity. We show
that the human IFN-inducible oligoadenylate synthetases-like (OASL) protein has
antiviral activity and mediates RIG-I activation by mimicking polyubiquitin. Loss
of OASL expression reduced RIG-I signaling and enhanced virus replication in
human cells. Conversely, OASL expression suppressed replication of a number of
viruses in a RIG-I-dependent manner and enhanced RIG-I-mediated IFN induction.
OASL interacted and colocalized with RIG-I, and through its C-terminal
ubiquitin-like domain specifically enhanced RIG-I signaling. Bone-marrow-derived 
macrophages from mice deficient for Oasl2 showed that among the two mouse
orthologs of human OASL, Oasl2 is functionally similar to human OASL. Our
findings show a mechanism by which human OASL contributes to host antiviral
responses by enhancing RIG-I activation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4101812
PMID: 24931123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Clin Immunol. 2014 Aug;153(2):343-52. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2014.06.001. Epub 2014 
Jun 10.

IRF5-mediated signaling and implications for SLE.

Lazzari E(1), Jefferies CA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Research Institute, Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. Electronic
address: elisalazzari@rcsi.ie. (2)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics, Research
Institute, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin
2, Ireland. Electronic address: cjefferies@rcsi.ie.

Transcription of the type I IFN genes is regulated by members of the Interferon
Regulatory Factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, composed in humans of 9 
distinct proteins. In addition to IRF3 and IRF7, the transcription factor IRF5
has been shown to be involved in type I IFN production and interestingly,
polymorphisms of the IRF5 gene in humans can result in risk or protective
haplotypes with regard to SLE susceptibility. In addition to regulation of type I
IFN expression, IRF5 is involved in other signaling pathways, including IgG
switching in B cells, macrophage polarization and apoptosis, and its role in SLE 
pathogenesis may therefore not be limited to dysregulated control of IFN
expression. In this review we will comprehensively discuss the role of IRF5 in
immune-mediated responses and its potential multifaceted role in conferring SLE
susceptibility.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24928322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Virol J. 2014 Jun 5;11:105. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-11-105.

Type-I interferon response affects an inoculation dose-independent mortality in
mice following Japanese encephalitis virus infection.

Aoki K, Shimada S, Simantini DS, Tun MM, Buerano CC, Morita K, Hayasaka D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, Institute of Tropical Medicine, GCOE program, Leading 
Graduate School Program, Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523,
Japan. hayasaka@nagasaki-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The laboratory mouse model is commonly employed to study the
pathogenesis of encephalitic flaviviruses such as Japanese encephalitis virus
(JEV). However, it is known that some strains of these viruses do not elicit a
typical mortality dose response curve from this organism after peripheral
infection and the reason for it has not yet been fully understood. It is
suggested that induction of more vigorous Type-I IFN (IFN-I) response might
control early virus dissemination following increasing infectious challenge doses
of the virus. Thus, the objective of this study was to examine this suggested
role of IFN-I in the mortality of mice infected with various doses of JEV.
METHODS: Inbred 129 mice and their IFNAR KO (A129) mice were subcutaneously
inoculated with 100, 102, 104 or 106 pfu of JaOArS982 strain of JEV. Mice were
weighed daily and observed for clinical signs. Virus titers in the brains and
spleens of JEV-infected mice were determined by plaque forming assays. The
upregulated mRNA levels of genes related to IFN-I response of mice were examined 
by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: The mortality rates of 129 mice infected with JaOArS982 did not
significantly increase despite the increase in inoculation dose and no
significant difference of viral loads was observed between their brains. However,
there was clear elevation of the mRNA levels of interferon regulatory factor
(IRF)3, IRF7, IRF9, MDA5 and RIG-I at 24 hours post-infection depending on the
inoculation dose. In A129 mice, length of survival days and the viral loads of
spleen and brain were observed to be inoculation dose-dependent.
CONCLUSIONS: From these results, it is suggested that early IFN-I response
elicited by high inoculation doses of JEV provides an anti-viral effect during
the early phase of infection. Accordingly, virus replication is counteracted by
IFN-I response at each increasing inoculation dose resulting in the interference 
of impending severe disease course or fatal outcome; hence, this might explain
the inoculation dose-independent mortality in mice caused by Japanese
encephalitis virus.

PMCID: PMC4074870
PMID: 24903089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2014 Jun 5;8(6):e2933. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0002933.
eCollection 2014.

Potent inhibition of Junín virus infection by interferon in murine cells.

Huang C(1), Walker AG(1), Grant AM(1), Kolokoltsova OA(1), Yun NE(1), Seregin
AV(1), Paessler S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Institute for Human Infections and Immunity,
University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas, United States of America.

The new world arenavirus Junín virus (JUNV) is the causative agent of Argentine
hemorrhagic fever, a lethal human infectious disease. Adult laboratory mice are
generally resistant to peripheral infection by JUNV. The mechanism underlying the
mouse resistance to JUNV infection is largely unknown. We have reported that
interferon receptor knockout mice succumb to JUNV infection, indicating the
critical role of interferon in restricting JUNV infection in mice. Here we report
that the pathogenic and vaccine strains of JUNV were highly sensitive to
interferon in murine primary cells. Treatment with low concentrations of
interferon abrogated viral NP protein expression in murine cells. The replication
of both JUNVs was enhanced in IRF3/IRF7 deficient cells. In addition, the vaccine
strain of JUNV displayed impaired growth in primary murine cells. Our data
suggested a direct and potent role of host interferon response in restricting
JUNV replication in mice. The defect in viral growth for vaccine JUNV might also 
partially explain its attenuation in mice.

PMCID: PMC4046933
PMID: 24901990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mar Genomics. 2014 Dec;18 Pt A:3-20. doi: 10.1016/j.margen.2014.05.004. Epub 2014
May 28.

Variation in embryonic mortality and maternal transcript expression among
Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) broodstock: a functional genomics study.

Rise ML(1), Nash GW(2), Hall JR(3), Booman M(2), Hori TS(2), Trippel EA(4),
Gamperl AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ocean Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's,
NL, A1C 5S7, Canada. Electronic address: mrise@mun.ca. (2)Department of Ocean
Sciences, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada.
(3)Aquatic Research Cluster, CREAIT Network, Ocean Sciences Centre, Memorial
University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, A1C 5S7, Canada. (4)Fisheries and
Oceans Canada, St. Andrews Biological Station, St. Andrews, NB, E5B 2L9, Canada.

Early life stage mortality is an important issue for Atlantic cod aquaculture,
yet the impact of the cod maternal (egg) transcriptome on egg quality and
mortality during embryonic development is poorly understood. In the present work,
we studied embryonic mortality and maternal transcript expression using eggs from
15 females. Total mortality at 7days post-fertilization (7 dpf, segmentation
stage) was used as an indice of egg quality. A 20,000 probe (20K) microarray
experiment compared the 7hours post-fertilization (7 hpf, ~2-cell stage) egg
transcriptome of the two lowest quality females (>90% mortality at 7 dpf) to that
of the highest quality female (~16% mortality at 7 dpf). Forty-three microarray
probes were consistently differentially expressed in both low versus high quality
egg comparisons (25 higher expressed in low quality eggs, and 18 higher expressed
in high quality eggs). The microarray experiment also identified many
immune-relevant genes [e.g. interferon (IFN) pathway genes ifngr1 and ifrd1)]
that were highly expressed in eggs of all 3 females regardless of quality. Twelve
of the 43 candidate egg quality-associated genes, and ifngr1, ifrd1 and irf7,
were included in a qPCR study with 7 hpf eggs from all 15 females. Then, the
genes that were confirmed by qPCR to be greater than 2-fold differentially
expressed between 7 hpf eggs from the lowest and highest quality females (dcbld1,
ddc, and acy3 more highly expressed in the 2 lowest quality females; kpna7 and
hacd1 more highly expressed in the highest quality female), and the 3 IFN pathway
genes, were included in a second qPCR study with unfertilized eggs. While some
maternal transcripts included in these qPCR studies were associated with extremes
in egg quality, there was little correlation between egg quality and gene
expression when all females were considered. Both dcbld1 and ddc showed greater
than 100-fold differences in transcript expression between females and were
potentially influenced by family. The Atlantic cod ddc (dopa decarboxylase)
complete cDNA was characterized, and has a 1461bp open reading frame encoding a
486 amino acid protein that contains all eight residues of the conserved
pyridoxal 5'-phosphate binding site including the catalytic lysine. This study
provides valuable new information and resources related to the Atlantic cod egg
transcriptome. Some of these microarray-identified, qPCR-confirmed, Atlantic cod 
egg transcripts (e.g. ddc, kpna7) play important roles during embryonic
development of other vertebrate species, and may have similar functions in
Atlantic cod.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 24878168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Glia. 2014 Sep;62(9):1452-62. doi: 10.1002/glia.22692. Epub 2014 May 14.

Type-I interferons suppress microglial production of the lymphoid chemokine,
CXCL13.

Esen N(1), Rainey-Barger EK, Huber AK, Blakely PK, Irani DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.

Lymphoid chemokines are crucial for the development and maintenance of lymphoid
organs, but their ectopic expression in non-lymphoid tissues is implicated in
both local response to infection and chronic organ-specific autoimmunity.
Production of one such chemokine, C-X-C motif ligand 13 (CXCL13), within the
central nervous system (CNS) has been linked to the pathogenesis of multiple
sclerosis (MS), although little is known about factors controlling its expression
in different neural cell types and across a range of disease states. We provoked 
acute neuroinflammation in experimental animals without causing any associated
demyelination using neuroadapted Sindbis virus (NSV) to better understand the
sources and regulators of this chemokine in the CNS. We found that mice
genetically deficient in the transcription factor, interferon (IFN) regulatory
factor-7 (IRF7), made significantly higher CXCL13 protein levels in the CNS
compared with wild-type (WT) controls. Microglia proved to be the main producer
of CXCL13 in the brain during infection of both WT and IRF7(-/-) mice, and
primary microglia cultured in vitro generated CXCL13 following stimulation with
either virus particles or synthetic Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands. Microglia
cultured from IRF7(-/-) mice selectively overproduced CXCL13, and manipulation of
extracellular type-I IFN levels demonstrated the existence of a negative feedback
loop whereby type-I IFN receptor signaling specifically suppressed microglial
CXCL13 release. Since IFN-ß is used to treat patients with relapsing-remitting MS
and yet acts through unknown mechanisms, we speculate that suppressed lymphoid
chemokine production by microglia could contribute to its therapeutic effects.

© 2014 The Authors. Glia Published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4143141
PMID: 24829092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Immunol. 2014 Jun 15;192(12):5863-72. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203230. Epub 2014 
May 7.

Human dendritic cells exhibit a pronounced type I IFN signature following
Leishmania major infection that is required for IL-12 induction.

Favila MA(1), Geraci NS(1), Zeng E(2), Harker B(2), Condon D(1), Cotton RN(1),
Jayakumar A(1), Tripathi V(1), McDowell MA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University
of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556; and. (2)Genomics and Bioinformatics Core
Facility, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556. (3)Department of
Biological Sciences, Eck Institute for Global Health, University of Notre Dame,
Notre Dame, IN 46556; and mcdowell.11@nd.edu.

Leishmania major-infected human dendritic cells (DCs) exhibit a marked induction 
of IL-12, ultimately promoting a robust Th1-mediated response associated with
parasite killing and protective immunity. The host cell transcription machinery
associated with the specific IL-12 induction observed during L. major infection
remains to be thoroughly elucidated. In this study, we used Affymetrix GeneChip
(Affymetrix) to globally assess the host cell genes and pathways associated with 
early L. major infection in human myeloid-derived DCs. Our data revealed 728
genes were significantly differentially expressed and molecular signaling pathway
revealed that the type I IFN pathway was significantly enriched. Addition of a
neutralizing type I IFN decoy receptor blocked the expression of IRF7 and
IL-12p40 during DC infection, indicating the L. major-induced expression of
IL-12p40 is dependent upon the type I IFN signaling pathway. In stark contrast,
IL-12p40 expression is not elicited by L. donovani, the etiological agent of
deadly visceral leishmaniasis. Therefore, we examined the gene expression profile
for several IFN response genes in L. major versus L. donovani DC infections. Our 
data revealed that L. major, but not L. donovani, induces expression of IRF2,
IRF7, and IFIT5, implicating the regulation of type I IFN-associated signaling
pathways as mediating factors toward the production of IL-12.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4052223
PMID: 24808365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Jul;44(7):2153-64. doi: 10.1002/eji.201344310. Epub 2014 May 
22.

Serum amyloid A induces interleukin-33 expression through an IRF7-dependent
pathway.

Sun L(1), Zhu Z, Cheng N, Yan Q, Ye RD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

Interleukin-33 (IL-33), an IL-1 family cytokine and nuclear alarmin, is
constitutively expressed in epithelial barrier tissues and human blood vessels.
However, little is known about the induced expression of IL-33 in monocytes and
macrophages, which are major cytokine-producing cells of the innate immune
system. Here, we report the induction of IL33 expression in both human monocytes 
and mouse macrophages from C57BL/6 mice by the acute-phase protein serum amyloid 
A (SAA). SAA-induced transcriptional activation of the Il33 gene, resulting in
nuclear accumulation of the IL-33 protein. TLR2, one of the SAA receptors, was
primarily responsible for the induction of IL-33. Progressive deletion of the
human IL-33 promoter led to the identification of two potential binding sites for
interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), one of which (-277/-257) was found to be
important for SAA-stimulated IL-33 promoter activity. IRF7 was recruited to the
IL-33 promoter upon SAA stimulation, and silencing IRF7 expression in THP-1 cells
abrogated SAA-induced Il33 expression. SAA also promoted an interaction between
TNF receptor-associated factor 6 and IRF7. Taken together, these results identify
IRF7 as a critical transcription factor for SAA-induced Il33 expression in
monocytes and macrophages.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4118754
PMID: 24777946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Fish Biol. 2014 May;84(5):1551-61. doi: 10.1111/jfb.12386.

Establishment and characterization of a head kidney cell line from large yellow
croaker Pseudosciaena crocea.

Wang XH(1), Wang KR, Nie P, Chen XH, Ao JQ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Biogenetic Resources, Third Institute of
Oceanography, State Oceanic Administration, Xiamen 361005, China; Fisheries
College, Jimei University, Xiamen, 361005, China.

A continuous cell line, LYCK, derived from the head kidney of large yellow
croaker Pseudosciaena crocea was established and characterized. The LYCK cell
line multiplied well in Leibovitz's-15 (L-15) medium supplemented with 10% foetal
bovine serum (FBS) at 28° C. This cell line, with a population doubling time of
29·5<U+2009>h at passage 35, has been subcultured for<U+2009>>70 passages. Microscopically,
LYCK cells were fibroblast-like. Chromosomal analysis revealed that the modal
diploid chromosome number of LYCK cells was 48, which was identical to that of
the P. crocea kidney. The cellular fluorescence could be observed in LYCK cells
at 48<U+2009>h after being transfected with pEGFP-N1 plasmid DNA, indicating that LYCK
cells were competent for target gene expression in vitro. The expression of mRNA 
transcripts of the antiviral immune-related molecules interferon regulatory
factor-3 I(ir3), interferon regulatory factor-7 (irf7), melanoma
differentiation-associated protein 5 (mda5) was obviously up-regulated in LYCK
cells in response to the stimulation with poly (I:C), whereas the expression of
mRNA transcripts of the inflammatory cytokines tumour necrosis factor-a2
(tnfTNF-a2), interleukin-8 (il8), CC chemokine (lycCC) was up-regulated by
lipopolysaccharide. These results indicated that the LYCK cell line could serve
as a valuable tool for studies on immune-related gene functions in vitro.

© 2014 The Fisheries Society of the British Isles.

PMID: 24773544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(13):7578-88. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03117-13. Epub 2014 Apr 23.

IRF7-dependent type I interferon production induces lethal immune-mediated
disease in STAT1 knockout mice infected with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus.

Li W(1), Hofer MJ(2), Jung SR(1), Lim SL(1), Campbell IL(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience and the Bosch Institute, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia. (2)School of Molecular Bioscience and the Bosch
Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
iain.campbell@sydney.edu.au markus.hofer@sydney.edu.au.

Following systemic infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV),
STAT1 knockout (KO) mice but not wild-type, STAT2 KO, IRF9 KO, or IFNAR KO mice
develop lethal disease perpetrated by CD4(+) T cells. IRF7 is a key
transcriptional activator of type I IFN (IFN-I) during LCMV infection. Here, the 
role of IRF7 in the lethal host response to LCMV infection in STAT1 KO mice was
examined. In contrast to STAT1 KO mice, STAT1/IRF7 double KO (DKO) mice survived 
LCMV infection with a reduced immune pathology in key organs, such as the liver
and spleen. However, similar to STAT1 KO mice, STAT1/IRF7 DKO mice failed to
control LCMV replication and spread. LCMV infection in STAT1 KO mice was
associated with a significant elevation in the levels of a number of cytokines in
serum, including IFN-Is, but this was largely absent in STAT1/IRF7 DKO mice,
which had a modest increase in the levels of gamma interferon and CCL2 only.
Since IRF7 is known to be a key transcriptional regulator of IFN-I gene
expression, the possible role of IFN-I in lethal disease was examined further.
STAT1/IFNAR DKO mice, in contrast to STAT1 KO mice, all survived infection with
LCMV and exhibited little tissue immune pathology. Additionally, STAT1 KO mice
that were deficient for either of the two IFN-I signaling molecules, STAT2 or
IRF9, also survived LCMV infection. We conclude that the lethal immune-mediated
disease resulting from LCMV infection in STAT1 KO mice is (i) dependent on
IRF7-induced IFN-I production and (ii) driven by noncanonical IFN-I signaling via
STAT2 and IRF9.IMPORTANCE: Here we report on the basis for the novel, fatal
immune-mediated disease of STAT1 KO mice infected with LCMV. Our findings show
that, surprisingly, the pathogenesis of this disease is dependent on
IRF7-mediated type I interferon production. Moreover, our study identifies
noncanonical type I interferon signaling via STAT2 and IRF9 to be essential for
the type I IFN-driven fatal disease in LCMV-infected STAT1 KO mice. These results
further highlight the significance of noncanonical type I IFN signaling in the
pathogenesis of host-mediated injury following viral infection.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4054449
PMID: 24760883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Neurosci. 2014 Apr 23;34(17):5882-94. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0410-14.2014.

Suppression of Alzheimer-associated inflammation by microglial prostaglandin-E2
EP4 receptor signaling.

Woodling NS(1), Wang Q, Priyam PG, Larkin P, Shi J, Johansson JU, Zagol-Ikapitte 
I, Boutaud O, Andreasson KI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, Neurosciences Graduate Program, Stanford
University, Stanford, California 94305, and Department of Pharmacology,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232.

A persistent and nonresolving inflammatory response to accumulating Aß peptide
species is a cardinal feature in the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD). In 
response to accumulating Aß peptide species, microglia, the innate immune cells
of the brain, generate a toxic inflammatory response that accelerates synaptic
and neuronal injury. Many proinflammatory signaling pathways are linked to
progression of neurodegeneration. However, endogenous anti-inflammatory pathways 
capable of suppressing Aß-induced inflammation represent a relatively unexplored 
area. Here we report that signaling through the prostaglandin-E2 (PGE2) EP4
receptor potently suppresses microglial inflammatory responses to Aß42 peptides. 
In cultured microglial cells, EP4 stimulation attenuated levels of Aß42-induced
inflammatory factors and potentiated phagocytosis of Aß42. Microarray analysis
demonstrated that EP4 stimulation broadly opposed Aß42-driven gene expression
changes in microglia, with enrichment for targets of IRF1, IRF7, and NF-<U+03BA>B
transcription factors. In vivo, conditional deletion of microglial EP4 in
APPSwe-PS1<U+0394>E9 (APP-PS1) mice conversely increased inflammatory gene expression,
oxidative protein modification, and Aß deposition in brain at early stages of
pathology, but not at later stages, suggesting an early anti-inflammatory
function of microglial EP4 signaling in the APP-PS1 model. Finally, EP4 receptor 
levels decreased significantly in human cortex with progression from normal to AD
states, suggesting that early loss of this beneficial signaling system in
preclinical AD development may contribute to subsequent progression of pathology.

PMCID: PMC3996215
PMID: 24760848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. PLoS Pathog. 2014 Apr 17;10(4):e1003989. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003989.
eCollection 2014.

Modified vaccinia virus Ankara triggers type I IFN production in murine
conventional dendritic cells via a cGAS/STING-mediated cytosolic DNA-sensing
pathway.

Dai P(1), Wang W(2), Cao H(1), Avogadri F(3), Dai L(4), Drexler I(4), Joyce
JA(5), Li XD(6), Chen Z(6), Merghoub T(3), Shuman S(7), Deng L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, United States of America; Molecular Biology Program, 
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of
America. (2)Dermatology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan Kettering
Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of America. (3)Immunology
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United
States of America. (4)Institute for Virology, Düsseldorf University Hospital,
Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany. (5)Cancer Biology & Genetics
Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United
States of America. (6)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas,
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, United States of America.
(7)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York, United States of America; Lucille Castori Center for Microbes,
Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York, United States of America. (8)Dermatology Service, Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of
America; Lucille Castori Center for Microbes, Inflammation and Cancer, Memorial
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, United States of America.

Modified vaccinia virus Ankara (MVA) is an attenuated poxvirus that has been
engineered as a vaccine against infectious agents and cancers. Our goal is to
understand how MVA modulates innate immunity in dendritic cells (DCs), which can 
provide insights to vaccine design. In this study, using murine bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells, we assessed type I interferon (IFN) gene
induction and protein secretion in response to MVA infection. We report that MVA 
infection elicits the production of type I IFN in murine conventional dendritic
cells (cDCs), but not in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). Transcription
factors IRF3 (IFN regulatory factor 3) and IRF7, and the positive feedback loop
mediated by IFNAR1 (IFN alpha/beta receptor 1), are required for the induction.
MVA induction of type I IFN is fully dependent on STING (stimulator of IFN genes)
and the newly discovered cytosolic DNA sensor cGAS (cyclic guanosine
monophosphate-adenosine monophosphate synthase). MVA infection of cDCs triggers
phosphorylation of TBK1 (Tank-binding kinase 1) and IRF3, which is abolished in
the absence of cGAS and STING. Furthermore, intravenous delivery of MVA induces
type I IFN in wild-type mice, but not in mice lacking STING or IRF3. Treatment of
cDCs with inhibitors of endosomal and lysosomal acidification or the lysosomal
enzyme Cathepsin B attenuated MVA-induced type I IFN production, indicating that 
lysosomal enzymatic processing of virions is important for MVA sensing. Taken
together, our results demonstrate a critical role of the cGAS/STING-mediated
cytosolic DNA-sensing pathway for type I IFN induction in cDCs by MVA. We present
evidence that vaccinia virulence factors E3 and N1 inhibit the activation of IRF3
and the induction of IFNB gene in MVA-infected cDCs.

PMCID: PMC3990710
PMID: 24743339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Retrovirology. 2014 Apr 17;11:30. doi: 10.1186/1742-4690-11-30.

HIV-1 Tat second exon limits the extent of Tat-mediated modulation of
interferon-stimulated genes in antigen presenting cells.

Kukkonen S, Martinez-Viedma Mdel P, Kim N, Manrique M, Aldovini A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Department of Medicine,
Boston Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
anna.aldovini@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: We have shown that HIV-1 Tat interaction with MAP2K3, MAP2K6, and
IRF7 promoters is key to IFN-stimulated genes (ISG) activation in immature
dendritic cells and macrophages.
RESULTS: We evaluated how Tat alleles and mutants differ in cellular gene
modulation of immature dendritic cells and monocyte-derived macrophages and what 
similarities this modulation has with that induced by interferons. The tested
alleles and mutants modulated to different degrees ISG, without concomitant
induction of interferons. The first exon TatSF21-72 and the minimal
transactivator TatSF21-58, all modulated genes to a significantly greater extent 
than full-length wild type, two-exon Tat, indicating that Tat second exon is
critical in reducing the innate response triggered by HIV-1 in these cells.
Mutants with reduced LTR transactivation had a substantially reduced effect on
host gene expression modulation than wild type TatSF2. However, the more potent
LTR transactivator TatSF2A58T modulated ISG expression to a lower degree compared
to TatSF2. A cellular gene modulation similar to that induced by Tat and Tat
mutants in immature dendritic cells could be observed in monocyte-derived
macrophages, with the most significant pathways affected by Tat being the same in
both cell types. Tat expression in cells deleted of the type I IFN locus or
receptor resulted in a gene modulation pattern similar to that induced in primary
immature dendritic cells and monocyte-derived macrophages, excluding the
involvement of type I IFNs in Tat-mediated gene modulation. ISG activation
depends on Tat interaction with MAP2K3, MAP2K6, and IRF7 promoters and a single
exon Tat protein more strongly modulated the luciferase activity mediated by
MAP2K3, MAP2K6, and IRF7 promoter sequences located 5' of the RNA start site than
the wild type two-exon Tat, while a cysteine and lysine Tat mutants, reduced in
LTR transactivation, had negligible effects on these promoters. Chemical
inhibition of CDK9 or Sp1 decreased Tat activation of MAP2K3-, MAP2K6-, and
IRF7-mediated luciferase transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data indicate that the second exon of Tat is
critical to the containment of the innate response stimulated by Tat in antigen
presenting cells and support a role for Tat in stimulating cellular transcription
via its interaction with transcription factors present at promoters.

PMCID: PMC4036831
PMID: 24742347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2014 Jul;41(7):482-8. doi: 10.1111/1440-1681.12241.

Toll-like receptor-4 signalling in the progression of non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease induced by high-fat and high-fructose diet in mice.

Liu J(1), Zhuang ZJ, Bian DX, Ma XJ, Xun YH, Yang WJ, Luo Y, Liu YL, Jia L, Wang 
Y, Zhu ML, Ye DW, Zhou G, Lou GQ, Shi JP.

Author information: 
(1)Second Clinical Medical College, Zhejiang Chinese Medical University,
Hangzhou, China.

The aim of the present study was to investigate Toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4)
signalling at different stages of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
induced by a high-fat, high-fructose (HFHFr) diet in mice. Both TLR4 wild-type
(WT) and mutant (TLR4(mut) ) mice were fed either standard chow (SC) or the HFHFr
diet for different periods of time from 4 to 16 weeks. Pathological
characteristics and function of the liver were assessed. Simple steatosis,
steatohepatitis and hepatic fibrosis occurred sequentially in Week 4, 8 and 16 in
WT mice fed with the HFHFr. Expression of TLR4, myeloid differentiation factor 88
(MyD88), interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7 started to increase at
Week 4, peaked at Week 8 and then declined to basal levels at Week 16. This
pattern was consistent with changes in inflammation in the liver revealed by
haematoxylin and eosin staining. However, lipid accumulation, inflammation and
fibrosis in livers of TLR4(mut) mice fed the HFHFr diet were significantly
alleviated. In addition, the expression of activin A in WT mice fed the HFHFr
diet increased at Week 16. The data suggest that TLR4 signalling mediates
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis before fibrosis and that activin A is subsequently 
involved in NAFLD.

© 2014 Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 24739055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Am J Pathol. 2014 Jun;184(6):1795-806. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2014.02.026. Epub
2014 Apr 13.

IRF-3, IRF-7, and IPS-1 promote host defense against acute human metapneumovirus 
infection in neonatal mice.

Spann KM(1), Loh Z(2), Lynch JP(2), Ullah A(3), Zhang V(2), Baturcam E(4), Werder
RB(2), Khajornjiraphan N(2), Rudd P(5), Loo YM(6), Suhrbier A(5), Gale M Jr(6),
Upham JW(7), Phipps S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Medical Virology Centre, University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Australia; Sir Albert Sakzewski Virus Research Centre, Children's Hospital
Queensland, Australia; Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, University
of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia. Electronic address: k.spann@uq.edu.au.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia.
(3)Woolcock Institute of Medical Research, Sydney Medical School, The University 
of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. (4)Clinical Medical Virology Centre, University of 
Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia; Sir Albert Sakzewski Virus Research Centre,
Children's Hospital Queensland, Australia; Queensland Childrens Medical Research 
Institute, University of Queensland, Herston, Australia. (5)Australian Infectious
Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland, St. Lucia, Australia; QIMR
Berghofer Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Australia. (6)Department of
Immunology, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington.
(7)Lung and Allergy Research Centre, Translational Research Institute, School of 
Medicine, University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia; Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Princess Alexandra Hospital, Brisbane, Australia.
(8)Australian Infectious Diseases Research Centre, University of Queensland, St. 
Lucia, Australia; School of Biomedical Sciences, University of Queensland, St.
Lucia, Australia. Electronic address: s.phipps@uq.edu.au.

Human metapneumovirus (hMPV) is a leading cause of respiratory tract disease in
children and is associated with acute bronchiolitis, pneumonia, and asthma
exacerbations, yet the mechanisms by which the host immune response to hMPV is
regulated are poorly understood. By using gene-deleted neonatal mice, we examined
the contributions of the innate receptor signaling molecules interferon (IFN)-ß
promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3, and IRF7. Viral
load in the lungs was markedly greater in IPS-1(-/-) > IRF3/7(-/-) > IRF3(-/-),
but not IRF7(-/-), mice compared with wild-type mice. IFN-ß and IFN-<U+03BB>2/3
(IL-28A/B) production was attenuated in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid in all
factor-deficient mice compared with wild-type mice at 1 day after infection,
although IFN-<U+03BB>2/3 was greater in IRF3/7(-/-) mice at 5 days after infection.
IRF7(-/-) and IRF3/7(-/-) mice presented with airway eosinophilia, whereas only
IRF3/7(-/-) mice developed an exaggerated type 1 and 17 helper T-cell response,
characterized by natural killer T-cell and neutrophilic inflammation. Despite
having the highest viral load, IPS-1(-/-) mice did not develop a proinflammatory 
cytokine or granulocytic response to hMPV infection. Our findings demonstrate
that IFN-ß, but not IFN-<U+03BB>2/3, produced via an IPS-1-IRF3 signaling pathway, is
important for hMPV clearance. In the absence of a robust type I IFN-a/ß response,
targeting the IPS-1 signaling pathway may limit the overexuberant inflammatory
response that occurs as a consequence of viral persistence.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 10;9(4):e94806. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094806. eCollection
2014.

HSV-2 increases TLR4-dependent phosphorylated IRFs and IFN-ß induction in
cervical epithelial cells.

Liu H(1), Chen K(2), Feng W(1), Guo J(1), Li H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, Institute of Medical Virology, Wuhan
University School of Medicine, Wuhan, Hubei, China; Shengzhen R&D Center of State
Key Laboratory of Virology, Wuhan University Shenzhen Institute, Shenzhen,
Guangdong, China. (2)Central Blood Station of Rizhao, Rizhao, Shandong, China.

Our previous studies demonstrated that HSV-2 infection up-regulates TLR4
expression and induces NF-kB activity, thereby facilitating innate immune
response in human cervical epithelial cells. This process requires involvement of
TLR4 adaptors, Mal and MyD88. In the current study, we found that HSV-2 infection
increases levels of phosphoryalted IRF3 and IRF7, then regulating expression of
type I IFN. As expected, these changes induced by HSV-2 infection depended upon
TLR4. Knockdown of TRIF and/or TRAM by siRNAs indicated that TRIF/TRAM might be
involved in expression of IFN-ß. Our results demonstrate for the first time that 
IRF3 and IRF7 are both involved in inducing TLR4-dependent IFN-ß expression in
response to HSV-2 in its primary infected genital epithelial cells. Thus,
TLR4-Mal/MyD88 and TLR4-TRIF/TRAM signaling may synergize and/or cooperate in
innate immune response of cervical epithelial cells to HSV-2 infection.

PMCID: PMC3983257
PMID: 24722640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 10;9(4):e94999. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094999. eCollection
2014.

Functionally distinct effects of the C-terminal regions of IKKe and TBK1 on type 
I IFN production.

Nakatsu Y(1), Matsuoka M(2), Chang TH(3), Otsuki N(1), Noda M(4), Kimura H(4),
Sakai K(1), Kato H(1), Takeda M(1), Kubota T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases,
Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Bacteriology II, National
Institute of Infectious Diseases, Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department
of Medical Education and Research, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Infectious Diseases Surveillance Center, National Institute
of Infectious Diseases, Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, Japan.

Inhibitor of <U+03BA>B kinase e (IKKe) and TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1), so-called
non-canonical IKKs or IKK-related kinases, are involved in the cellular innate
immunity by inducing type I IFNs. Two kinases commonly phosphorylate
transcription factors IRF3 and IRF7 in type I IFN production pathway. In contrast
to TBK1, underlying mechanisms of IKKe activation and regions required for
activation of downstream molecules are poorly understood. In this study, we
investigated regions of IKKe required for the activation of type I IFN promoter
specially, by focusing on the C-terminal region. To show the functional
significance of the IKKe C-terminal region on type I IFN production, we employed 
various mutant forms of IKKe and compared to corresponding region of TBK1. We
identified the specific regions and residues of IKKe involved in the activation
of downstream signaling. Interestingly, corresponding region and residues are not
required for activation of downstream signaling by TBK1. The results highlight
the importance of the C-terminal region in the functional activity of IKKe in
innate immune response and also the difference in activation mechanisms between
IKKe and the closely related TBK1.

PMCID: PMC3983252
PMID: 24722368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014 Jun 1;306(11):C1017-27. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00062.2014. Epub 2014 Apr 9.

Prostatic acid phosphatase is the main acid phosphatase with 5'-ectonucleotidase 
activity in the male mouse saliva and regulates salivation.

Araujo CL(1), Quintero IB(1), Kipar A(2), Herrala AM(1), Pulkka AE(1), Saarinen
L(3), Hautaniemi S(3), Vihko P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Hospital Laboratory, Helsinki, Finland; (2)Finnish Centre for
Laboratory Animal Pathology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland; and. (3)Research Programs Unit; Genome-scale Biology
and Institute of Biomedicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland;
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Hospital Laboratory, Helsinki, Finland; Veterinary Pathology, School
of Veterinary Science and Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection
and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, United Kingdom
pirkko.vihko@helsinki.fi.

Comment in
    Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014 Jun 1;306(11):C997-8.

We have previously shown that in addition to the well-known secreted isoform of
prostatic acid phosphatase (sPAP), a transmembrane isoform exists (TMPAP) that
interacts with snapin (a SNARE-associated protein) and regulates the
endo-/exocytic pathways. We have also shown that PAP has 5'-ectonucleotidase and 
thiamine monophosphatase activity and elicits antinociceptive effects in mouse
models of chronic inflammatory and neuropathic pain. Therefore, to determine the 
physiological role of PAP in a typical exocrine organ, we studied the
submandibular salivary gland (SMG) of PAP(-/-) and wild-type C57BL/6J mice by
microarray analyses, microRNA sequencing, activity tests, immunohistochemistry,
and biochemical and physiological analyses of saliva. We show that PAP is the
main acid phosphatase in the wild-type male mouse saliva, accounting for 50% of
the total acid phosphatase activity, and that it is expressed only in the
granular convoluted tubules of the SMGs, where it is the only
5'-ectonucleotidase. The lack of PAP in male PAP(-/-) mice was associated with a 
significant increase in the salivation volume under secretagogue stimulation,
overexpression of genes related to cell proliferation (Mki67, Aurkb, Birc5) and
immune response (Irf7, Cxcl9, Ccl3, Fpr2), and upregulation of miR-146a in SMGs. 
An increased and sustained acinar cell proliferation was detected without signs
of glandular hyperplasia. Our results indicate that in PAP(-/-) mice, SMG
homeostasis is maintained by an innate immune response. Additionally, we suggest 
that in male mice, PAP via its 5'-ectonucleotidase activity and production of
adenosine can elicit analgesic effects when animals lick their wounds.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 24717577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 7;9(4):e93396. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093396. eCollection 
2014.

Dynamic cross talk model of the epithelial innate immune response to
double-stranded RNA stimulation: coordinated dynamics emerging from cell-level
noise.

Bertolusso R(1), Tian B(2), Zhao Y(3), Vergara L(4), Sabree A(1), Iwanaszko M(5),
Lipniacki T(6), Brasier AR(3), Kimmel M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Statistics, Rice University, Houston, Texas, United States of
America. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch
(UTMB), Galveston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Texas Medical Branch (UTMB), Galveston, Texas, United
States of America; Sealy Center for Molecular Medicine, UTMB, Galveston, Texas,
United States of America; Institute for Translational Sciences, UTMB, Galveston, 
Texas, United States of America. (4)Center for Biomedical Engineering, UTMB,
Galveston, Texas, United States of America. (5)Systems Engineering Group,
Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland. (6)Institute of Fundamental
Technological Research, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland. (7)Department
of Statistics, Rice University, Houston, Texas, United States of America; Systems
Engineering Group, Silesian University of Technology, Gliwice, Poland.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(7):e103019.

We present an integrated dynamical cross-talk model of the epithelial innate
immune response (IIR) incorporating RIG-I and TLR3 as the two major pattern
recognition receptors (PRR) converging on the RelA and IRF3 transcriptional
effectors. bioPN simulations reproduce biologically relevant gene-and protein
abundance measurements in response to time course, gene silencing and
dose-response perturbations both at the population and single cell level. Our
computational predictions suggest that RelA and IRF3 are under auto- and
cross-regulation. We predict, and confirm experimentally, that RIG-I mRNA
expression is controlled by IRF7. We also predict the existence of a
TLR3-dependent, IRF3-independent transcription factor (or factors) that
control(s) expression of MAVS, IRF3 and members of the IKK family. Our model
confirms the observed dsRNA dose-dependence of oscillatory patterns in single
cells, with periods of 1-3 hr. Model fitting to time series, matched by knockdown
data suggests that the NF-<U+03BA>B module operates in a different regime (with
different coefficient values) than in the TNFa-stimulation experiments. In future
studies, this model will serve as a foundation for identification of
virus-encoded IIR antagonists and examination of stochastic effects of viral
replication. Our model generates simulated time series, which reproduce the noisy
oscillatory patterns of activity (with 1-3 hour period) observed in individual
cells. Our work supports the hypothesis that the IIR is a phenomenon that emerged
by evolution despite highly variable responses at an individual cell level.

PMCID: PMC3977818
PMID: 24710104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Dev Comp Immunol. 2014 Aug;45(2):278-90. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.03.018. Epub
2014 Apr 1.

Molecular characterizations of grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) TBK1 gene and
its roles in regulating IFN-I pathway.

Feng X(1), Su J(2), Yang C(1), Yan N(1), Rao Y(1), Chen X(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling 712100, China.
(2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling 712100, China.
Electronic address: su.jianguo@gmail.com.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), a kinase at the crossroads of multiple IFN-inducing
signaling pathways, plays essential roles in both antiviral and antibacterial
innate immunity in mammals. Here, TBK1 gene (10339bp) was identified and
characterized from grass carp Ctenopharyngodon idella (CiTBK1). The genomic
sequence is shorter than other orthologs in vertebrate, and a promoter region is 
found in intron 1. mRNA expression of CiTBK1 was widespread in fifteen tissues
investigated, and was up-regulated post GCRV challenge in vivo and in vitro, as
well as after stimulation of viral/bacterial PAMPs in vitro. CiTBK1 mediates
IFN-I signal pathway through over-expression experiment. Post GCRV challenge,
CiTBK1 over-expression inhibits viral infection by induction of CiIFN-I and CiMx1
mainly via CiIRF7. In CiTBK1 over-expression cells, mRNA expressions of CiIRF3,
CiIRF7 and CiIFN-I were inhibited, whereas CiMx1 was facilitated after poly I:C
stimulation, comparing to those in control group. The result indicated that CiMx1
expression mediated by CiTBK1 is in IFN-I independent way after poly I:C
stimulation. However, over-expression of CiTBK1 diminishes LPS-induced
expressions of CiIRF3 and CiIRF7 but promotes the induction of CiIFN-I and CiMx1 
in comparison with the control, which suggests that CiTBK1-triggered IFN-I
activation is in IRF3/IRF7-independent manner after LPS stimulation. Notably,
over-expression of CiTBK1 negatively regulated PGN-induced IRF3, IRF7, IFN-I and 
Mx1 immune response. Taken together, CiTBK1 participates in broad antiviral and
antibacterial immune responses in different manners, and keeps regulatory balance
that prevents harmful effects from excessive activation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24704212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mediators Inflamm. 2014;2014:697837. doi: 10.1155/2014/697837. Epub 2014 Feb 23.

Hantaan virus infection induces CXCL10 expression through TLR3, RIG-I, and MDA-5 
pathways correlated with the disease severity.

Zhang Y(1), Liu B(1), Ma Y(1), Yi J(2), Zhang C(1), Zhang Y(1), Xu Z(1), Wang
J(3), Yang K(1), Yang A(1), Zhuang R(1), Jin B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Fourth Military Medical University, 169 Changle 
West Road, Xi'an 710032, China. (2)Department of Immunology, The Fourth Military 
Medical University, 169 Changle West Road, Xi'an 710032, China ; Department of
Blood Transfusion, Xijing Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an
710032, China. (3)Department of Infectious Disease, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China.

Hantaan virus (HTNV) is a major agent causing hemorrhagic fever with renal
syndrome (HFRS). Although the pathogenesis of HFRS is unclear, some reports have 
suggested that the abundant production of proinflammatory cytokines and
uncontrolled inflammatory responses may contribute to the development of HFRS.
CXCL10 is one of these cytokines and is found to be involved in the pathogenesis 
of many virus infectious diseases. However, the role of CXCL10 in the
pathogenesis of HFRS and the molecular regulation mechanism of CXCL10 in HTNV
infection remain unknown. In this study, we report that CXCL10 expresses highly
in the HFRS patients' sera and the elevated CXCL10 is positively correlated with 
the severity of HFRS. We find that HTNV, a single-strand RNA virus, can act as a 
double-strand RNA to activate the TLR3, RIG-I, and MDA-5 signaling pathways.
Through the downstream transcription factors of these pathways, NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF7,
which bind directly to the CXCL10's promoter, the expression of CXCL10 is
increased. Our results may help to better understand the role of CXCL10 in the
development of HFRS and may provide some novel insights into the immune response 
of HTNV infection.

PMCID: PMC3950924
PMID: 24701034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Infect Immun. 2014 Jun;82(6):2405-16. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01617-14. Epub 2014 Mar
24.

Borrelia burgdorferi RNA induces type I and III interferons via Toll-like
receptor 7 and contributes to production of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent cytokines.

Love AC(1), Schwartz I, Petzke MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
New York, USA.

Borrelia burgdorferi elicits a potent cytokine response through activation of
multiple signaling receptors on innate immune cells. Spirochetal lipoproteins
initiate expression of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent cytokines primarily via TLR2, whereas type
I interferon (IFN) production is induced through the endosomal receptors TLR7 and
TLR9 in human dendritic cells and TLR8 in monocytes. We demonstrate that DNA and 
RNA are the B. burgdorferi components that initiate a type I IFN response by
human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs). IFN-a protein and transcripts
for IRF7, MX1, and OAS1 were induced by endosomal delivery of B. burgdorferi DNA,
RNA, or whole-cell lysate, but not by lysate that had been treated with DNase and
RNase. Induction of IFN-a and IFN-<U+03BB>1, a type III IFN, by B. burgdorferi RNA or
live spirochetes required TLR7-dependent signaling and correlated with
significantly enhanced transcription and expression of IRF7 but not IRF3.
Induction of type I and type III IFNs by B. burgdorferi RNA could be completely
abrogated by a TLR7 inhibitor, IRS661. In addition to type I and type III IFNs,
B. burgdorferi RNA contributed to the production of the NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
cytokines, IFN-<U+03B3>, interleukin-10 (IL-10), IL-1ß, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor 
alpha (TNF-a), by human PBMCs. Collectively, these data indicate that
TLR7-dependent recognition of RNA is pivotal for IFN-a and IFN-<U+03BB>1 production by
human PBMCs, and that RNA-initiated signaling contributes to full potentiation of
the cytokine response generated during B. burgdorferi infection.

PMCID: PMC4019181
PMID: 24664510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Dev Comp Immunol. 2014 Jul;45(1):163-76. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2014.03.001. Epub
2014 Mar 11.

Identification, characterization and immunological response analysis of
stimulator of interferon gene (STING) from grass carp Ctenopharyngodon idella.

Feng X(1), Yang C(2), Zhang Y(1), Peng L(1), Chen X(1), Rao Y(1), Gu T(1), Su
J(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling
712100, China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest A&F University,
Yangling 712100, China. (3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest
A&F University, Yangling 712100, China. Electronic address: su.jianguo@gmail.com.

Stimulator of interferon gene (STING), an important adapter responsible for RLR
pathway, plays a pivotal role in both viral RNA- and DNA-triggered induction of
IFNs in mammals. To understand the roles of STING in piscine immune system, STING
gene (CiSTING) was identified from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella). The
genomic sequence of CiSTING was of 8548 base pairs (bp), including 899 bp 5'
flank region, 7 exons and 6 introns. Promoter region was predicted and promoter
activity was verified. The CiSTING cDNA was of 1358 bp with an open reading frame
of 1185 bp, encoding a polypeptide of 394 amino acids with a signal peptide and
three transmembrane motifs in the N-terminal region. mRNA expression of CiSTING
was widespread in fifteen tissues investigated, and was up-regulated by GCRV in
vivo and in vitro. Meanwhile, the transcription of CiSTING was inhibited at early
stage, and then up-regulated at late phase upon poly(I:C) or PGN stimulation in
vitro. Interestingly, CiSTING had little impact on LPS in vitro. In CiSTING
over-expression cells, CiTBK1, CiIRF3 and CiIRF7 were significantly up-regulated 
post GCRV or viral/bacterial PAMPs stimulation. In addition, post GCRV or PGN
stimulation, the transcription of CiIFN-I was remarkably inhibited while CiMx1
was up-regulated; as for poly(I:C) stimulation, mRNA expressions of CiIFN-I and
CiMx1 were inhibited at early stage while enhanced at late phrase; after LPS
stimulation, both CiIFN-I and CiMx1 were inhibited. Furthermore, antiviral
activity of CiSTING was manifested by the inhibition of GCRV yield. Taken
together, these results demonstrated that CiSTING may be involved in board innate
immune responses via the TBK1-IRF3/IRF7 cascade, responding to not only dsRNA
analogue in an IFN-dependent pathway, but also virus and bacterial PAMPs in an
IFN-independent pathway. This study provided novel insights into the essential
role of STING in innate immunity.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24631580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Science. 2014 Mar 7;343(6175):1246980. doi: 10.1126/science.1246980.

Common genetic variants modulate pathogen-sensing responses in human dendritic
cells.

Lee MN(1), Ye C, Villani AC, Raj T, Li W, Eisenhaure TM, Imboywa SH, Chipendo PI,
Ran FA, Slowikowski K, Ward LD, Raddassi K, McCabe C, Lee MH, Frohlich IY, Hafler
DA, Kellis M, Raychaudhuri S, Zhang F, Stranger BE, Benoist CO, De Jager PL,
Regev A, Hacohen N.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Mar 7;343(6175):1087-8.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Apr;14(4):212.

Little is known about how human genetic variation affects the responses to
environmental stimuli in the context of complex diseases. Experimental and
computational approaches were applied to determine the effects of genetic
variation on the induction of pathogen-responsive genes in human dendritic cells.
We identified 121 common genetic variants associated in cis with variation in
expression responses to Escherichia coli lipopolysaccharide, influenza, or
interferon-ß (IFN-ß). We localized and validated causal variants to binding sites
of pathogen-activated STAT (signal transducer and activator of transcription) and
IRF (IFN-regulatory factor) transcription factors. We also identified a common
variant in IRF7 that is associated in trans with type I IFN induction in response
to influenza infection. Our results reveal common alleles that explain
interindividual variation in pathogen sensing and provide functional annotation
for genetic variants that alter susceptibility to inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC4124741
PMID: 24604203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Science. 2014 Mar 7;343(6175):1087-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1251426.

Genetics. A genomic road map for complex human disease.

Gregersen PK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics and Human Genetics, The Feinstein Institute
for Medical Research, North Shore LIJ Health System, 350 Community Drive,
Manhasset, NY 110430, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2014 Mar 7;343(6175):1246980.
    Science. 2014 Mar 7;343(6175):1246949.

PMID: 24604188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2014 Apr;37(2):239-47. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2014.02.009.
Epub 2014 Feb 21.

Cloning and expression analyses of interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and 7
genes in European eel, Anguilla anguilla with the identification of genes
involved in IFN production.

Huang B(1), Huang WS(1), Nie P(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Jimei University, 43 Yindou Road, Xiamen, Fujian
Province 361021, China. (2)College of Fisheries, Jimei University, 43 Yindou
Road, Xiamen, Fujian Province 361021, China. Electronic address:
pinnie@ihb.ac.cn.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7 have been identified as regulators 
of type I interferon (IFN) gene expression in mammals. In the present study, the 
two genes were cloned and characterized in the European eel, Anguilla anguilla.
The full-length cDNA sequence of IRF3 and IRF7 in the European eel, named as
AaIRF3 and AaIRF7 consists of 2879 and 2419 bp respectively. Multiple alignments 
showed that the two IRFs have a highly conserved DNA binding domain (DBD) in the 
N terminus, with the characteristic motif containing five tryptophan residues,
which is a feature present in their mammalian homologues. But, IRF7 has only four
of the five residues in other species of fish. The expression of AaIRF3 and
AaIRF7 both displayed an obvious dose-dependent manner following
polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (PolyI:C) challenge. In vivo expression analysis 
showed that the mRNA level of AaIRF3 and AaIRF7 was significantly up-regulated in
response to PolyI:C stimulation in all examined tissues/organs except in muscle, 
with a lower level of increase observed in response to lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
challenge and Edwardsiella tarda infection, indicating that AaIRF3 and AaIRF7 may
be more likely involved in antiviral immune response. In addition, some pattern
recognition receptors genes related with the production of type I IFNs and those 
genes in response to type I IFNs were identified in the European eel genome
database, indicating a relatively conserved system in the production of type I
IFN and its signalling in the European eel.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24565894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 13;9(2):e88756. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088756. eCollection
2014.

Late multiple organ surge in interferon-regulated target genes characterizes
staphylococcal enterotoxin B lethality.

Ferreyra GA(1), Elinoff JM(1), Demirkale CY(2), Starost MF(3), Buckley M(4),
Munson PJ(2), Krakauer T(4), Danner RL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics and Proteomics Facility, Critical Care Medicine
Department, Clinical Research Center, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America. (2)Mathematical and Statistical Computing
Laboratory, Center for Information Technology, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. (3)Division of Veterinary
Resources, Office of Research Services, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, United States of America. (4)Integrated Toxicology Division, U.S. Army 
Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases, Fort Detrick, Maryland, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Bacterial superantigens are virulence factors that cause toxic shock 
syndrome. Here, the genome-wide, temporal response of mice to lethal intranasal
staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) challenge was investigated in six tissues.
RESULTS: The earliest responses and largest number of affected genes occurred in 
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), spleen, and lung tissues with the
highest content of both T-cells and monocyte/macrophages, the direct cellular
targets of SEB. In contrast, the response of liver, kidney, and heart was delayed
and involved fewer genes, but revealed a dominant genetic program that was seen
in all 6 tissues. Many of the 85 uniquely annotated transcripts participating in 
this shared genomic response have not been previously linked to SEB. Nine of the 
85 genes were subsequently confirmed by RT-PCR in every tissue/organ at 24 h.
These 85 transcripts, up-regulated in all tissues, annotated to the interferon
(IFN)/antiviral-response and included genes belonging to the DNA/RNA sensing
system, DNA damage repair, the immunoproteasome, and the ER/metabolic
stress-response and apoptosis pathways. Overall, this shared program was
identified as a type I and II interferon (IFN)-response and the promoters of
these genes were highly enriched for IFN regulatory matrices. Several genes whose
secreted products induce the IFN pathway were up-regulated at early time points
in PBMCs, spleen, and/or lung. Furthermore, IFN regulatory factors including
Irf1, Irf7 and Irf8, and Zbp1, a DNA sensor/transcription factor that can
directly elicit an IFN innate immune response, participated in this host-wide SEB
signature.
CONCLUSION: Global gene-expression changes across multiple organs implicated a
host-wide IFN-response in SEB-induced death. Therapies aimed at IFN-associated
innate immunity may improve outcome in toxic shock syndromes.

PMCID: PMC3923834
PMID: 24551153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 May;11(3):245-52. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.65. Epub 2014 Feb 
17.

Death-associated protein kinase 1 is an IRF3/7-interacting protein that is
involved in the cellular antiviral immune response.

Zhang J, Hu MM, Shu HB, Li S.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 7 has been demonstrated to be a master
regulator of virus-induced type I interferon production (IFN), and it plays a
central role in the innate immune response against viruses. Here, we identified
death-associated protein kinase 1 (DAPK1) as an IRF7-interacting protein by
tandem affinity purification (TAP). Viral infection induced DAPK1-IRF7 and
DAPK1-IRF3 interactions and overexpression of DAPK1 enhanced virus-induced
activation of the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) and IFN-ß
promoters and the expression of the IFNB1 gene. Knockdown of DAPK1 attenuated the
induction of IFNB1 and RIG-I expression triggered by viral infection or IFN-ß,
and they were enhanced by viral replication. In addition, viral infection or
IFN-ß treatment induced the expression of DAPK1. IFN-ß treatment also activated
DAPK1 by decreasing its phosphorylation level at serine 308. Interestingly, the
involvement of DAPK1 in virus-induced signaling was independent of its kinase
activity. Therefore, our study identified DAPK1 as an important regulator of the 
cellular antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC4085485
PMID: 24531619  [PubMed - in process]


184. Vaccine. 2014 Apr 1;32(16):1808-13. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2014.01.088. Epub 2014
Feb 13.

Efficacy of formalin-killed Pseudomonas anguilliseptica vaccine on immune gene
expression and protection in farmed olive flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus.

Jang YH(1), Subramanian D(2), Heo MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Jeju Special Self-Governing Province Ocean and Fisheries Research Institute,
Pyoseon-myeon, Segwipo-si, Jeju 697-914, South Korea. (2)Marine Applied Microbes 
and Aquatic Organism Disease Control Lab, Department of Aquatic Biomedical
Sciences, School of Marine Biomedical Sciences & Marine and Environmental
Research Institute, Jeju National University, Jeju 690-756, South Korea.
(3)Marine Applied Microbes and Aquatic Organism Disease Control Lab, Department
of Aquatic Biomedical Sciences, School of Marine Biomedical Sciences & Marine and
Environmental Research Institute, Jeju National University, Jeju 690-756, South
Korea. Electronic address: msheo@jejunu.ac.kr.

Formalin killed Pseudomonas anguilliseptica bacterial vaccine was prepared and
administered to farm reared olive flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus reared at 17
°C and 20 °C for 4 weeks. Non-vaccinated fishes (n=150) served as positive
control. Vaccinated fishes were divided into two groups (n=150 each in
replicate). Both the vaccinated and non-vaccinated fishes were challenged
intraperitoneally with P. anguilliseptica (1×10(7) CFU ml(-1)) isolates and PBS
(negative control). Fishes were sampled from zero hour post injection (hpi) for
28 days (each hour and each day); the mean percent mortality and relative percent
survival (RPS) were calculated for the challenged and control groups. The
vaccinated fishes had a significant increase in RPS (69 and 89, respectively);
the percentage mortality declined from 83±0.6 and 74±0.7 in challenged and
control fishes to 25%±0.8% and 8%±0.8% in vaccinated and challenged fish groups, 
respectively. The immune gene expression assay was analyzed using real-time PCR. 
Vaccinated fishes registered a significant increase in the expression of TNFR-1, 
FasL, IRF7, TLR2, IL-1b and CD40 gene transcripts when compared to the control
group. The upregulation of these genes along with the increased RPS values
suggest that the formalin-killed cells of P. anguilliseptica could play an
important role in immunizing olive flounder against P. anguilliseptica.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 2014 Mar 28;289(13):9208-20. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.508663. Epub 2014
Feb 13.

The inducible nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS)/Src axis mediates Toll-like receptor 3
tyrosine 759 phosphorylation and enhances its signal transduction, leading to
interferon-ß synthesis in macrophages.

Hsieh MY(1), Chang MY, Chen YJ, Li YK, Chuang TH, Yu GY, Cheung CH, Chen HC, Maa 
MC, Leu TH.

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute of Basic Medical Sciences.

Double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) induces phosphorylation of Toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3) at tyrosine 759 and subsequently triggers signaling pathways to promote
interferon-ß (IFN-ß) production. In this study, we found that dsRNA stimulation
induces biphasic TLR3 Tyr-759 phosphorylation in macrophages. In addition to the 
immediate TLR3 Tyr-759 phosphorylation, we identified a second wave of Tyr-759
phosphorylation accompanied by an increase of both Src and ifn-ß transcription in
the later phase of dsRNA stimulation. Interestingly, Src phosphorylated TLR3
Tyr-759 in vitro and in vivo. However, knockdown of Src abolished the late phase 
of TLR3 Tyr-759 phosphorylation and decreased the nuclear accumulation of
interferon regulatory factors 3 and 7 (IRF3 and -7) and IFN-ß production.
Reintroduction of Src restored all of these molecular changes. Notably, via
down-regulation of Src, dsRNA-elicited TLR3 Tyr-759 phosphorylation, the nuclear 
accumulation of IRF3/IRF7, and IFN-ß generation were inhibited in inducible
nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS)-null macrophages. TLR3 knockdown destabilized Src
and reduced the nuclear level of IRF3/IRF7 and IFN-ß production in macrophages
exposed to LPS (a TLR4 ligand known to induce Src and IFN-ß expression). Ectopic 
expression of wild type TLR3, but not its 759-phenylalanine mutant, restored Src 
activity and ifn-ß transcription. Taken together, these results suggested an
essential role of the iNOS/Src/TLR3 axis in IFN-ß production in macrophages.

PMCID: PMC3979412
PMID: 24526685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 Mar;11(2):175-83. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2013.66. Epub 2014 Feb 
10.

HBV life cycle is restricted in mouse hepatocytes expressing human NTCP.

Li H(1), Zhuang Q(1), Wang Y(2), Zhang T(3), Zhao J(3), Zhang Y(3), Zhang J(3),
Lin Y(4), Yuan Q(3), Xia N(3), Han J(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, and School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China.
(2)1] State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology, and School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China [2]
School of Chemical Engineering, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361005, China.
(3)National Institute of Diagnostics and Vaccine Development in Infectious
Disease, School of Public Health, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China.
(4)School of Chemical Engineering, Huaqiao University, Xiamen 361005, China.

Recent studies have revealed that human sodium taurocholate cotransporting
polypeptide (SLC10A1 or NTCP) is a functional cellular receptor for hepatitis B
virus (HBV). However, whether human NTCP can support HBV infection in mouse
hepatocyte cell lines has not been clarified. Because an HBV-permissible mouse
model would be helpful for the study of HBV pathogenesis, it is necessary to
investigate whether human NTCP supports the susceptibility of mouse hepatocyte
cell lines to HBV. The results show that exogenous human NTCP expression can
render non-susceptible HepG2 (human), Huh7 (human), Hepa1-6 (mouse), AML-12
(mouse) cell lines and primary mouse hepatocyte (PMH) cells susceptible to
hepatitis D virus (HDV) which employs HBV envelope proteins. However, human NTCP 
could only introduce HBV susceptibility in human-derived HepG2 and Huh7 cells,
but not in mouse-derived Hepa1-6, AML-12 or PMH cells. These data suggest that
although human NTCP is a functional receptor that mediates HBV infection in human
cells, it cannot support HBV infection in mouse hepatocytes. Our study indicated 
that the restriction of HBV in mouse hepatocytes likely occurs after viral entry 
but prior to viral transcription. We have excluded the role of mouse hepatocyte
nuclear factors in the restriction of the HBV life cycle and showed that
knockdown or inhibition of Sting, TBK1, IRF3 or IRF7, the components of the
anti-viral signaling pathways, had no effect on HBV infection in mouse
hepatocytes. Therefore, murine restriction factors that limit HBV infection need 
to be identified before a HBV-permissible mouse line can be created.

PMCID: PMC4003384
PMID: 24509445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Virology. 2014 Feb;450-451:182-95. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.12.020. Epub 2014
Jan 4.

MicroRNA-23 inhibits PRRSV replication by directly targeting PRRSV RNA and
possibly by upregulating type I interferons.

Zhang Q(1), Guo XK(1), Gao L(1), Huang C(1), Li N(2), Jia X(3), Liu W(3), Feng
WH(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China; Ministry of Agriculture Key
Laboratory of Soil Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China; Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China;
Department of Molecular Biology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. (3)Institute of Microbiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of
Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China; Ministry of Agriculture Key Laboratory of Soil
Microbiology, College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China; Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of
Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China.
Electronic address: whfeng@cau.edu.cn.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression
post-transcriptionally and play critical roles in intricate networks of
host-pathogen interactions and innate immunity. Porcine reproductive and
respiratory syndrome (PRRS) is one of the most important diseases affecting swine
industry worldwide. Here, we demonstrated that miR-23, miR-378, and miR-505 were 
antiviral host factors against PRRS virus (PRRSV). Over-expression of the three
miRNAs inhibited PRRSV infection in a dose-dependent manner, respectively.
Blockage of the three endogenously expressed miRNAs significantly enhanced PRRSV 
replication. Different type 2 PRRSV strains harbored conserved miR-23, miR-378,
and miR-505 target sites (TSs) that were sufficient to confer miRNA-mediated
repression of PRRSV replication. Interestingly, miR-23 was capable of inducing
type I interferon expression during PRRSV infection through IRF3/IRF7 activation,
which might further lead to the inhibition of virus infection. These results
suggest that miR-23, miR-378, and miR-505, especially miR-23, may have the
potential to be used as antiviral therapy against PRRSV infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24503081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 29;9(1):e87668. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087668. eCollection
2014.

IL-4 suppresses the responses to TLR7 and TLR9 stimulation and increases the
permissiveness to retroviral infection of murine conventional dendritic cells.

Sriram U(1), Xu J(1), Chain RW(1), Varghese L(1), Chakhtoura M(1), Bennett HL(2),
Zoltick PW(3), Gallucci S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Dendritic Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Temple University, School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America. (2)Joseph Stokes, Jr. Research Institute, Division of
Rheumatology, Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (3)Department of Surgery,
The Children's Center for Fetal Research, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Th2-inducing pathological conditions such as parasitic diseases increase
susceptibility to viral infections through yet unclear mechanisms. We have
previously reported that IL-4, a pivotal Th2 cytokine, suppresses the response of
murine bone-marrow-derived conventional dendritic cells (cDCs) and splenic DCs to
Type I interferons (IFNs). Here, we analyzed cDC responses to TLR7 and TLR9
ligands, R848 and CpGs, respectively. We found that IL-4 suppressed the gene
expression of IFNß and IFN-responsive genes (IRGs) upon TLR7 and TLR9
stimulation. IL-4 also inhibited IFN-dependent MHC Class I expression and
amplification of IFN signaling pathways triggered upon TLR stimulation, as
indicated by the suppression of IRF7 and STAT2. Moreover, IL-4 suppressed TLR7-
and TLR9-induced cDC production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNFa,
IL-12p70 and IL-6 by inhibiting IFN-dependent and NF<U+03BA>B-dependent responses. IL-4 
similarly suppressed TLR responses in splenic DCs. IL-4 inhibition of IRGs and
pro-inflammatory cytokine production upon TLR7 and TLR9 stimulation was
STAT6-dependent, since DCs from STAT6-KO mice were resistant to the IL-4
suppression. Analysis of SOCS molecules (SOCS1, -2 and -3) showed that IL-4
induces SOCS1 and SOCS2 in a STAT6 dependent manner and suggest that IL-4
suppression could be mediated by SOCS molecules, in particular SOCS2. IL-4 also
decreased the IFN response and increased permissiveness to viral infection of
cDCs exposed to a HIV-based lentivirus. Our results indicate that IL-4 modulates 
and counteracts pro-inflammatory stimulation induced by TLR7 and TLR9 and it may 
negatively affect responses against viruses and intracellular parasites.

PMCID: PMC3906189
PMID: 24489947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Hypertension. 2014 Apr;63(4):663-4. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.02795. Epub 
2014 Jan 6.

Interferon regulatory factors in heart: stress response beyond inflammation.

Sun H(1), Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California at Los Angeles, Charles E. Young Dr, Room CHS 569, Los Angeles, CA
90095. yibinwang@mednet.ucla.edu.

Comment on
    Hypertension. 2014 Apr;63(4):713-22.

PMCID: PMC4046326
PMID: 24396026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Hypertension. 2014 Apr;63(4):713-22. doi: 10.1161/HYPERTENSIONAHA.113.02653. Epub
2014 Jan 6.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 functions as a novel negative regulator of
pathological cardiac hypertrophy.

Jiang DS(1), Liu Y, Zhou H, Zhang Y, Zhang XD, Zhang XF, Chen K, Gao L, Peng J,
Gong H, Chen Y, Yang Q, Liu PP, Fan GC, Zou Y, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Cardiovascular 
Research Institute, Wuhan University, Jiefang Road 238, Wuhan 430060, PR China.
lihl@whu.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Hypertension. 2014 Apr;63(4):663-4.

Cardiac hypertrophy is a complex pathological process that involves multiple
factors including inflammation and apoptosis. Interferon regulatory factor 7
(IRF7) is a multifunctional regulator that participates in immune regulation,
cell differentiation, apoptosis, and oncogenesis. However, the role of IRF7 in
cardiac hypertrophy remains unclear. We performed aortic banding in
cardiac-specific IRF7 transgenic mice, IRF7 knockout mice, and the wild-type
littermates of these mice. Our results demonstrated that IRF7 was downregulated
in aortic banding-induced animal hearts and cardiomyocytes that had been treated 
with angiotensin II or phenylephrine for 48 hours. Accordingly, heart-specific
overexpression of IRF7 significantly attenuated pressure overload-induced cardiac
hypertrophy, fibrosis, and dysfunction, whereas loss of IRF7 led to opposite
effects. Moreover, IRF7 protected against angiotensin II-induced cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy in vitro. Mechanistically, we identified that IRF7-dependent
cardioprotection was mediated through IRF7 binding to inhibitor of <U+03BA>B kinase-ß,
and subsequent nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B inactivation. In fact, blocking nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B signaling with cardiac-specific inhibitors of <U+03BA>Ba(S32A/S36A)
super-repressor transgene counteracted the adverse effect of IRF7 deficiency.
Conversely, activation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B signaling via a cardiac-specific
conditional inhibitor of <U+03BA>B kinase-ß(S177E/S181E) (constitutively active)
transgene negated the antihypertrophic effect of IRF7 overexpression. Our data
demonstrate that IRF7 acts as a novel negative regulator of pathological cardiac 
hypertrophy by inhibiting nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B signaling and may constitute a
potential therapeutic target for pathological cardiac hypertrophy.

PMID: 24396025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. BMB Rep. 2014 Oct;47(10):558-62.

Secondary structure of the Irf7 5'-UTR, analyzed using SHAPE (selective
2'-hydroxyl acylation analyzed by primer extension).

Kim YM(1), Choi WY(2), Oh CM(3), Han GH(1), Kim YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Integrated OMICs for Biomedical Science, Yonsei University,
Seoul 120-749, Korea. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Yonsei University, Seoul
120-749, Korea. (3)Departments of Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul
120-749, Korea.

OASL1 is a member of the 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS) family and
promotes viral clearance by activating RNase L. OASL1 interacts with the
5'-untranslated region (UTR) of interferon regulatory factor 7 (Irf7) and
inhibits its translation. To identify the secondary structure required for OASL1 
binding, we examined the 5'-UTR of the Irf7 transcript using "selective
2'-hydroxyl acylation analyzed by primer extension" (SHAPE). SHAPE takes
advantage of the selective acylation of residues in single-stranded regions by
1-methyl-7-nitroisatoic anhydride (1M7). We found five major acylation sites
located in, or next to, predicted single-stranded regions of the Irf7 5'-UTR.
These results demonstrate the involvement of the stem structure of the Irf7
5'-UTR in the regulation of Irf7 translation, mediated by OASL1.

PMCID: PMC4261513
PMID: 24393529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Feb 1;189(3):301-13. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201306-1181OC.

Foxa3 induces goblet cell metaplasia and inhibits innate antiviral immunity.

Chen G(1), Korfhagen TR, Karp CL, Impey S, Xu Y, Randell SH, Kitzmiller J, Maeda 
Y, Haitchi HM, Sridharan A, Senft AP, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)1 Perinatal Institute, Division of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary
Biology, and.

RATIONALE: Goblet cell metaplasia accompanies common pulmonary disorders that are
prone to recurrent viral infections. Mechanisms regulating both goblet cell
metaplasia and susceptibility to viral infection associated with chronic lung
diseases are incompletely understood.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to identify the role of the transcription factor FOXA3 in
regulation of goblet cell metaplasia and pulmonary innate immunity.
METHODS: FOXA3 was identified in airways from patients with asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. We produced transgenic mice conditionally
expressing Foxa3 in airway epithelial cells and developed human bronchial
epithelial cells expressing Foxa3. Foxa3-regulated genes were identified by
immunostaining, Western blotting, and RNA analysis. Direct binding of FOXA3 to
target genes was identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
correlated with RNA sequencing.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: FOXA3 was highly expressed in airway goblet cells 
from patients with asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. FOXA3 was
induced by either IL-13 or rhinovirus. Foxa3 induced goblet cell metaplasia and
enhanced expression of a network of genes mediating mucus production.
Paradoxically, FOXA3 inhibited rhinovirus-induced IFN production, IRF-3
phosphorylation, and IKKe expression and inhibited viral clearance and expression
of genes required for antiviral defenses, including MDA5, RIG-I, TLR3, IRF7/9,
and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXA3 induces goblet cell metaplasia in response to infection or Th2
stimulation. Suppression of IFN signaling by FOXA3 provides a plausible mechanism
that may serve to limit ongoing Th1 inflammation during the resolution of acute
viral infection; however, inhibition of innate immunity by FOXA3 may contribute
to susceptibility to viral infections associated with chronic lung disorders
accompanied by chronic goblet cell metaplasia.

PMCID: PMC3977731
PMID: 24392884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 26;8(12):e83457. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083457.
eCollection 2013.

EBI2 is a negative regulator of type I interferons in plasmacytoid and myeloid
dendritic cells.

Chiang EY(1), Johnston RJ(1), Grogan JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genentech Inc., South San Francisco, California,
United States of America.

Epstein-Barr virus induced receptor 2 (EBI2), a Gai-coupled G protein-coupled
receptor, is a chemotactic receptor for B, T and dendritic cells (DC). Genetic
studies have also implicated EBI2 as a regulator of an interferon regulatory
factor 7 (IRF7)-driven inflammatory network (IDIN) associated with autoimmune
diseases, although the corollary in primary type I IFN-producing cells has not
been reported. Here we demonstrate that EBI2 negatively regulates type I IFN
responses in plasmacytoid DC (pDCs) and CD11b(+) myeloid cells. Activation of
EBI2(-/-) pDCs and CD11b(+) cells with various TLR ligands induced elevated type 
I IFN production compared to wild-type cells. Moreover, in vivo challenge with
endosomal TLR agonists or infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
elicited more type I IFNs and proinflammatory cytokines in EBI2(-/-) mice
compared to normal mice. Elevated systemic cytokines occurred despite impaired
ability of EBI2-deficient pDCs and CD11b(+) cells to migrate from the blood to
the spleen and peritoneal cavity under homeostatic conditions. As reported for
other immune cells, pDC migration was dependent on the ligand for EBI2,
7a,25-dihydroxycholesterol. Consistent with a cell intrinsic role for EBI2, type 
I IFN-producing cells from EBI2-deficient mice expressed higher levels of IRF7
and IDIN genes. Together these data suggest a negative regulatory role for EBI2
in balancing TLR-mediated responses to foreign and to self nucleic acids that may
precipitate autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3873289
PMID: 24386204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 21;289(8):5310-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.536102. Epub 2014
Jan 2.

Transcriptional regulation of IFN-<U+03BB> genes in hepatitis C virus-infected
hepatocytes via IRF-3·IRF-7·NF-<U+03BA>B complex.

Lee HC(1), Narayanan S, Park SJ, Seong SY, Hahn YS.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology, Beirne B. Carter Center for Immunology
Research, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 25;289(17):11861.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection in hepatocytes stimulates innate antiviral
responses including the production of type III interferons (IFN-<U+03BB>), including
IL-28A, IL-28B, and IL-29. However, the molecular mechanism(s) regulating the
expression of IFN-<U+03BB> genes in HCV-infected hepatocytes remains undefined. In this 
study, we examined regulatory elements involved in the induction of IFN-<U+03BB> genes
following HCV infection in hepatocytes and further determined the binding of
specific transcription factor(s) to promoter regions of IFN-<U+03BB> genes. Our studies 
reveal that the regulatory portion for IL-28A, IL-28B, and IL-29 genes is
localized to a 1-kb region in their respective promoters. Notably, interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and -7 are the key transcriptional factors for the
induction of IL-28A and IL-28B genes, whereas NF-<U+03BA>B is an additional requirement 
for the induction of the IL-29 gene. Ligation of Toll-like receptors (TLR) 3, 7, 
8, and 9, which also activate IRFs and NF-<U+03BA>B, resulted in more robust production 
of IFN-<U+03BB> than that observed with HCV infection, verifying the importance of TLR
pathways in IFN-<U+03BB> production. Furthermore, the addition of IFN-<U+03BB> to HCV-infected 
hepatocytes decreased viral replication and produced a concurrent reduction in
microRNA-122 (miR-122). The decrease in viral replication was enhanced by the
co-administration of IFN-<U+03BB> and miR-122 inhibitor (miRIDIAN), suggesting that such
combinatorial therapies may be beneficial for the treatment of chronic HCV
infection.

PMCID: PMC3931086
PMID: 24385435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 23;8(12):e85302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085302.
eCollection 2013.

Functional limitations of plasmacytoid dendritic cells limit type I interferon, T
cell responses and virus control in early life.

Belnoue E(1), Fontannaz P(1), Rochat AF(1), Tougne C(1), Bergthaler A(1), Lambert
PH(1), Pinschewer DD(1), Siegrist CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)World Health Organization Collaborating Center for Vaccinology and Neonatal
Immunology, Departments of Pathology-Immunology and Pediatrics, University of
Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.

Infant mortality from viral infection remains a major global health concern:
viruses causing acute infections in immunologically mature hosts often follow a
more severe course in early life, with prolonged or persistent viral replication.
Similarly, the WE strain of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV-WE) causes
acute self-limiting infection in adult mice but follows a protracted course in
infant animals, in which LCMV-specific CD8<U+207A> T cells fail to expand and control
infection. By disrupting type I IFNs signaling in adult mice or providing IFN-a
supplementation to infant mice, we show here that the impaired early life T cell 
responses and viral control result from limited early type I IFN responses. We
postulated that plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC), which have been identified as
one major source of immediate-early IFN-I, may not exert adult-like function in
vivo in the early life microenvironment. We tested this hypothesis by studying
pDC functions in vivo during LCMV infection and identified a coordinated
downregulation of infant pDC maturation, activation and function: despite an
adult-like in vitro activation capacity of infant pDCs, the expression of the
E2-2 pDC master regulator (and of critical downstream antiviral genes such as
MyD88, TLR7/TLR9, NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF7 and IRF8) is downregulated in vivo at baseline and 
during LCMV infection. A similar pattern was observed in response to ssRNA polyU,
a model ligand of the TLR7 viral sensor. This suggests that the limited T
cell-mediated defense against early life viral infections is largely attributable
to / regulated by infant pDC responses and provides incentives for novel
strategies to supplement or stimulate immediate-early IFN-a responses.

PMCID: PMC3871569
PMID: 24376875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nat Med. 2014 Jan;20(1):47-53. doi: 10.1038/nm.3424. Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Host-cell sensors for Plasmodium activate innate immunity against liver-stage
infection.

Liehl P(1), Zuzarte-Luís V(1), Chan J(2), Zillinger T(3), Baptista F(1), Carapau 
D(1), Konert M(1), Hanson KK(1), Carret C(1), Lassnig C(4), Müller M(4), Kalinke 
U(5), Saeed M(6), Chora AF(1), Golenbock DT(7), Strobl B(4), Prudêncio M(1),
Coelho LP(1), Kappe SH(8), Superti-Furga G(9), Pichlmair A(9), Vigário AM(10),
Rice CM(6), Fitzgerald KA(7), Barchet W(11), Mota MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina Universidade de Lisboa,
Lisboa, Portugal. (2)1] Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases
and Immunology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, USA. [2]. (3)1] Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical
Pharmacology, University Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. [2]. (4)Institute of
Animal Breeding and Genetics and Biomodels, Austria University of Veterinary
Medicine Vienna, Vienna, Austria. (5)Institute for Experimental Infection
Research, TWINCORE, Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research,
Hannover Medical School and Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Hannover,
Germany. (6)Laboratory of Virology and Infectious Diseases, Center for the Study 
of Hepatitis C, The Rockefeller University, New York, New York, USA.
(7)Department of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(8)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, USA. (9)CeMM
Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences,
Vienna, Austria. (10)1] Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina
Universidade de Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal. [2] Unidade de Ciências Médicas, Centro
de compentência de ciências da vida, Universidade da Madeira, Funchal, Portugal. 
(11)Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Pharmacology, University
Hospital of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2014 Jan;20(1):17-9.

Before they infect red blood cells and cause malaria, Plasmodium parasites
undergo an obligate and clinically silent expansion phase in the liver that is
supposedly undetected by the host. Here, we demonstrate the engagement of a type 
I interferon (IFN) response during Plasmodium replication in the liver. We
identified Plasmodium RNA as a previously unrecognized pathogen-associated
molecular pattern (PAMP) capable of activating a type I IFN response via the
cytosolic pattern recognition receptor Mda5. This response, initiated by
liver-resident cells through the adaptor molecule for cytosolic RNA sensors,
Mavs, and the transcription factors Irf3 and Irf7, is propagated by hepatocytes
in an interferon-a/ß receptor-dependent manner. This signaling pathway is
critical for immune cell-mediated host resistance to liver-stage Plasmodium
infection, which we find can be primed with other PAMPs, including hepatitis C
virus RNA. Together, our results show that the liver has sensor mechanisms for
Plasmodium that mediate a functional antiparasite response driven by type I IFN.

PMCID: PMC4096771
PMID: 24362933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Immunol. 2014 Jan 15;192(2):691-703. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300252. Epub 2013
Dec 11.

IL-27, a cytokine, and IFN-<U+03BB>1, a type III IFN, are coordinated to regulate virus 
replication through type I IFN.

Cao Y(1), Zhang R, Zhang W, Zhu C, Yu Y, Song Y, Wang Q, Bai L, Liu Y, Wu K, Wu
J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan 430072, People's Republic of China;

IL-27, a member of the IL-12 family, plays a critical role in the control of
innate and adaptive immune responses. IFN-<U+03BB>1, a member of the type III IFN
family, shows antiviral abilities. In this study, we investigated the effects of 
IL-27 and IFN-<U+03BB>1 on the replication of hepatitis B virus (HBV), a major pathogen 
associated with a high risk for cirrhosis, liver failure, and hepatocellular
carcinoma. We revealed that HBV infection activates IL-27 expression and IFN-<U+03BB>1
production and demonstrated that viral-activated IL-27 and IFN-<U+03BB>1 are coordinated
to inhibit HBV replication. Initially, HBV infection upregulates IL-27
expression, which, in turn, stimulates IFN-<U+03BB>1 production through regulating
ERK1/2 signaling and by enhancing NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear translocation to bind to the
IFN-<U+03BB>1 promoter. Moreover, IL-27-activated IFN-<U+03BB>1 upregulates IFN-<U+03BB>1 receptor
(IL-28R1 and IL-10Rß) activity, resulting in the activation of the STAT1/2
pathway, which, in turn, induces the expression of IFN-stimulated genes,
including IFN-inducible dsRNA-activated protein kinase, oligoadenylate synthetase
1, and IFN-induced GTP-binding protein 1 and, finally, inhibits HBV protein
expression and viral capsid-associated DNA replication. More interestingly, we
also revealed that type I IFN (IFN-a) is also involved in the downregulation of
HBV replication mediated by IL-27. Thus, we identified a previously unknown
mechanism by which IL-27 and IFN-<U+03BB>1 are coordinated to regulate virus replication
through type I IFN.

PMID: 24337382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Virol. 2014 Feb;88(4):2157-67. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03055-13. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Innate immune response induced by baculovirus attenuates transgene expression in 
mammalian cells.

Ono C(1), Ninomiya A, Yamamoto S, Abe T, Wen X, Fukuhara T, Sasai M, Yamamoto M, 
Saitoh T, Satoh T, Kawai T, Ishii KJ, Akira S, Okamoto T, Matsuura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

The baculovirus Autographa californica nucleopolyhedrovirus (AcNPV) has been
widely used to achieve a high level of foreign gene expression in insect cells,
as well as for efficient gene transduction into mammalian cells without any
replication. In addition to permitting efficient gene delivery, baculovirus has
been shown to induce host innate immune responses in various mammalian cells and 
in mice. In this study, we examined the effects of the innate immune responses on
gene expression by recombinant baculoviruses in cultured cells. The reporter gene
expression in IRF3-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) infected with the
recombinant baculovirus was shown to be enhanced in accordance with the
suppression of beta interferon (IFN-ß) production. Furthermore, efficient gene
transduction by the recombinant baculovirus was achieved in MEFs deficient for
stimulator of interferon genes (STING), TANK binding kinase 1 (TBK1), IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), or IFN-ß promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1), but not in
those deficient for IRF7, MyD88, or Z-DNA binding protein 1 (ZBP1)/DAI.
Enhancement of gene expression by the recombinant baculovirus was also observed
in human hepatoma cell lines replicating hepatitis C virus (HCV), in which innate
immunity was impaired by the cleavage of IPS-1 by the viral protease. In
addition, infection with the recombinant baculovirus expressing the BH3-only
protein, BIMS, a potent inducer of apoptosis, resulted in a selective cell death 
in the HCV replicon cells. These results indicate that innate immune responses
induced by infection with baculovirus attenuate transgene expression, and this
characteristic might be useful for a selective gene transduction into cells with 
impaired innate immunity arising from infection with various viruses.

PMCID: PMC3911546
PMID: 24335288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Feb;44(2):489-99. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343725. Epub 2013 Dec
2.

CCK8 negatively regulates the TLR9-induced activation of human peripheral blood
pDCs by targeting TRAF6 signaling.

Jia X(1), Cong B, Zhang J, Li H, Liu W, Chang H, Dong M, Ma C.

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medicine, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei, People's
Republic of China.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) are specialized in rapid and massive
secretion of type I interferon in response to foreign nuclei acids. Combined with
their antigen presentation capacity, this powerful functionality enables pDCs to 
orchestrate innate and adaptive immune responses. Cholecystokinin octapeptide
(CCK8) is a potent immunomodulator, whose role in pDCs function is unknown. In
this study, we found that two different cholecystokinin receptors, CCK1R and
CCK2R, are expressed on human peripheral blood pDCs. Exogenous CCK8 was able to
modulate the TLR-induced activation of pDCs, including phenotypic maturation,
IFN-a synthesis and secretion, and could also regulate the potential of pDCs to
induce adaptive immune responses in vitro. CCK8 inhibited TLR9-induced activation
of tumor-necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6, which is an important
adapter protein in activation of interferon-regulatory factor (IRF)5 and IRF7,
possibly through CCK2R, by evoking the activity of protein kinase (PK)A and
reducing the activity of PKC. All these results indicate that CCK8 can inhibit
the TLR9-induced phenotypic maturation and activation of pDCs, acting through
CCK2R by modulating the tumor-necrosis factor receptor-associated factor 6
signaling pathways.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24301797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(11):e1003773. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003773. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

Type I and type III interferons drive redundant amplification loops to induce a
transcriptional signature in influenza-infected airway epithelia.

Crotta S(1), Davidson S, Mahlakoiv T, Desmet CJ, Buckwalter MR, Albert ML,
Staeheli P, Wack A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunoregulation, MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, London, United Kingdom.

Interferons (IFNs) are a group of cytokines with a well-established antiviral
function. They can be induced by viral infection, are secreted and bind to
specific receptors on the same or neighbouring cells to activate the expression
of hundreds of IFN stimulated genes (ISGs) with antiviral function. Type I IFN
has been known for more than half a century. However, more recently, type III IFN
(IFN<U+03BB>, IL-28/29) was shown to play a similar role and to be particularly
important at epithelial surfaces. Here we show that airway epithelia, the primary
target of influenza A virus, produce both IFN I and III upon infection, and that 
induction of both depends on the RIG-I/MAVS pathway. While IRF3 is generally
regarded as the transcription factor required for initiation of IFN transcription
and the so-called "priming loop", we find that IRF3 deficiency has little impact 
on IFN expression. In contrast, lack of IRF7 reduced IFN production
significantly, and only IRF3(-/-)IRF7(-/-) double deficiency completely abolished
it. The transcriptional response to influenza infection was largely dependent on 
IFNs, as it was reduced to a few upregulated genes in epithelia lacking receptors
for both type I and III IFN (IFNAR1(-/-)IL-28Ra(-/-)). Wild-type epithelia and
epithelia deficient in either the type I IFN receptor or the type III IFN
receptor exhibit similar transcriptional profiles in response to virus,
indicating that none of the induced genes depends selectively on only one IFN
system. In chimeric mice, the lack of both IFN I and III signalling in the
stromal compartment alone significantly increased the susceptibility to influenza
infection. In conclusion, virus infection of airway epithelia induces, via a
RIG-I/MAVS/IRF7 dependent pathway, both type I and III IFNs which drive two
completely overlapping and redundant amplification loops to upregulate ISGs and
protect from influenza infection.

PMCID: PMC3836735
PMID: 24278020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 3;289(1):299-311. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.519934. Epub 2013
Nov 25.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated licensing of interferon regulatory
factor 3/7 reinforces the cell response to virus.

Schmid S(1), Sachs D, tenOever BR.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Microbiology and.

The induction of the intrinsic antiviral defense in mammals relies on the
accumulation of foreign genetic material. As such, complete engagement of this
response is limited to replication-competent viruses. Interferon regulatory
factors (IRFs) are mediators of this defense with shared enhancer elements but
display a spectrum of transcriptional potential. Here we describe a mechanism
designed to enhance this response should a pathogen not be successfully
inhibited. We find that activation of IRF7 results in the induction of MAP3K8 and
restructuring of the antiviral transcriptome. MAP3K8 mediates the phosphorylation
and repression of IRF3 homodimers to promote greater transcriptional activity
through utilization of IRF3:IRF7 heterodimers. Among the genes influenced by the 
MAP3K8/IRF7 signaling axis are members of the SP100 gene family that serve as
general transcriptional enhancers of the antiviral defense. We propose that this 
feed forward loop serves to reinforce the cellular response and is reserved for
imminent threats to the host.

PMCID: PMC3879553
PMID: 24275658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. FEBS Lett. 2014 Jan 3;588(1):28-34. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.11.015. Epub 2013
Nov 20.

An anti-interferon activity shared by paramyxovirus C proteins: inhibition of
Toll-like receptor 7/9-dependent alpha interferon induction.

Yamaguchi M(1), Kitagawa Y(1), Zhou M(1), Itoh M(2), Gotoh B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Department of Pathology,
Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta Tsukinowa-cho, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192,
Japan. (2)Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Bio-Science, Nagahama Institute 
of Bio-Science and Technology, 1266 Tamura-cho, Nagahama, Shiga 526-0829, Japan. 
(3)Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Department of Pathology,
Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta Tsukinowa-cho, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192,
Japan. Electronic address: bing@belle.shiga-med.ac.jp.

Paramyxovirus C protein targets the host interferon (IFN) system for virus immune
evasion. To identify its unknown anti-IFN activity, we examined the effect of
Sendai virus C protein on activation of the IFN-a promoter via various signaling 
pathways. This study uncovers a novel ability of C protein to block Toll-like
receptor (TLR) 7- and TLR9-dependent IFN-a induction, which is specific to
plasmacytoid dendritic cells. C protein interacts with a serine/threonine kinase 
IKKa and inhibits phosphorylation of IRF7. This anti-IFN activity of C protein is
shared across genera of the Paramyxovirinae, and thus appears to play an
important role in paramyxovirus immune evasion.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24269682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Vet Res Commun. 2014 Mar;38(1):51-8. doi: 10.1007/s11259-013-9585-7. Epub 2013
Nov 20.

Effects of florfenicol on the immune responses and the interferon-inducible genes
in broiler chickens under the impact of E. coli infection.

Hassanin O(1), Abdallah F, Awad A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Avian and Rabbit Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Zagazig University, Zagazig, Egypt, olafalcon2001@yahoo.com.

Florfenicol (FFC) as a chloramphenicol's derivative is a special broad-spectrum
antibiotic that was used in veterinary clinics. In the present study, we
investigated the effect of different doses of FFC on the humoral immune response 
of broiler chickens to Newcastle disease virus (NDV) vaccine under the impact of 
E. coli infection. In addition, the expression of the interferon-inducible genes 
(IRF7, 2'-5'OAS and Mx1) were analyzed in the spleen tissue of these chickens
using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR). The non-treated group with FFC and
non-infected with E. coli had the highest immune responses against NDV compared
with the FFC treated groups. In the case of E. coli infection, the group treated 
with FFC (30 mg/Kg BWt) showed lower NDV HI and IgG ELISA Ab levels compared to
the group treated with FFC (60 mg/Kg BWt). A dose dependent up-regulation was
observed in the level of the interferon-alpha pathway related genes (IRF7 and
2'-5'OAS) in the FFC treated groups compared to the non-treated group. At the
slaughter time, the numbers of adipocyte in the bone marrow were significantly
higher with moderate atrophy of the hematopoietic lineages in the FFC treated
birds compared to the non-treated birds. These results indicated that this FFC
dosage dependent increase in the humoral immune responses against NDV vaccine
could be attributed to its efficient therapeutic effect on the E. coli infection.
However, the increase in the FFC dosage can negatively but temporarily affect the
chicken body weights. Additionally, it can exert up regulation effect on the
chicken innate immune response with moderate hypoplasia of the bone marrow cells.

PMID: 24254460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Dev Comp Immunol. 2014 Mar;43(1):87-95. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.11.001. Epub 2013
Nov 12.

IFN-<U+03B3> in turtle: conservation in sequence and signalling and role in inhibiting
iridovirus replication in Chinese soft-shelled turtle Pelodiscus sinensis.

Fu JP(1), Chen SN(2), Zou PF(2), Huang B(3), Guo Z(2), Zeng LB(4), Qin QW(5), Nie
P(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430072, China;
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)State Key
Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430072, China. (3)College of
Fisheries, Jimei University, 43 Yindou Road, Xiamen, Fujian Province 361021,
China. (4)Yangtze River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery 
Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430223, China. (5)Key Laboratory of Tropical
Marine Bioresources and Ecology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, 164 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province 510301,
China. (6)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute
of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, Hubei Province 430072,
China; College of Fisheries, Jimei University, 43 Yindou Road, Xiamen, Fujian
Province 361021, China. Electronic address: pinnie@ihb.ac.cn.

The IFN-<U+03B3> gene was identified in a turtle, the Chinese soft-shelled turtle,
Pelodiscus sinensis, with its genome consisting of 4 exons and 3 introns. The
deduced amino acid sequence of this gene contains a signal peptide, an IFN-<U+03B3>
family signature motif (130)IQRKAVNELFPT, an NLS motif (155)KRKR and three
potential N-glycosylation sites. As revealed by real-time quantitative PCR, the
gene was constitutively expressed in all tested organs/tissues, with higher level
observed in blood, intestine and thymus. An induced expression of IFN-<U+03B3> at mRNA
level was observed in peripheral blood leucocytes (PBLs) in response to in vitro 
stimulation of LPS and PolyI:C. The overexpression of IFN-<U+03B3> in the Chinese
soft-shelled turtle artery (STA) cell line resulted in the increase in the
expression of transcriptional regulators, such as IRF1, IRF7 and STAT1, and
antiviral genes, such as Mx, PKR, implying possibly the existence of a conserved 
signalling network and role for IFN-<U+03B3> in the turtle. Furthermore, the infection
of soft-shelled turtle iridovirus (STIV) in the cell line transfected with IFN-<U+03B3> 
may cause the cell death as demonstrated with the elevated lactate dehydrogenase 
(LDH) level and cell mortality. However, the mechanism involved in the antiviral 
activity may require further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24239708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Viral Immunol. 2013 Dec;26(6):366-77. doi: 10.1089/vim.2013.0016. Epub 2013 Nov
16.

Innate immune mechanisms in Japanese encephalitis virus infection: effect on
transcription of pattern recognition receptors in mouse neuronal cells and brain 
tissue.

Fadnis PR(1), Ravi V, Desai A, Turtle L, Solomon T.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Neurovirology, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro
Sciences (NIMHANS) , Bangalore, India .

Very little information is available on the role of innate immune mechanisms in
Japanese encephalitis virus (JEV) infection. This study was designed to
investigate the role of all Pattern Recognition Receptors (PRRs) in JEV infection
in a mouse neuronal cell line in comparison to events that occur in vivo, using
JEV infected suckling and adult mice. Analysis of mRNA expression was carried out
using RT-PCR for detection of PRR genes and their downstream pathway genes, while
a PCR array technique was used to examine the complete transcription analysis.
Amongst the various innate immune receptors, TLR3 gene exhibited differential
expression in JEV-infected Neuro2a, in suckling mice and adult mouse brain cells 
but not in uninfected control cells. The downstream events of TLR3 were confirmed
by increased mRNA expression of IRF3 and interferon-ß in JEV-infected Neuro2a
cells and suckling mice brain tissue. To confirm the functional significance of
this observation, TLR3 gene silencing experiments were carried using specific
siRNA in Neuro2a cells. The results revealed a significant enhancement of JEV
replication in TLR3 gene silenced JEV-infected Neuro2a cells, thereby suggesting 
that TLR3 serves a protective role against JEV. The expression levels of other
PRRs varied. JEV-infected adult mice showed significant upregulation of TLR2 and 
MDA5 as compared to JEV-infected suckling mice and Neuro2a cells. In addition,
upregulation of Myd88 and IRF7 was also noted in adult mice. These observations, 
coupled with the fact that adult mice infected with JEV exhibited longer survival
rates, suggests that the host antiviral TLR2 response seen in adult mice was
eventually countered by the virus by using MDA5 receptor. Our findings suggest
that different PRRs appear to be involved in JEV infection in Neuro2a cells and
brains of suckling and adult mice.

PMCID: PMC4649254
PMID: 24236856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. PLoS Pathog. 2013 Oct;9(10):e1003721. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003721. Epub
2013 Oct 31.

DDX24 negatively regulates cytosolic RNA-mediated innate immune signaling.

Ma Z(1), Moore R, Xu X, Barber GN.

Author information: 
(1)Sheila and David Fuente Graduate Program in Cancer Biology, University of
Miami Miller School of Medicine, Miami, Florida, United States of America.

RIG-I-Like Receptors (RLRs) sense cytosolic viral RNA to transiently activate
type I IFN production. Here, we report that a type I IFN inducible DExD/H
helicase, DDX24, exerts a negative-regulatory effect on RLR function. Expression 
of DDX24 specifically suppressed RLR activity, while DDX24 loss, which caused
embryonic lethality, augmented cytosolic RNA-mediated innate signaling and
facilitated RNA virus replication. DDX24 preferentially bound to RNA rather than 
DNA species and influenced signaling by associating with adaptor proteins FADD
and RIP1. These events preferentially impeded IRF7 activity, an essential
transcription factor for type I IFN production. Our data provide a new function
for DDX24 and help explain innate immune gene regulation, mechanisms that may
additionally provide insight into the causes of inflammatory disease.

PMCID: PMC3814876
PMID: 24204270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Nat Immunol. 2013 Dec;14(12):1237-46. doi: 10.1038/ni.2756. Epub 2013 Nov 3.

ELF4 is critical for induction of type I interferon and the host antiviral
response.

You F(1), Wang P, Yang L, Yang G, Zhao YO, Qian F, Walker W, Sutton R, Montgomery
R, Lin R, Iwasaki A, Fikrig E.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Mol Immunol. 2014 May;11(3):218-20.

Induction of type I interferon is a central event of innate immunity, essential
for host defense. Here we report that the transcription factor ELF4 is induced by
type I interferon and upregulates interferon expression in a feed-forward loop.
ELF4 deficiency leads to reduced interferon production, resulting in enhanced
susceptibility to West Nile virus encephalitis in mice. After viral infection,
ELF4 is recruited by STING, interacts with and is activated by the MAVS-TBK1
complex, and translocates into the nucleus to bind interferon promoters.
Cooperative binding with ELF4 increases the binding affinity of interferon
regulatory factors IRF3 and IRF7, which is mediated by EICE elements. Thus, in
addition to identifying a regulator of innate immune signaling, we uncovered a
role for EICE elements in interferon transactivation.

PMCID: PMC3939855
PMID: 24185615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cell Res. 2013 Dec;23(12):1356-68. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.145. Epub 2013 Oct 29.

miR-142-3p regulates the formation and differentiation of hematopoietic stem
cells in vertebrates.

Lu X(1), Li X, He Q, Gao J, Gao Y, Liu B, Liu F.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

Previous studies on developmental hematopoiesis have mainly focused on signaling 
and transcription factors, while the appreciation of epigenetic regulation
including that of microRNAs is recent. Here, we show that in zebrafish and mouse,
miR-142-3p is specifically expressed in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs).
Knockdown of miR-142a-3p in zebrafish led to a reduced population of HSCs in the 
aorta-gonad-mesonephros (AGM) region as well as T-cell defects in the thymus.
Mechanistically, miR-142a-3p regulates HSC formation and differentiation through 
the repression of interferon regulatory factor 7 (irf7)-mediated inflammation
signaling. Finally, we show that miR-142-3p is also involved in the development
of HSCs in mouse AGM, suggesting that it has a highly conserved role in
vertebrates. Together, these findings unveil the pivotal roles that miR-142a-3p
plays in the formation and differentiation of HSCs by repressing irf7 signaling.

PMCID: PMC3847575
PMID: 24165894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Oncotarget. 2013 Nov;4(11):2067-79.

Alterations of immune response of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer with Azacytidine.

Wrangle J(1), Wang W, Koch A, Easwaran H, Mohammad HP, Vendetti F, Vancriekinge
W, Demeyer T, Du Z, Parsana P, Rodgers K, Yen RW, Zahnow CA, Taube JM, Brahmer
JR, Tykodi SS, Easton K, Carvajal RD, Jones PA, Laird PW, Weisenberger DJ, Tsai
S, Juergens RA, Topalian SL, Rudin CM, Brock MV, Pardoll D, Baylin SB.

Author information: 
(1)The Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Oncology
Center-Hematology/Medical Oncology, Baltimore, Maryland.

Innovative therapies are needed for advanced Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC). 
We have undertaken a genomics based, hypothesis driving, approach to query an
emerging potential that epigenetic therapy may sensitize to immune checkpoint
therapy targeting PD-L1/PD-1 interaction. NSCLC cell lines were treated with the 
DNA hypomethylating agent azacytidine (AZA - Vidaza) and genes and pathways
altered were mapped by genome-wide expression and DNA methylation analyses.
AZA-induced pathways were analyzed in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project by
mapping the derived gene signatures in hundreds of lung adeno (LUAD) and squamous
cell carcinoma (LUSC) samples. AZA up-regulates genes and pathways related to
both innate and adaptive immunity and genes related to immune evasion in a
several NSCLC lines. DNA hypermethylation and low expression of IRF7, an
interferon transcription factor, tracks with this signature particularly in LUSC.
In concert with these events, AZA up-regulates PD-L1 transcripts and protein, a
key ligand-mediator of immune tolerance. Analysis of TCGA samples demonstrates
that a significant proportion of primary NSCLC have low expression of AZA-induced
immune genes, including PD-L1. We hypothesize that epigenetic therapy combined
with blockade of immune checkpoints - in particular the PD-1/PD-L1 pathway - may 
augment response of NSCLC by shifting the balance between immune activation and
immune inhibition, particularly in a subset of NSCLC with low expression of these
pathways. Our studies define a biomarker strategy for response in a recently
initiated trial to examine the potential of epigenetic therapy to sensitize
patients with NSCLC to PD-1 immune checkpoint blockade.

PMCID: PMC3875770
PMID: 24162015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Hum Immunol. 2014 Jan;75(1):15-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2013.09.015. Epub 2013
Oct 9.

Decreased expression of toll like receptor signaling molecules in chronic HBV
infected patients.

Momeni M(1), Zainodini N(1), Bidaki R(2), Hassanshahi G(3), Daneshvar H(4),
Khaleghinia M(4), Ebrahim M(1), Karimi-Googheri M(4), Askari A(1), Arababadi
MK(5), Kennedy D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Immunology of Infectious Diseases Research Center, Rafsanjan University of
Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran. (2)Dept. of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine,
Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran. (3)Molecular Medicine 
Research Center, Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran.
(4)Dept. of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, Kerman University of Medical
Sciences, Kerman, Iran. (5)Immunology of Infectious Diseases Research Center,
Rafsanjan University of Medical Sciences, Rafsanjan, Iran. Electronic address:
dr.kazemi@rums.ac.ir. (6)School of Biomolecular and Physical Science, Eskitis
Institute for Drug Discovery, Griffith University Nathan, Queensland, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: Toll like receptors (TLRs) and their signaling molecules play
important roles in microbe recognition and induction of immune responses,
including production of inflammatory cytokines, against viral infections.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine expression levels of TLR
signaling molecules (IRAK1, IRAK4, TRAF3, and IRF7) and the pro-inflammatory
cytokines, IL-12 and IL-6 in chronic HBV infected (CHB) patients.
DESIGN: This study was performed on 60 CHB patients and 60 healthy controls and
the expression of IRAK1, IRAK4, TRAF3, and IRF7 and their downstream inflammatory
cytokines (IL-12 and IL-6) were evaluated by Real-Time PCR and ELISA techniques.
RESULTS: The results demonstrated that expression of IRAK4, TRAF3, and IRF7 were 
significantly decreased in PBMCs of CHB patients in comparison to healthy
controls. Serum levels of IL-12 were significantly increased, while, IL-6 were
not differ between patients and controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on the results presented here it seems that CHB patients do
not express appropriate levels of the genes in the TLRs pathway which may lead to
impaired immune responses against HBV infection which is seen in the patients.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics. All 
rights reserved.

PMID: 24120739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Fish Dis. 2014 Dec;37(12):1041-54. doi: 10.1111/jfd.12182. Epub 2013 Sep 24.

Disease resistance and immune-relevant gene expression in golden mandarin fish,
Siniperca scherzeri Steindachner, infected with infectious spleen and kidney
necrosis virus-like agent.

Shin GW(1), White SL, Dahms HU, Jeong HD, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Fundamental Research Department, National Fisheries Research and Development
Institute, Busan, Korea.

Infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus (ISKNV), family Iridoviridae, genus
Megalocytivirus, may cause high mortality rates such as those seen in mandarin
fish, Siniperca chuatsi. ISKNV has attracted much attention due to the possible
environmental threat and economic losses it poses on both cultured and wild
populations. We have investigated the pathogenicity of ISKNV-like agent
Megalocytivirus, isolated from infected pearl gourami, in golden mandarin fish,
Siniperca scherzeri - a member of the Percichthyidae family - and in another
Percichthyidae species, S. chuatsi. Fish were challenged with four different
doses of ISKNV-like agent Megalocytivirus (1, 10, 100 or 1000 µg per fish) over a
30-day period, and cumulative fish mortalities were calculated for each group. No
significant mortality was observed for fish challenged with the lowest dose (1 µg
per fish) relative to a control group. However, all other challenged groups
showed 100% mortality over a 30-day period in proportion to the challenge dose.
Quantitative real-time PCR was performed to measure mRNA expression levels for
six immune-related genes in golden mandarin fish following ISKNV-like agent
challenge. mRNA expression levels for IRF1, Mx, viperin and interleukin 8
significantly increased, while mRNA levels for IRF2 and IRF7 remained constant or
declined during the challenge period.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24111797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Pathol. 2014 Jan;232(1):57-64. doi: 10.1002/path.4267.

Defective control of vitamin D receptor-mediated epithelial STAT1 signalling
predisposes to severe respiratory syncytial virus bronchiolitis.

Stoppelenburg AJ(1), von Hegedus JH, Huis in't Veld R, Bont L, Boes M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Immunology and Infectious Diseases, University
Medical Centre Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) infection causes bronchiolitis in infants with 
seasonal frequency, for which vitamin D deficiency and a well-described
polymorphism in the vitamin D receptor (VDR) FokI are important risk factors.
Recent studies suggest that vitamin D regulates immune pathways in airway
epithelial cells during RSV infection. It is not understood why the VDR FokI
polymorphism predisposes to severe RSV bronchiolitis. We investigated how the VDR
FokI polymorphism regulates the epithelial response to RSV infection. To this
end, we over-expressed the normal and FokI VDR variants in A549 airway epithelial
cells. Vitamin D restrained the expression of both NF<U+03BA>B- and STAT1-induced
antiviral genes. However, while NF<U+03BA>B control by vitamin D remained intact, both
RSV-induced phosphorylation of STAT1 and expression of its downstream targets,
IRF1 and IRF7, escaped vitamin D control in FokI epithelial cells. The poor
capacity of vitamin D to regulate IRF1 in FokI VDR-expressing cells was
recapitulated using blood samples from normal and FokI VDR-genotyped healthy
donors. Hence, we provide mechanistic insight that the FokI VDR polymorphism
renders STAT1-mediated antiviral immune reactions to RSV infection non-responsive
to vitamin D control, resulting in enhanced immunopathology and exacerbated RSV
bronchiolitis.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24105653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Mar;92(3):239-54. doi: 10.1007/s00109-013-1090-5. Epub
2013 Oct 6.

The signal transducers Stat1 and Stat3 and their novel target Jmjd3 drive the
expression of inflammatory genes in microglia.

Przanowski P(1), Dabrowski M, Ellert-Miklaszewska A, Kloss M, Mieczkowski J, Kaza
B, Ronowicz A, Hu F, Piotrowski A, Kettenmann H, Komorowski J, Kaminska B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, Nencki Institute of Experimental
Biology, Warsaw, Poland.

Comment in
    J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Mar;92(3):197-200.

Most neurological diseases are associated with chronic inflammation initiated by 
the activation of microglia, which produce cytotoxic and inflammatory factors.
Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) are potent regulators 
of gene expression but contribution of particular STAT to inflammatory gene
expression and STAT-dependent transcriptional networks underlying brain
inflammation need to be identified. In the present study, we investigated the
genomic distribution of Stat binding sites and the role of Stats in the gene
expression in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-activated primary microglial cultures.
Integration of chromatin immunoprecipitation-promoter microarray data and
transcriptome data revealed novel Stat-target genes including Jmjd3, Ccl5, Ezr,
Ifih1, Irf7, Uba7, and Pim1. While knockdown of individual Stat had little effect
on the expression of tested genes, knockdown of both Stat1 and Stat3 inhibited
the expression of Jmjd3 and inflammatory genes. Transcriptional regulation of
Jmjd3 by Stat1 and Stat3 is a novel mechanism crucial for launching inflammatory 
responses in microglia. The effects of Jmjd3 on inflammatory gene expression were
independent of its H3K27me3 demethylase activity. Forced expression of
constitutively activated Stat1 and Stat3 induced the expression of Jmjd3,
inflammation-related genes, and the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines as
potently as lipopolysacharide. Gene set enrichment and gene function analysis
revealed categories linked to the inflammatory response in LPS and Stat1C +
Stat3C groups. We defined upstream pathways that activate STATs in response to
LPS and demonstrated contribution of Tlr4 and Il-6 and interferon-<U+03B3> signaling.
Our findings define novel direct transcriptional targets of Stat1 and Stat3 and
highlight their contribution to inflammatory gene expression.KEY MESSAGE:
Combined analysis of genomic Stat occupancy and transcriptome revealed novel Stat
target genes in LPS-induced microglia. Jmjd3 transcription factor is a novel
transcriptional target of Stat1 and Stat3. Stat1 and Stat3 cooperate with Jmjd3
to induce the expression of pro-inflammatory genes. Constitutively active Stat1
and Stat3 fully mimic the LPS-induced upregulation of inflammatory genes and
secretion of cytokines.

PMCID: PMC3940857
PMID: 24097101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Mol Immunol. 2014 Feb;57(2):100-10. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.08.007. Epub 2013 
Oct 4.

MAVS-dependent IRF3/7 bypass of interferon ß-induction restricts the response to 
measles infection in CD150Tg mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells.

Takaki H(1), Honda K, Atarashi K, Kobayashi F, Ebihara T, Oshiumi H, Matsumoto M,
Shingai M, Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Measles virus (MV) infects CD150Tg/Ifnar (IFN alpha receptor)(-/-) mice but not
CD150 (a human MV receptor)-transgenic (Tg) mice. We have shown that bone
marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) from CD150Tg/Ifnar(-/-) mice are
permissive to MV in contrast to those from simple CD150Tg mice, which reveals a
crucial role of type I interferon (IFN) in natural tropism against MV. Yet, the
mechanism whereby BMDCs produce initial type I IFN has not been elucidated in MV 
infection. RNA virus infection usually allows cells to generate double-stranded
RNA and induce activation of IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3/7 transcription
factors, leading to the production of type I IFN through the retinoic
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)/melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5
(MDA5)-mitochondrial antiviral signaling protein (MAVS) pathway. In mouse
experimental BMDCs models, we found CD150Tg/Mavs(-/-)BMDCs, but not
CD150Tg/Irf3(-/-)/Irf7(-/-)BMDCs, permissive to MV. IFN-a/ß were not induced in
MV-infected CD150Tg/Mavs(-/-)BMDCs, while IFN-ß was subtly induced in
CD150Tg/Irf3(-/-)/Irf7(-/-)BMDCs. In vivo systemic infection was therefore
established by transfer of MV-infected CD150Tg/Mavs(-/-) BMDCs to
CD150Tg/Ifnar(-/-) mice. These data indicate that MAVS-dependent,
IRF3/7-independent IFN-ß induction triggers the activation of the IFNAR pathway
so as to restrict the spread of MV by infected BMDCs. Hence, MAVS participates in
the initial induction of type I IFN in BMDCs and IFNAR protects against MV
spreading. We also showed the importance of IL-10-producing CD4(+) T cells
induced by MV-infected BMDCs in vitro, which may account for immune modulation
due to the functional aberration of DCs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24096085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2013;78:105-16. doi:
10.1101/sqb.2013.78.020321. Epub 2013 Oct 3.

The IRF family transcription factors at the interface of innate and adaptive
immune responses.

Ikushima H(1), Negishi H(1), Taniguchi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of Industrial Science, The
University of Tokyo, Komaba 4-6-1, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan.

The interferon-regulatory factor (IRF) family, originally identified as
transcriptional regulators of the type I interferon system, consists of nine
members in mammals. A large number of studies have revealed the versatile and
critical functions performed by this transcription factor family in immunity and 
other biological processes. Most notably, the advances in the study of signal
transducing innate immune receptors have placed many IRF members as central
mediators in the regulation of innate immune responses. In parallel, mechanistic 
studies have made it clearer that many IRFs exert their function either in
cooperation or competition with other factors. In this article, we discuss
current advances on the multipurpose and critical functions of IRFs in the
regulation of innate immunity, particularly as they instruct adaptive immunity.

Copyright © 2013 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 24092468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Front Immunol. 2013 Sep 19;4:291. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00291. eCollection
2013.

Bioinformatics analysis of the factors controlling type I IFN gene expression in 
autoimmune disease and virus-induced immunity.

Feng D(1), Barnes BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rutgers Biomedical and
Health Sciences , Newark, NJ , USA ; Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences, New 
Jersey Medical School-Cancer Center, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New 
Jersey , Newark, NJ , USA.

Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and Sjögren's syndrome (SS)
display increased levels of type I interferon (IFN)-induced genes. Plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (PDCs) are natural interferon producing cells and considered to
be a primary source of IFN-a in these two diseases. Differential expression
patterns of type I IFN-inducible transcripts can be found in different immune
cell subsets and in patients with both active and inactive autoimmune disease. A 
type I IFN gene signature generally consists of three groups of IFN-induced genes
- those regulated in response to virus-induced type I IFN, those regulated by the
IFN-induced mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular-regulated kinase
(MAPK/ERK) pathway, and those by the IFN-induced phosphoinositide-3 kinase
(PI-3K) pathway. These three groups of type I IFN-regulated genes control
important cellular processes such as apoptosis, survival, adhesion, and
chemotaxis, that when dysregulated, contribute to autoimmunity. With the recent
generation of large datasets in the public domain from next-generation sequencing
and DNA microarray experiments, one can perform detailed analyses of cell-type
specific gene signatures as well as identify distinct transcription factors (TFs)
that differentially regulate these gene signatures. We have performed
bioinformatics analysis of data in the public domain and experimental data from
our lab to gain insight into the regulation of type I IFN gene expression. We
have found that the genetic landscape of the IFNA and IFNB genes are occupied by 
TFs, such as insulators CTCF and cohesin, that negatively regulate transcription,
as well as interferon regulatory factor (IRF)5 and IRF7, that positively and
distinctly regulate IFNA subtypes. A detailed understanding of the factors
controlling type I IFN gene transcription will significantly aid in the
identification and development of new therapeutic strategies targeting the IFN
pathway in autoimmune disease.

PMCID: PMC3776951
PMID: 24065968  [PubMed]


217. BMC Immunol. 2013 Sep 24;14:44. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-14-44.

CAWS administration increases the expression of interferon <U+03B3> and complement
factors that lead to severe vasculitis in DBA/2 mice.

Nagi-Miura N(1), Okuzaki D, Torigata K, Sakurai MA, Ito A, Ohno N, Nojima H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immunopharmacology of Microbial Products, School of Pharmacy,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Sciences, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji,
Tokyo 192-0329, Japan. ohnonao@toyaku.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Candida albicans water-soluble fraction (CAWS), a
mannoprotein-ß-glucan complex obtained from the culture supernatant of C.
albicans NBRC1385, causes CAWS-mediated vasculitis (CAWS-vasculitis) in B6 and
DBA/2 mice with mild and lethal symptoms, respectively. Why CAWS is lethal only
in DBA/2 mice remains unknown.
RESULTS: We performed DNA microarray analyses using mRNA obtained from peripheral
blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) of B6 and DBA/2 mice and compared their
respective transcriptomes. We found that the mRNA levels of interferon-<U+03B3> (Ifng)
and several genes that regulate the complement system, such as C3, C4, Cfb, Cfh, 
and Fcna, were increased dramatically only in DBA/2 mice at 4 and 8 weeks after
CAWS administration. The dramatic increase was confirmed by quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reactions (qRT-PCR). Moreover, mRNA levels of
immune-related genes, such as Irf1, Irf7, Irf9, Cebpb, Ccl4, Itgam, Icam1, and
IL-12rb1, whose expression levels are known to be increased by Ifng, were also
increased, but only in DBA/2 mice. By contrast, the mRNA level of Dectin-2, the
critical receptor for the a-mannans of CAWS, was increased slightly and similarly
in both B6 and DBA/2 mice after CAWS administration.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results suggest that CAWS administration induces
Dectin-2 mediated CAWS-vasculitis in both B6 and DBA/2 mice and the expression of
Ifng, but only in DBA/2 mice, which led to increased expression of C3, C4, Cfb,
Cfh, and Fcna and an associated increase in lethality in these mice. This model
may contribute to our understanding of the pathogenesis of severe human
vasculitis.

PMCID: PMC3876726
PMID: 24063402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Front Genet. 2013 Sep 17;4:179. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00179. eCollection 2013.

Computationally efficient permutation-based confidence interval estimation for
tail-area FDR.

Millstein J(1), Volfson D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Challenges of satisfying parametric assumptions in genomic settings with
thousands or millions of tests have led investigators to combine powerful False
Discovery Rate (FDR) approaches with computationally expensive but exact
permutation testing. We describe a computationally efficient permutation-based
approach that includes a tractable estimator of the proportion of true null
hypotheses, the variance of the log of tail-area FDR, and a confidence interval
(CI) estimator, which accounts for the number of permutations conducted and
dependencies between tests. The CI estimator applies a binomial distribution and 
an overdispersion parameter to counts of positive tests. The approach is general 
with regards to the distribution of the test statistic, it performs favorably in 
comparison to other approaches, and reliable FDR estimates are demonstrated with 
as few as 10 permutations. An application of this approach to relate sleep
patterns to gene expression patterns in mouse hypothalamus yielded a set of 11
transcripts associated with 24 h REM sleep [FDR = 0.15 (0.08, 0.26)]. Two of the 
corresponding genes, Sfrp1 and Sfrp4, are involved in wnt signaling and several
others, Irf7, Ifit1, Iigp2, and Ifih1, have links to interferon signaling. These 
genes would have been overlooked had a typical a priori FDR threshold such as
0.05 or 0.1 been applied. The CI provides the flexibility for choosing a
significance threshold based on tolerance for false discoveries and precision of 
the FDR estimate. That is, it frees the investigator to use a more data-driven
approach to define significance, such as the minimum estimated FDR, an option
that is especially useful for weak effects, often observed in studies of complex 
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3775454
PMID: 24062767  [PubMed]


219. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Dec;20:257-69. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.09.016. Epub
2013 Sep 20.

Global gene expression changes in BV2 microglial cell line during rabies virus
infection.

Zhao P(1), Yang Y, Feng H, Zhao L, Qin J, Zhang T, Wang H, Yang S, Xia X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Jilin Province for Zoonosis Prevention and Control,
Institute of Military Veterinary, Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Changchun
130122, China. Electronic address: pzhao@som.umaryland.edu.

Microglia plays a crucial role during virus pathogenesis in the central nervous
system (CNS). Infection by rabies virus (RABV) causes a fatal infection in the
CNS of all warm-blooded animals. However, the microglial responses to RABV
infection have been scarcely reported. To better understand microglia-RABV
interactions at the transcriptional level, a genome wide gene expression profile 
in mouse microglial cells line BV2 was performed using microarray analysis. The
global messenger RNA changes in murine microglial cell line BV2 after 12, 24 and 
48 h of infection with rabies virus CVS-11 strain were investigated using DNA
Microarray and quantitative real-time PCR. Infection of CVS-11 at different time 
points induced different gene expression signatures in BV2 cells. The expression 
patterns of differentially expressed genes are shown by K-means clustering in
four clusters in RABV- or mock-infected microglia at 12, 24 and 48h post
infection (hpi). Gene ontology and network analysis of the differentially
expressed genes in responses to RABV were performed by the Ingenuity Pathway
Analysis system (IPA, Ingenuity® Systems, http://www.ingenuity.com). The results 
revealed that 28 genes were significantly up-regulated (P<0.01) and 1 gene was
significantly down-regulated (P<0.01) in microglial cells at 12hpi, 72 genes were
significantly up-regulated (P<0.01) and 24 genes were significantly
down-regulated (P<0.01) at 24hpi, and 671 genes were significantly up-regulated
(P<0.01) and 190 genes were significantly down-regulated (P<0.01) at 48hpi. Genes
in BV2 were significantly regulated (P<0.01) in response to RABV infection and
they were found to be interferon stimulated genes (Isg15, Isg20, Oasl1, Oasl2,
Ifit2, Irf7 and Ifi203), chemokine genes (Ccl5, Cxcl10 and Ccrl2) and the
proinflammatory factor gene (Interleukin 6). The results indicated that the
differentially expressed genes from microglial cells after RABV infection were
mainly involved in innate immune responses, inflammatory responses and host
antiviral responses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24056016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Front Immunol. 2013 Sep 6;4:266. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00266.

The role of type 1 interferon in systemic sclerosis.

Wu M(1), Assassi S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunogenetics, Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston , Houston, TX ,
USA.

Systemic Sclerosis (Scleroderma, SSc) is an autoimmune disease characterized by
vasculopathy, inflammation, and fibrosis that can lead to loss of organ function.
Type I interferons (IFNs) are family of cytokines that mitigate the deleterious
effects of viral and bacterial infections in the innate immunity system. Past
several years, research efforts have been focused on the role of type I IFN and
IFN-inducible genes in the pathogenesis of SSc. Polymorphisms in the Interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-5, IRF7, and IRF8 are associated with SSc, Similarly,
polymorphism of Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription (STAT)-4, has
been established as a genetic risk factor of SSc. IRFs and STAT4 proteins are key
activators of type I IFN signaling pathways. An IFN signature (increased
expression and activation of IFN-regulated genes) has been observed in the
peripheral blood and skin biopsy samples of patients with SSc. Furthermore, a
plasma IFN-inducible chemokine score correlated with markers of disease severity 
and autoantibody subtypes in SSc. In this review, we summarize our current
knowledge of the role of type I IFNs and IFN-inducible genes in the pathogenesis 
of SSc and their potential role as biomarkers and therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC3764426
PMID: 24046769  [PubMed]


221. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4194-201. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300799. Epub 2013 
Sep 16.

The roles of IRF-3 and IRF-7 in innate antiviral immunity against dengue virus.

Chen HW(1), King K, Tu J, Sanchez M, Luster AD, Shresta S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, CA 92037.

We investigated the roles of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF-7 in innate
antiviral immunity against dengue virus (DENV). Double-deficient Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-)
mice infected with the DENV2 strain S221 possessed 1,000-150,000 fold higher
levels of viral RNA than wild-type and single-deficient mice 24 h postinfection
(hpi); however, they remained resistant to lethal infection. IFN-a/ß was induced 
similarly in wild-type and Irf-3(-/-) mice post-DENV infection, whereas in the
Irf-7(-/-) and Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice, significantly low levels of IFN-a/ß
expression was observed within 24 hpi. IFN-stimulated gene induction was also
delayed in Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice relative to wild-type and single-deficient mice.
In particular, Cxcl10 and Ifna2 were rapidly induced independently of both IRF-3 
and IRF-7 in the Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice with DENV infection. Higher levels of
serum IFN-<U+03B3>, IL-6, CXCL10, IL-8, IL-12 p70, and TNF were also observed in
Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice 24 hpi, at which time point viral titers peaked and started
to be cleared. Ab-mediated blockade experiments revealed that IFN-<U+03B3>, CXCL10, and 
CXCR3 function to restrict DENV replication in Irf-3(-/-)7(-/-) mice.
Additionally, the IFN-stimulated genes Cxcl10, Ifit1, Ifit3, and Mx2 can be
induced via an IRF-3- and IRF-7-independent pathway that does not involve IFN-<U+03B3>
signaling for protection against DENV. Collectively, these results demonstrate
that IRF-3 and IRF-7 are redundant, albeit IRF-7 plays a more important role than
IRF-3 in inducing the initial IFN-a/ß response; only the combined actions of
IRF-3 and IRF-7 are necessary for efficient control of early DENV infection; and 
the late, IRF-3- and IRF-7-independent pathway contributes to anti-DENV immunity.

PMCID: PMC3795795
PMID: 24043884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 25;288(43):31268-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.462341. Epub
2013 Sep 9.

Toll-like receptor 3-mediated necrosis via TRIF, RIP3, and MLKL.

Kaiser WJ(1), Sridharan H, Huang C, Mandal P, Upton JW, Gough PJ, Sehon CA,
Marquis RW, Bertin J, Mocarski ES.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Vaccine Center,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling is triggered by pathogen-associated molecular 
patterns that mediate well established cytokine-driven pathways, activating NF-<U+03BA>B
together with IRF3/IRF7. In addition, TLR3 drives caspase 8-regulated programmed 
cell death pathways reminiscent of TNF family death receptor signaling. We find
that inhibition or elimination of caspase 8 during stimulation of TLR2, TLR3,
TLR4, TLR5, or TLR9 results in receptor interacting protein (RIP) 3
kinase-dependent programmed necrosis that occurs through either TIR
domain-containing adapter-inducing interferon-ß (TRIF) or MyD88 signal
transduction. TLR3 or TLR4 directly activates programmed necrosis through a RIP
homotypic interaction motif-dependent association of TRIF with RIP3 kinase (also 
called RIPK3). In fibroblasts, this pathway proceeds independent of RIP1 or its
kinase activity, but it remains dependent on mixed lineage kinase domain-like
protein (MLKL) downstream of RIP3 kinase. Here, we describe two small molecule
RIP3 kinase inhibitors and employ them to demonstrate the common requirement for 
RIP3 kinase in programmed necrosis induced by RIP1-RIP3, DAI-RIP3, and TRIF-RIP3 
complexes. Cell fate decisions following TLR signaling parallel death receptor
signaling and rely on caspase 8 to suppress RIP3-dependent programmed necrosis
whether initiated directly by a TRIF-RIP3-MLKL pathway or indirectly via TNF
activation and the RIP1-RIP3-MLKL necroptosis pathway.

PMCID: PMC3829437
PMID: 24019532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(8):e1003597. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003597. Epub 2013 Aug
29.

Intact type I Interferon production and IRF7 function in sooty mangabeys.

Bosinger SE(1), Johnson ZP, Folkner KA, Patel N, Hashempour T, Jochems SP, Del
Rio Estrada PM, Paiardini M, Lin R, Vanderford TH, Hiscott J, Silvestri G.

Author information: 
(1)Divison of Microbiology and Immunology, Emory Vaccine Center, Yerkes National 
Primate Research Center, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America.
sbosing@emory.edu

In contrast to pathogenic HIV/SIV infections of humans and rhesus macaques (RMs),
natural SIV infection of sooty mangabeys (SMs) is typically non-pathogenic
despite high viremia. Several studies suggested that low immune activation and
relative resistance of CD4+ central memory T-cells from virus infection are
mechanisms that protect SMs from AIDS. In 2008 it was reported that plasmacytoid 
dendritic cells (pDCs) of SMs exhibit attenuated interferon-alpha (IFN-a)
responses to TLR7/9 ligands in vitro, and that species-specific amino acid
substitutions in SM Interferon Regulatory Factor-7 (IRF7) are responsible for
this observation. Based on these findings, these authors proposed that "muted"
IFN-a responses are responsible for the benign nature of SIV infection in SMs.
However, other studies indicated that acutely SIV-infected SMs show robust IFN-a 
responses and marked upregulation of Interferon Stimulated Genes (ISGs). To
investigate this apparent disparity, we first examined the role of the reported
IRF7 amino acid substitutions in SMs. To this end, we sequenced all IRF7 exons in
16 breeders, and exons displaying variability (exons 2,3,5,6,7,8) in the
remainder of the colony (177 animals). We found that the reported Ser-Gly
substitution at position 191 was a sequencing error, and that several of the
remaining substitutions represent only minor alleles. In addition, functional
assays using recombinant SM IRF7 showed no defect in its ability to translocate
in the nucleus and drive transcription from an IFN-a promoter. Furthermore, in
vitro stimulation of SM peripheral blood mononuclear cells with either the TLR7
agonist CL097 or SIV(mac239) induced an 500-800-fold induction of IFN-a and IFN-ß
mRNA, and levels of IFN-a production by pDCs similar to those of RMs or humans.
These data establish that IFN-a and IRF7 signaling in SMs are largely intact,
with differences with RMs that are minor and unlikely to play any role in the
AIDS resistance of SIV-infected SMs.

PMCID: PMC3757038
PMID: 24009514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Sep 3;7:85. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-85.

Systems analysis reveals a transcriptional reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype 
induced by SNAIL-inhibitor GN-25.

Azmi AS(1), Bollig-Fischer A, Bao B, Park BJ, Lee SH, Yong-Song G, Dyson G, Reddy
CK, Sarkar FH, Mohammad RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, John R, HWCRC 732, Detroit, MI, 4100, USA.
azmia@karmanos.org.

BACKGROUND: HMLEs (HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE, Kras-HMLE-SNAIL pairs) serve as
excellent model system to interrogate the effect of SNAIL targeted agents that
reverse epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We had earlier developed a
SNAIL-p53 interaction inhibitor (GN-25) that was shown to suppress SNAIL
function. In this report, using systems biology and pathway network analysis, we 
show that GN-25 could cause reversal of EMT leading to mesenchymal-to-epithelial 
transition (MET) in a well-recognized HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL models.
RESULTS: GN-25 induced MET was found to be consistent with growth inhibition,
suppression of spheroid forming capacity and induction of apoptosis. Pathway
network analysis of mRNA expression using microarrays from GN-25 treated
Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells showed an orchestrated global re-organization of EMT
network genes. The expression signatures were validated at the protein level
(down-regulation of mesenchymal markers such as TWIST1 and TWIST2 that was
concurrent with up-regulation of epithelial marker E-Cadherin), and RNAi studies 
validated SNAIL dependent mechanism of action of the drug. Most importantly,
GN-25 modulated many major transcription factors (TFs) such as inhibition of
oncogenic TFs Myc, TBX2, NR3C1 and led to enhancement in the expression of tumor 
suppressor TFs such as SMAD7, DD1T3, CEBPA, HOXA5, TFEB, IRF1, IRF7 and XBP1,
resulting in MET as well as cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: Our systems and network investigations provide convincing
pre-clinical evidence in support of the clinical application of GN-25 for the
reversal of EMT and thereby reducing cancer cell aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC3848843
PMID: 24004452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Infect Immun. 2013 Nov;81(11):4299-310. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00477-13. Epub 2013 Sep 
3.

Deciphering the contribution of human meningothelial cells to the inflammatory
and antimicrobial response at the meninges.

Royer PJ(1), Rogers AJ, Wooldridge KG, Tighe P, Mahdavi J, Rittig MG, Ala'Aldeen 
D.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Medical Sciences and School of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United Kingdom.

We have investigated the response of primary human meningothelial cells to
Neisseria meningitidis. Through a transcriptome analysis, we provide a
comprehensive examination of the response of meningothelial cells to bacterial
infection. A wide range of chemokines are elicited which act to attract and
activate the main players of innate and adaptive immunity. We showed that
meningothelial cells expressed a high level of Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4), and, 
using a gene silencing strategy, we demonstrated the contribution of this
pathogen recognition receptor in meningothelial cell activation. Secretion of
interleukin-6 (IL-6), CXCL10, and CCL5 was almost exclusively TLR4 dependent and 
relied on MyD88 and TRIF adaptor cooperation. In contrast, IL-8 induction was
independent of the presence of TLR4, MyD88, and TRIF. Transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B
p65, p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), Jun N-terminal protein kinase
(JNK1), IRF3, and IRF7 were activated after contact with bacteria. Interestingly,
the protein kinase IRAK4 was found to play a minor role in the meningothelial
cell response to Neisseria infection. Our work highlights the role of
meningothelial cells in the development of an immune response and inflammation in
the central nervous system (CNS) in response to meningococcal infection. It also 
sheds light on the complexity of intracellular signaling after TLR triggering.

PMCID: PMC3811830
PMID: 24002066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Immunol. 2013 Sep 15;191(6):3393-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300740. Epub 2013
Aug 16.

Negative regulation of Nmi on virus-triggered type I IFN production by targeting 
IRF7.

Wang J(1), Yang B, Hu Y, Zheng Y, Zhou H, Wang Y, Ma Y, Mao K, Yang L, Lin G, Ji 
Y, Wu X, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes of Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, People's Republic of China.

Viral infection causes host cells to produce type I IFNs, which play a critical
role in viral clearance. IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 7 is the master regulator of
type I IFN-dependent immune responses. In this article, we report that N-Myc and 
STATs interactor (Nmi), a Sendai virus-inducible protein, interacted with IRF7
and inhibited virus-triggered type I IFN production. The overexpression of Nmi
inhibited the Sendai virus-triggered induction of type I IFNs, whereas the
knockdown of Nmi promoted IFN production. Furthermore, the enhanced production of
IFNs resulting from Nmi knockdown was sufficient to protect cells from infection 
by vesicular stomatitis virus. In addition, Nmi was found to promote the
K48-linked ubiquitination of IRF7 and the proteasome-dependent degradation of
this protein. Finally, an impairment of antiviral responses is also detectable in
Nmi-transgenic mice. These findings suggest that Nmi is a negative regulator of
the virus-triggered induction of type I IFNs that targets IRF7.

PMID: 23956435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(8):e1003514. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003514. Epub 2013 Aug
8.

A systematic analysis of host factors reveals a Med23-interferon-<U+03BB> regulatory
axis against herpes simplex virus type 1 replication.

Griffiths SJ(1), Koegl M, Boutell C, Zenner HL, Crump CM, Pica F, Gonzalez O,
Friedel CC, Barry G, Martin K, Craigon MH, Chen R, Kaza LN, Fossum E, Fazakerley 
JK, Efstathiou S, Volpi A, Zimmer R, Ghazal P, Haas J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathway Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United
Kingdom.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is a neurotropic virus causing vesicular oral
or genital skin lesions, meningitis and other diseases particularly harmful in
immunocompromised individuals. To comprehensively investigate the complex
interaction between HSV-1 and its host we combined two genome-scale screens for
host factors (HFs) involved in virus replication. A yeast two-hybrid screen for
protein interactions and a RNA interference (RNAi) screen with a druggable genome
small interfering RNA (siRNA) library confirmed existing and identified novel HFs
which functionally influence HSV-1 infection. Bioinformatic analyses found the
358 HFs were enriched for several pathways and multi-protein complexes. Of
particular interest was the identification of Med23 as a strongly anti-viral
component of the largely pro-viral Mediator complex, which links specific
transcription factors to RNA polymerase II. The anti-viral effect of Med23 on
HSV-1 replication was confirmed in gain-of-function gene overexpression
experiments, and this inhibitory effect was specific to HSV-1, as a range of
other viruses including Vaccinia virus and Semliki Forest virus were unaffected
by Med23 depletion. We found Med23 significantly upregulated expression of the
type III interferon family (IFN-<U+03BB>) at the mRNA and protein level by directly
interacting with the transcription factor IRF7. The synergistic effect of Med23
and IRF7 on IFN-<U+03BB> induction suggests this is the major transcription factor for
IFN-<U+03BB> expression. Genotypic analysis of patients suffering recurrent orofacial
HSV-1 outbreaks, previously shown to be deficient in IFN-<U+03BB> secretion, found a
significant correlation with a single nucleotide polymorphism in the IFN-<U+03BB>3
(IL28b) promoter strongly linked to Hepatitis C disease and treatment outcome.
This paper describes a link between Med23 and IFN-<U+03BB>, provides evidence for the
crucial role of IFN-<U+03BB> in HSV-1 immune control, and highlights the power of
integrative genome-scale approaches to identify HFs critical for disease
progression and outcome.

PMCID: PMC3738494
PMID: 23950709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Sep 6;438(4):619-23. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.08.006. Epub 2013 Aug 11.

Borna disease virus nucleoprotein inhibits type I interferon induction through
the interferon regulatory factor 7 pathway.

Song W(1), Kao W, Zhai A, Qian J, Li Y, Zhang Q, Zhao H, Hu Y, Li H, Zhang F.

Author information: 
(1)The Heilongjiang Key Laboratory of Immunity and Infection, Heilongjiang,
China.

The expression of type I interferon (IFN) is one of the most potent innate
defences against viral infection in higher vertebrates. Borna disease virus (BDV)
establishes persistent, noncytolytic infections in animals and in cultured cells.
Early studies have shown that the BDV phosphoprotein can inhibit the activation
of type I IFN through the TBK1-IRF3 pathway. The function of the BDV
nucleoprotein in the inhibition of IFN activity is not yet clear. In this study, 
we demonstrated IRF7 activation and increased IFN-a/ß expression in a
BDV-persistently infected human oligodendroglia cell line following RNA
interference-mediated BDV nucleoprotein silencing. Furthermore, we showed that
BDV nucleoprotein prevented the nuclear localisation of IRF7 and inhibited
endogenous IFN induction by poly(I:C), coxsackie virus B3 and IFN-ß. Our findings
provide evidence for a previously undescribed mechanism by which the BDV
nucleoprotein inhibits type I IFN expression by interfering with the IRF7
pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23939047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Dec;41(4):534-43. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.07.017. Epub
2013 Aug 1.

Expression regulation of zebrafish interferon regulatory factor 9 by promoter
analysis.

Shi J(1), Zhang YB, Zhang JS, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China; Department of
Bioengineering & Environmental Science, Changsha University, Changsha 410003,
China.

We previously showed that a fish interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 9 (IRF9)
homologue, crucian carp Carassius auratus IRF9, displays constitutively nuclear
localization and involvement in fish IFN-dependent JAK-STAT signaling; however,
little is known about the expression regulation of fish IRF9. Here, we
characterized the expression of zebrafish IRF9 by promoter analysis. Zebrafish
IRF9 gene promoter contained several putative transcription factor binding sites,
including one ISRE (IFN-stimulated response element), one GAS (IFN gamma
activation sequence) and three GATEs (IFN<U+03B3> activated transcriptional element,
GATE1/2/3). Further sequence analyses revealed that GAS and GATE motifs existed
in all promoters of IRF9 from mammals and fishes. Luciferase assays confirmed
that zebrafish IRF9 promoter could be activated by zebrafish IFNfs and zebrafish 
IFN<U+03B3>2, as well as transcription factors IRF3, IRF7, and combination of IRF9 and
STAT2. Treatment of recombinant crucian carp IFN protein or overexpression of
zebrafish IFN<U+03B3>2 both led to significant increase in crucian carp IRF9 mRNA and
protein in cultured fish cells. Comparison of IFN-stimulated promoter activity
revealed much more significant induction of zebrafish IRF9 by zebrafish IFN<U+03B3>2
than by zebrafish IFNfs. Mutation analyses showed that the putative GAS and GATE3
contributed to zebrafish IFN<U+03B3>2-triggered IRF9 expression, whereas the putative
ISRE and the other two GATEs were not functional for induction of zebrafish IRF9.
These results together indicated that the expression property of IRF9 might be
conserved from fish to mammals and that some not yet identified mechanisms could 
exist in IRF9 gene transcription regulation in response to IFNs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23916490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Cell Rep. 2013 Aug 15;4(3):530-41. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.07.009. Epub 2013
Aug 1.

Identification of PHRF1 as a tumor suppressor that promotes the TGF-ß cytostatic 
program through selective release of TGIF-driven PML inactivation.

Ettahar A(1), Ferrigno O, Zhang MZ, Ohnishi M, Ferrand N, Prunier C, Levy L,
Bourgeade MF, Bieche I, Romero DG, Colland F, Atfi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling and Carcinogenesis, INSERM UMRS938, 184 Rue du
Faubourg St-Antoine, 75571 Paris, France.

The homeodomain protein TGIF (TG-interacting factor) restricts TGF-ß/Smad
cytostatic signaling by interfering with the nucleocytoplasmic transit of the
tumor suppressor cPML. Here, we identify PHRF1 as a ubiquitin ligase that
enforces TGIF decay by driving its ubiquitination at lysine 130. In so doing,
PHRF1 ensures redistribution of cPML into the cytoplasm, where it associates with
SARA and coordinates activation of Smad2 by the TGF-ß receptor. The PHRF1 gene
resides within the tumor suppressor locus 11p15.5, which displays frequent loss
in a wide variety of malignancies, including breast cancer. Remarkably, we found 
that the PHRF1 gene is deleted or silenced in a high proportion of human breast
cancer samples and cancer cell lines. Reconstitution of PHRF1 into deficient
cells impeded their propensity to form tumors in vivo, most likely because of the
reemergence of TGF-ß responsiveness. These findings unveil a paradigm behind
inactivation of the cPML tumor suppressor network in human malignancies.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23911286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Dec;94(6):1231-41. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0413206. Epub 2013 Aug 1.

Human TLR8 is activated upon recognition of Borrelia burgdorferi RNA in the
phagosome of human monocytes.

Cervantes JL(1), La Vake CJ, Weinerman B, Luu S, O'Connell C, Verardi PH, Salazar
JC.

Author information: 
(1)1.Connecticut Children's Medical Center, Division of Infectious Diseases and
Immunology, 282 Washington St., Hartford, CT 06106. jsalazar@nso1.uchc.edu.

Phagocytosed Borrelia burgdorferi (Bb), the Lyme disease spirochete, induces a
robust and complex innate immune response in human monocytes, in which TLR8
cooperates with TLR2 in the induction of NF-<U+03BA>B-mediated cytokine production,
whereas TLR8 is solely responsible for transcription of IFN-ß through IRF7. We
now establish the role of Bb RNA in TLR8-mediated induction of IFN-ß. First,
using TLR2-transfected HEK.293 cells, which were unable to phagocytose intact Bb,
we observed TLR2 activation by lipoprotein-rich borrelial lysates and TLR2
synthetic ligands but not in response to live spirochetes. Purified Bb RNA, but
not borrelial DNA, triggered TLR8 activation. Neither of these 2 ligands induced 
activation of TLR7. Using purified human monocytes we then show that phagocytosed
live Bb, as well as equivalent amounts of borrelial RNA delivered into the
phagosome by polyethylenimine (PEI), induces transcription of IFN-ß and secretion
of TNF-a. The cytokine response to purified Bb RNA was markedly impaired in human
monocytes naturally deficient in IRAK-4 and in cells with knockdown TLR8
expression by small interfering RNA. Using confocal microscopy we provide
evidence that TLR8 colocalizes with internalized Bb RNA in both early (EEA1) and 
late endosomes (LAMP1). Live bacterial RNA staining indicates that spirochetal
RNA does not transfer from the phagosome into the cytosol. Using fluorescent
dextran particles we show that phagosomal integrity in Bb-infected monocytes is
not affected. We demonstrate, for the first time, that Bb RNA is a TLR8 ligand in
human monocytes and that transcription of IFN-ß in response to the spirochete is 
induced from within the phagosomal vacuole through the TLR8-MyD88 pathway.

PMCID: PMC3828603
PMID: 23906644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Dec 20;22(25):5083-95. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt358. Epub 2013 Jul
29.

WT1 regulates the expression of inhibitory chemokines during heart development.

Velecela V(1), Lettice LA, Chau YY, Slight J, Berry RL, Thornburn A, Gunst QD,
van den Hoff M, Reina M, Martínez FO, Hastie ND, Martínez-Estrada OM.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.

The embryonic epicardium is an important source of cardiovascular precursor cells
and paracrine factors that are required for adequate heart formation. Signaling
pathways regulated by WT1 that promote heart development have started to be
described; however, there is little information on signaling pathways regulated
by WT1 that could act in a negative manner. Transcriptome analysis of Wt1KO
epicardial cells reveals an unexpected role for WT1 in repressing the expression 
of interferon-regulated genes that could be involved in a negative regulation of 
heart morphogenesis. Here, we showed that WT1 is required to repress the
expression of the chemokines Ccl5 and Cxcl10 in epicardial cells. We observed an 
inverse correlation of Wt1 and the expression of Cxcl10 and Ccl5 during
epicardium development. Chemokine receptor analyses of hearts from Wt1(gfp/+)
mice demonstrate the differential expression of their chemokine receptors in
GFP(+) epicardial enriched cells and GFP(-) cells. Functional assays demonstrate 
that CXCL10 and CCL5 inhibit epicardial cells migration and the proliferation of 
cardiomyocytes respectively. WT1 regulates the expression levels of Cxcl10 and
Ccl5 in epicardial cells directly and indirectly through increasing the levels of
IRF7. As epicardial cell reactivation after a myocardial damage is linked with
WT1 expression, the present work has potential implications in adult heart
repair.

PMID: 23900076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Cell Res. 2013 Aug;23(8):1025-42. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.98. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Viral degradasome hijacks mitochondria to suppress innate immunity.

Goswami R(1), Majumdar T, Dhar J, Chattopadhyay S, Bandyopadhyay SK,
Verbovetskaya V, Sen GC, Barik S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Regulation in Health and Disease, and Department of
Biological, Geological and Environmental Sciences, College of Sciences and Health
Professions, Cleveland State University, 2121 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44115,
USA.

The balance between the innate immunity of the host and the ability of a pathogen
to evade it strongly influences pathogenesis and virulence. The two nonstructural
(NS) proteins, NS1 and NS2, of respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) are critically
required for RSV virulence. Together, they strongly suppress the type I
interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immunity of the host cells by degrading or
inhibiting multiple cellular factors required for either IFN induction or
response pathways, including RIG-I, IRF3, IRF7, TBK1 and STAT2. Here, we provide 
evidence for the existence of a large and heterogeneous degradative complex
assembled by the NS proteins, which we named "NS-degradasome" (NSD). The NSD is
roughly ~300-750 kD in size, and its degradative activity was enhanced by the
addition of purified mitochondria in vitro. Inside the cell, the majority of the 
NS proteins and the substrates of the NSD translocated to the mitochondria upon
RSV infection. Genetic and pharmacological evidence shows that optimal
suppression of innate immunity requires mitochondrial MAVS and mitochondrial
motility. Together, we propose a novel paradigm in which the mitochondria, known 
to be important for the innate immune activation of the host, are also important 
for viral suppression of the innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC3731571
PMID: 23877405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(7):e1003478. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003478. Epub 2013 Jul
18.

Negative regulation of type I IFN expression by OASL1 permits chronic viral
infection and CD8<U+207A> T-cell exhaustion.

Lee MS(1), Park CH, Jeong YH, Kim YJ, Ha SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Research Center, Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science
and Biotechnology, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The type I interferons (IFN-Is) are critical not only in early viral control but 
also in prolonged T-cell immune responses. However, chronic viral infections such
as those of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus (HCV) in
humans and lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) in mice overcome this early 
IFN-I barrier and induce viral persistence and exhaustion of T-cell function.
Although various T-cell-intrinsic and -extrinsic factors are known to contribute 
to induction of chronic conditions, the roles of IFN-I negative regulators in
chronic viral infections have been largely unexplored. Herein, we explored
whether 2'-5' oligoadenylate synthetase-like 1 (OASL1), a recently defined IFN-I 
negative regulator, plays a key role in the virus-specific T-cell response and
viral defense against chronic LCMV. To this end, we infected Oasl1 knockout and
wild-type mice with LCMV CL-13 (a chronic virus) and monitored T-cell responses, 
serum cytokine levels, and viral titers. LCMV CL-13-infected Oasl1 KO mice
displayed a sustained level of serum IFN-I, which was primarily produced by
splenic plasmacytoid dendritic cells, during the very early phase of infection
(2-3 days post-infection). Oasl1 deficiency also led to the accelerated
elimination of viremia and induction of a functional antiviral CD8 T-cell
response, which critically depended on IFN-I receptor signaling. Together, these 
results demonstrate that OASL1-mediated negative regulation of IFN-I production
at an early phase of infection permits viral persistence and suppresses T-cell
function, suggesting that IFN-I negative regulators, including OASL1, could be
exciting new targets for preventing chronic viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3715418
PMID: 23874199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Hepatol. 2013 Nov;59(5):957-63. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.07.004. Epub 2013 Jul 
10.

Temperature rise after peginterferon alfa-2a injection in patients with chronic
hepatitis C is associated with virological response and is modulated by IL28B
genotype.

Han H(1), Noureddin M, Witthaus M, Park YJ, Hoofnagle JH, Liang TJ, Rotman Y.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, United States.

Erratum in
    J Hepatol. 2014 Jun;60(6):1334-5.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Interferon treatment for chronic hepatitis C is associated
with non-specific symptoms including fever. We aimed to determine the association
of temperature changes with interferon antiviral activity.
METHODS: 60 treatment-naïve patients with chronic hepatitis C (67% genotype
1/4/6, 33% genotype 2/3) were admitted to start peginterferon alfa-2a and
ribavirin in a clinical trial. Temperature was measured at baseline and 3 times
daily for the first 24h and the maximal increase from baseline during that time
(<U+0394>Tmax) was determined. Serum HCV-RNA, interferon-gamma-inducible protein-10
(IP-10) and expression of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs - CD274, ISG15,
RSAD2, IRF7, CXCL10) in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were measured 
at very early time points, and response kinetics calculated. The IL28B single
nucleotide polymorphism, rs12979860, was genotyped.
RESULTS: Temperatures rose by 1.2±0.8°C, peaking after 12.5h. <U+0394>Tmax was strongly 
associated with 1st phase virological decline (r=0.59, p<0.0001) and was
independent of gender, cirrhosis, viral genotype or baseline HCV-RNA. The
association with 1st phase decline was seen in patients with rs12979860CC
genotype (r = 0.65, p <0.0001) but not in CT/TT (r = 0.13, p = 0.53) and patients
with CC genotype had a higher DTmax (1.4 ± 0.8 C vs. 0.8 ± 0.6 +C, p = 0.001).
DTmax was associated with 6- and 24-h induction of serum IP-10 and of PBMC ISG
expression, but only in patients with rs12979860CC [corrected].<U+0394>Tmax weakly
predicted early virological response (AUC=0.68, CI 0.49-0.88).
CONCLUSIONS: Temperature rise following peginterferon injection is closely
associated with virological response and is modulated by IL28B polymorphism,
reflecting host interferon-responsiveness.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3856983
PMID: 23850879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 23;288(34):24569-80. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.479550. Epub
2013 Jul 11.

DEAF1 is a Pellino1-interacting protein required for interferon production by
Sendai virus and double-stranded RNA.

Ordureau A(1), Enesa K, Nanda S, Le Francois B, Peggie M, Prescott A, Albert PR, 
Cohen P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, Sir James Black Centre,
University of Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Double-stranded (ds) RNA of viral origin, a ligand for Melanoma
Differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) and Toll-Like Receptor 3 (TLR3), induces
the TANK-Binding Kinase 1 (TBK1)-dependent phosphorylation and activation of
Interferon Regulatory Factor 3 (IRF3) and the E3 ubiquitin ligase Pellino1, which
are required for interferon ß (IFNß) gene transcription. Here, we report that
Pellino1 interacts with the transcription factor Deformed Epidermal
Autoregulatory Factor 1 (DEAF1). The interaction is independent of the E3 ligase 
activity of Pellino1, but weakened by the phosphorylation of Pellino1. We show
that DEAF1 binds to the IFNß promoter and to IRF3 and IRF7, that it is required
for the transcription of the IFNß gene and IFNß secretion in MEFs infected with
Sendai virus or transfected with poly(I:C). DEAF1 is also needed for
TLR3-dependent IFNß production. Taken together, our results identify DEAF1 as a
novel component of the signal transduction network by which dsRNA of viral origin
stimulates IFNß production.

PMCID: PMC3750155
PMID: 23846693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jul;43(7):1693-7. doi: 10.1002/eji.201343739.

IRF5, IRF8, and IRF7 in human pDCs - the good, the bad, and the insignificant?

Pelka K(1), Latz E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Innate Immunity, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Comment on
    Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jul;43(7):1896-906.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRFs) are transcription factors with
versatile functions in the regulation of innate and adaptive immune responses. In
the current issue of the European Journal of Immunology, Steinhagen et al. [Eur. 
J. Immunol. 2013. 43: 1896-1906] investigate the regulation of IFN-ß and IL-6
induction in human plasmacytoid DCs stimulated with CpG DNA. Using RNA
interference studies, the authors identify critical roles for IRF5 and IRF8 as
positive and negative regulators, respectively. In contrast, knockdown of IRF7
had no significant effect on IFN-ß or IL-6 gene induction. In this Commentary,
these findings are discussed in the context of the published literature and
recent data regarding IRF5 and IRF8 as susceptibility genes for autoimmunity.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23828296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(17):9813-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01146-13. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Rotavirus NSP1 mediates degradation of interferon regulatory factors through
targeting of the dimerization domain.

Arnold MM(1), Barro M, Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Rotavirus Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP1 can inhibit expression of interferon (IFN)
and IFN-stimulated gene products by inducing proteasome-mediated degradation of
IFN-regulatory factors (IRFs), including IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7. All IRF proteins
share an N-terminal DNA-binding domain (DBD), and IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 contain a 
similar C-proximal IRF association domain (IAD) that mediates IRF dimerization.
An autoinhibitory domain (ID) at the extreme C terminus interacts with the IAD,
burying residues necessary for IRF dimerization. Phosphorylation of
serine/threonine residues in the ID induces charge repulsions that unmask the
IAD, enabling IRF dimerization and subsequent nuclear translocation. To define
the region of IRF proteins targeted for degradation by NSP1, we generated IRF3
and IRF7 truncation mutants and transiently expressed each with simian SA11-4F
NSP1. These assays indicated that the IAD represented a necessary and sufficient 
target for degradation. Because NSP1 did not mediate degradation of truncated
forms of the IAD, NSP1 likely requires a structurally intact IAD for recognition 
and targeting of IRF proteins. IRF9, which contains an IAD-like region that
directs interactions with signal inducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins, was also targeted for degradation by NSP1, while IRF1, which lacks an
IAD, was not. Analysis of mutant forms of IRF3 unable to undergo dimerization or 
that were constitutively dimeric showed that both were targeted for degradation
by NSP1. These results indicate that SA11-4F NSP1 can induce degradation of
inactive and activated forms of IAD-containing IRF proteins (IRF3 to IRF9),
allowing a multipronged attack on IFN-based pathways that promote antiviral
innate and adaptive immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3754143
PMID: 23824805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(17):9788-801. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01440-13. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Herpes simplex virus 1-encoded tegument protein VP16 abrogates the production of 
beta interferon (IFN) by inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B activation and blocking IFN regulatory 
factor 3 to recruit its coactivator CBP.

Xing J(1), Ni L, Wang S, Wang K, Lin R, Zheng C.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Biology and Medical Sciences, Soochow University, Suzhou, China.

Host cells activate innate immune signaling pathways to defend against invading
pathogens. To survive within an infected host, viruses have evolved intricate
strategies to counteract host immune responses. Herpesviruses, including herpes
simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), have large genomes and therefore have the capacity 
to encode numerous proteins that modulate host innate immune responses. Here we
define the contribution of HSV-1 tegument protein VP16 in the inhibition of beta 
interferon (IFN-ß) production. VP16 was demonstrated to significantly inhibit
Sendai virus (SeV)-induced IFN-ß production, and its transcriptional activation
domain was not responsible for this inhibition activity. Additionally, VP16
blocked the activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B promoter induced by SeV or tumor necrosis
factor alpha treatment and expression of NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent genes through
interaction with p65. Coexpression analysis revealed that VP16 selectively
blocked IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3)-mediated but not IRF-7-mediated
transactivation. VP16 was able to bind to IRF-3 but not IRF-7 in vivo, based on
coimmunoprecipitation analysis, but it did not affect IRF-3 dimerization, nuclear
translocation, or DNA binding activity. Rather, VP16 interacted with the CREB
binding protein (CBP) coactivator and efficiently inhibited the formation of the 
transcriptional complexes IRF-3-CBP in the context of HSV-1 infection. These
results illustrate that VP16 is able to block the production of IFN-ß by
inhibiting NF-<U+03BA>B activation and interfering with IRF-3 to recruit its coactivator
CBP, which may be important to the early events leading to HSV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC3754106
PMID: 23824799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 20;8(6):e66859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066859. Print 2013.

Lineage-specific expansion of IFIT gene family: an insight into coevolution with 
IFN gene family.

Liu Y(1), Zhang YB, Liu TK, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

In mammals, IFIT (Interferon [IFN]-induced proteins with Tetratricopeptide Repeat
[TPR] motifs) family genes are involved in many cellular and viral processes,
which are tightly related to mammalian IFN response. However, little is known
about non-mammalian IFIT genes. In the present study, IFIT genes are identified
in the genome databases from the jawed vertebrates including the cartilaginous
elephant shark but not from non-vertebrates such as lancelet, sea squirt and
acorn worm, suggesting that IFIT gene family originates from a vertebrate
ancestor about 450 million years ago. IFIT family genes show conserved gene
structure and gene arrangements. Phylogenetic analyses reveal that this gene
family has expanded through lineage-specific and species-specific gene
duplication. Interestingly, IFN gene family seem to share a common ancestor and a
similar evolutionary mechanism; the function link of IFIT genes to IFN response
is present early since the origin of both gene families, as evidenced by the
finding that zebrafish IFIT genes are upregulated by fish IFNs, poly(I:C) and two
transcription factors IRF3/IRF7, likely via the IFN-stimulated response elements 
(ISRE) within the promoters of vertebrate IFIT family genes. These coevolution
features creates functional association of both family genes to fulfill a common 
biological process, which is likely selected by viral infection during evolution 
of vertebrates. Our results are helpful for understanding of evolution of
vertebrate IFN system.

PMCID: PMC3688568
PMID: 23818968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Innate Immun. 2014 Apr;20(3):312-9. doi: 10.1177/1753425913492180. Epub 2013 Jun 
26.

Inflammatory response to Porphyromonas gingivalis partially requires interferon
regulatory factor (IRF) 3.

Shaik-Dasthagirisaheb YB(1), Huang N, Gibson FC 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA.

Innate immune activation with expression of pro-inflammatory molecules such as
TNF-a is a hallmark of the chronic inflammation associated with periodontal
disease (PD). Porphyromonas gingivalis, a bacterium associated with PD, engages
TLRs and activates MyD88-dependent and TIR-domain-containing adapter-inducing
IFN-ß (TRIF)-dependent signaling pathways. IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 is
activated in a TRIF-dependent manner and participates in production of cytokines 
such as TNF-a; however, little is known regarding IRF3 and the host response to
PD pathogens. We speculated that IRF3 participates in the host inflammatory
response to P. gingivalis. Our results show that bone marrow macrophages (MØ)
from WT mice respond to P. gingivalis with activation and nuclear translocation
of IRF3. Compared with WT, MØ from IRF3(-/-), TRIF(-/-), and TLR4(-/-) mice
responded with reduced levels of TNF-a on P. gingivalis challenge. In addition,
full expression of IL-6 and RANTES by MØ to P. gingivalis was dependent on IRF3. 
Lastly, employing MØ from IRF3(-/-) and IRF7(-/-) mice we observed a significant 
role for IRF3 and a modest role for IRF7 in the P. gingivalis-elicited TNF-a
response. These studies identify a role for IRF3 in the inflammatory response by 
MØ to the periodontal pathogen P. gingivalis.

PMCID: PMC3867555
PMID: 23803413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Sep;135(1):81-90. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft140. Epub 2013 Jun 23.

Suppression of acute graft-versus-host response by TCDD is independent of the
CTLA-4-IFN-<U+03B3>-IDO pathway.

Rohlman D(1), Punj S, Pennington J, Bradford S, Kerkvliet NI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, Oregon 97331, USA.

Activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) by its prototypic ligand,
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), induces potent suppression of an
acute graft-versus-host (GVH) response and prevents GVH disease (GVHD).
Suppression is associated with development of a regulatory population of donor
CD4(+) CD25(+)T-cells that express high levels of cytotoxic T-lymphocyte antigen 
4 (CTLA-4). However, a direct link between these AhR-induced Tregs (AhR-Tregs)
and suppression of GVHD remains to be shown. CTLA-4 is a negative regulator of
T-cell responses and is associated with the induction of tolerogenic dendritic
cells (DCs) that produce indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO). We hypothesized that 
AhR-Tregs mediate suppression via their enhanced expression of CTLA-4, which, in 
turn, induces IFN-<U+03B3> and IDO in host DCs. Subsequent depletion of tryptophan by
IDO leads to termination of the donor T-cell response prior to development of
effector CTL. Here, we show that despite increased expression of Ifng, Irf3,
Irf7, Ido1, and Ido2 in the lymph nodes of TCDD-treated host mice, inhibition of 
IDO enzyme activity by 1-methyl-tryptophan was unable to relieve TCDD-mediated
suppression of the GVH response. Furthermore, treatment with an anti-CTLA-4
antibody that blocks CTLA-4 signaling was also unable to alleviate TCDD-mediated 
suppression. Alternatively, we investigated the possibility that donor-derived
AhR-Tregs produce IFN-<U+03B3> to suppress effector CTL development. However,
suppression of GVHD by TCDD was not affected by the use of Ifng-deficient donor
cells. Together, these results indicate that neither overexpression of CTLA-4 nor
production of IFN-<U+03B3> by AhR-Tregs plays a major role in the manifestation of their
immunosuppressive function in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3748765
PMID: 23798565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Viruses. 2013 Jun 21;5(6):1587-606. doi: 10.3390/v5061587.

NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF7 pathway activation by Epstein-Barr virus Latent Membrane Protein
1.

Ersing I(1), Bernhardt K, Gewurz BE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The principal Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) oncoprotein, Latent Membrane Protein 1
(LMP1), is expressed in most EBV-associated human malignancies. LMP1 mimics CD40 
receptor signaling to provide infected cells with constitutive NF-<U+03BA>B, MAP kinase,
IRF7, and PI3 kinase pathway stimulation. EBV-transformed B-cells are
particularly dependent on constitutive NF-<U+03BA>B activity, and rapidly undergo
apoptosis upon NF-<U+03BA>B blockade. Here, we review LMP1 function, with special
attention to current understanding of the molecular mechanisms of LMP1-mediated
NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF7 pathway activation. Recent advances include the elucidation of
transmembrane motifs important for LMP1 trafficking and ligand-independent
signaling, analysis of genome-wide LMP1 gene targets, and the identification of
novel cell proteins that mediate LMP1 NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF7 pathway activation.

PMCID: PMC3717723
PMID: 23793113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Virology. 2013 Sep;444(1-2):71-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.05.034. Epub 2013 Jun
16.

Synergistic control of herpes simplex virus pathogenesis by IRF-3, and IRF-7
revealed through non-invasive bioluminescence imaging.

Murphy AA(1), Rosato PC, Parker ZM, Khalenkov A, Leib DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel School of Medicine at
Dartmouth, One Medical Center Drive, HB 7556, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 are central to the establishment of
the innate antiviral response. This study examines HSV-1 pathogenesis in
IRF-3(-/-), IRF-7(-/-) and double-deleted IRF3/7(-/-) (DKO) mice. Bioluminescence
imaging of infection revealed that DKO mice developed visceral infection
following corneal inoculation, along with increased viral burdens in all tissues 
relative to single knockout mice. While all DKO mice synchronously reached
endpoint criteria 5 days post infection, the IRF-7(-/-) mice survived longer,
indicating that although IRF-7 is dominant, IRF-3 also plays a role in
controlling disease. Higher levels of systemic pro-inflammatory cytokines were
found in IRF7(-/-) and DKO mice relative to wild-type and IRF-3(-/-) mice, and
IL-6 and G-CSF, indicative of sepsis, were increased in the DKO mice relative to 
wild-type or single-knockout mice. In addition to controlling viral replication, 
IRF-3 and -7 therefore play coordinating roles in modulation of inflammation
during HSV infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3755050
PMID: 23777662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Immunity. 2013 Jun 27;38(6):1176-86. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.05.010. Epub 2013
Jun 13.

Interferon-ß production via Dectin-1-Syk-IRF5 signaling in dendritic cells is
crucial for immunity to C. albicans.

del Fresno C(1), Soulat D, Roth S, Blazek K, Udalova I, Sancho D, Ruland J,
Ardavín C.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología y Oncología, Centro Nacional de
Biotecnología/CSIC, C/ Darwin 3, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

Type I interferon (IFN) is crucial during infection through its antiviral
properties and by coordinating the immunocompetent cells involved in antiviral or
antibacterial immunity. Type I IFN (IFN-a and IFN-ß) is produced after virus or
bacteria recognition by cytosolic receptors or membrane-bound TLR receptors
following the activation of the transcription factors IRF3 or IRF7. IFN-ß
production after fungal infection was recently reported, although the underlying 
mechanism remains controversial. Here we describe that IFN-ß production by
dendritic cells (DCs) induced by Candida albicans is largely dependent on
Dectin-1- and Dectin-2-mediated signaling. Dectin-1-induced IFN-ß production
required the tyrosine kinase Syk and the transcription factor IRF5. Type I IFN
receptor-deficient mice had a lower survival after C. albicans infection,
paralleled by defective renal neutrophil infiltration. IFN-ß production by renal 
infiltrating leukocytes was severely reduced in C. albicans-infected mice with
Syk-deficient DCs. These data indicate that Dectin-induced IFN-ß production by
renal DCs is crucial for defense against C. albicans infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23770228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cell Host Microbe. 2013 Jun 12;13(6):701-10. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2013.04.015.

Crosstalk between the type 1 interferon and nuclear factor kappa B pathways
confers resistance to a lethal virus infection.

Rubio D(1), Xu RH, Remakus S, Krouse TE, Truckenmiller ME, Thapa RJ, Balachandran
S, Alcamí A, Norbury CC, Sigal LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Immune Cell Development and Host Defense Program, Research Institute of Fox
Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and type 1 interferon (T1-IFN) signaling are
innate immune mechanisms activated upon viral infection. However, the role of
NF-<U+03BA>B and its interplay with T1-IFN in antiviral immunity is poorly understood.
We show that NF-<U+03BA>B is essential for resistance to ectromelia virus (ECTV), a
mouse orthopoxvirus related to the virus causing human smallpox. Additionally, an
ECTV mutant lacking an NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor activates NF-<U+03BA>B more effectively in vivo, 
resulting in increased proinflammatory molecule transcription in uninfected cells
and organs and decreased viral replication. Unexpectedly, NF-<U+03BA>B activation
compensates for genetic defects in the T1-IFN pathway, such as a deficiency in
the IRF7 transcription factor, resulting in virus control. Thus, overlap between 
the T1-IFN and NF-<U+03BA>B pathways allows the host to overcome genetic or
pathogen-induced deficiencies in T1-IFN and survive an otherwise lethal poxvirus 
infection. These findings may also explain why some pathogens target both
pathways to cause disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3688842
PMID: 23768494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Aug 1;19(15):4249-61. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3666.
Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Cyclophosphamide induces a type I interferon-associated sterile inflammatory
response signature in cancer patients' blood cells: implications for cancer
chemoimmunotherapy.

Moschella F(1), Torelli GF, Valentini M, Urbani F, Buccione C, Petrucci MT,
Natalino F, Belardelli F, Foà R, Proietti E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology Oncology and Molecular Medicine, Istituto Superiore
di Sanità, Viale Regina Elena 299, Rome 00161, Italy. federica.moschella@iss.it

PURPOSE: Certain chemotherapeutics, particularly cyclophosphamide, can enhance
the antitumor efficacy of immunotherapy. A better understanding of the cellular
and molecular basis of cyclophosphamide-mediated immunomodulation is needed to
improve the efficacy of chemoimmunotherapy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Transcript profiling and flow cytometry were used to explore
cyclophosphamide-induced immunoadjuvanticity in patients with hematologic
malignancies.
RESULTS: A single high-dose treatment rapidly (1-2 days) induced peripheral blood
mononuclear cell (PBMC) transcriptional modulation, leading to reduction of
cell-cycle and biosynthetic/metabolic processes and augmentation of DNA damage
and cell death pathways (p53 signaling pathway), death-related scavenger
receptors, antigen processing/presentation mediators, T-cell activation markers
and, noticeably, a type I IFN (IFN-I) signature (OAS1, CXCL10, BAFF, IFITM2,
IFI6, IRF5, IRF7, STAT2, UBE2L6, UNC93B1, ISG20L1, TYK2). Moreover, IFN-I-induced
proinflammatory mediators (CXCL10, CCL2, IL-8, and BAFF) were increased in
patients' plasma. Accordingly, cyclophosphamide induced the expansion/activation 
of CD14(+)CD16(+) monocytes, of HLA-DR(+), IL-8RA(+), and MARCO(+)
monocytes/dendritic cells, and of CD69(+), OX40(+), and IL-8RA(+) lymphocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, these data identify the cyclophosphamide-induced
immunomodulatory factors in humans and indicate that preconditioning chemotherapy
may stimulate immunity as a consequence of danger perception associated with
blood cell death, through p53 and IFN-I-related mechanisms.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23759676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Oct;41(2):230-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.05.019. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Expressions of transcription factors in goldfish (Carassius auratus L.)
macrophages and their progenitors.

Katzenback BA(1), Foroutanpay BV, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The development of macrophages is a highly regulated process requiring
coordination amongst transcription factors. The presence/absence, relative
levels, antagonism, or synergy of all transcription factors involved is critical 
to directing lineage cell fate and differentiation. While relative levels of many
key myeloid transcription factors have been determined in mammalian macrophage
differentiation, a similar set of studies have yet to be conducted in a teleost
system. In this study, we report on the mRNA levels of transcription factors
(cebpa, cjun, cmyb, egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1) 
in sorted goldfish progenitor cells, monocytes, and macrophages from primary
kidney macrophage cultures. The mRNA levels of runx1 and pu.1 were significantly 
higher, gata3 and pax5 mRNA levels were lower, in monocytes compared to
progenitors, and the mRNA levels of cjun, egr1, gata2, gata3, mafb and pax5 were 
significantly decreased in macrophages compared to progenitor cells. The relative
mRNA levels of the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors, 
irf1, irf2, irf5, irf7, irf8 and irf9 in sorted progenitors, monocytes and
macrophages were also measured. In contrast to other irf family transcription
factors examined, irf8 mRNA levels were increased in monocytes compared to
progenitors by greater than three-fold, suggesting that irf8 is important for
monopoiesis. Lastly, we show the differential regulation of myeloid transcription
factor mRNA levels in sorted progenitor cells from 1, 2, or 3-day old cultures in
response to the recombinant goldfish growth factors, rgCSF-1 and rgKITLA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23748037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. DNA Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;32(8):467-79. doi: 10.1089/dna.2012.1950. Epub 2013 Jun
8.

Nucleofection of expression vectors induces a robust interferon response and
inhibition of cell proliferation.

Huerfano S(1), Ryabchenko B, Forstová J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, Charles University in Prague, Prague,
Czech Republic.

The interferon (IFN) response, induced as a side effect after transfection of
nucleic acids into mammalian cells, is known but inadequately described. We
followed the IFN response, the fate of cells, and the possible mechanisms leading
to this response in NIH3T3 mouse fibroblasts after DNA nucleofection. The gateway
destination vector, phGf, and its derivatives encoding toxic and non-toxic
variants of the minor structural proteins of polyomaviruses, VP2 and VP3, were
used. DNA vector sequences induced in cells the production of high levels of IFN 
and the upregulation of the IFN-inducible genes, Mx-1, STAT1, IRF1, and IRF7. The
IFN response was not restricted to phGf-derived plasmids. In nucleofected cells, 
upregulation of the modified <U+03B3>-histone 2A.X indicating DNA damage and inhibition 
of cell proliferation were also observed. Although 3T3 cells expressed the
Toll-like receptor-9 (TLR9) and vectors used for nucleofection contained
unmethylated CpGs, signaling leading to IFN induction was found to be TLR9
independent. However, the early activation of nuclear factor-kappa B suggested
the participation of this transcription factor in IFN induction. Surprisingly, in
contrast to nucleofection, transfection using a cationic polymer induced only a
poor IFN response. Together, the results point to a strong side effect of
nucleofection.

PMCID: PMC3725941
PMID: 23745681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Allergy. 2013 Jul;68(7):870-9. doi: 10.1111/all.12162. Epub 2013 Jun 5.

Phthalates suppress type I interferon in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells via
epigenetic regulation.

Kuo CH(1), Hsieh CC, Kuo HF, Huang MY, Yang SN, Chen LC, Huang SK, Hung CH.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Exposure to environmental endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) is
associated with allergy, chronic inflammation, and immunodeficiency. Phthalates, 
the common EDCs used in plastic industry, may act as adjuvants to disrupt immune 
system and enhance allergy. Plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) are predominant cells
secreting type I interferon (IFN) against infection and are professional
antigen-presenting cells in regulating adaptive immunity. However, the effects of
phthalates on the function of pDCs are unknown.
METHODS: Circulating pDCs were isolated from healthy subjects, were pretreated
with diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) and butyl benzyl phthalate (BBP), and were
stimulated with Toll-like receptor (TLR)-9 agonist CpG. IFN-a/IFN-ß levels,
surface markers, and T-cell stimulatory function were investigated using ELISA,
flow cytometry, and pDC/T-cell coculture assay. Mechanisms were investigated
using receptor antagonists, pathway inhibitors, Western blotting, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation.
RESULTS: Diethylhexyl phthalate and butyl benzyl phthalate suppressed CpG-induced
IFN-a/IFN-ß expression in pDCs, and the effect was reversed by aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AHR) antagonist. Diethylhexyl phthalate suppressed CpG-activated
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-MEK1/2-ERK-ELK1 and NF<U+03BA>B signaling
pathways. Diethylhexyl phthalate suppressed CpG-induced interferon regulatory
factor (IRF)-7 expression by suppressing histone H3K4 trimethylation at IRF7 gene
promoter region through inhibiting translocation of H3K4-specific
trimethyltransferase WDR5 from cytoplasm into nucleus. Butyl benzyl phthalate or 
diethylhexyl phthalate-treated pDCs suppressed IFN-<U+03B3> but enhanced IL-13
production by CD4+ T cells.
CONCLUSION: Phthalates may interfere with immunity against infection and promote 
the deviation of Th2 response to increase allergy by acting on human pDCs via
suppressing IFN-a/IFN-ß expression and modulating the ability to stimulate T-cell
responses.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23738920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Aug 15;305(4):E485-95. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00505.2012. Epub 2013 May 21.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 deficiency prevents diet-induced obesity and
insulin resistance.

Wang XA(1), Zhang R, Zhang S, Deng S, Jiang D, Zhong J, Yang L, Wang T, Hong S,
Guo S, She ZG, Zhang XD, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China;

Obesity-related inflammation has been implicated in the pathogenesis of insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes. In this study, we addressed the potential role of
interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a master regulator of type I
interferon-dependent immune responses, in the regulation of energy metabolism.
The expression levels of IRF7 were increased in white adipose tissue, liver
tissue, and gastrocnemius muscle of both diet-induced obese mice and ob/ob mice
compared with their lean counterparts. After feeding a high-fat diet (HFD) for 24
wk, IRF7 knockout (KO) mice showed less weight gain and adiposity than wild-type 
controls. KO of IRF7 improved glucose and lipid homeostasis and insulin
sensitivity. Additionally, KO of IRF7 ameliorated diet-induced hepatic steatosis.
Next, we assessed the inflammatory state of the IRF7 KO mice on the HFD. These
mice showed less macrophage infiltration into multiple organs and were protected 
from local and systemic inflammation. This study demonstrates a role for IRF7 in 
diet-induced alterations in energy metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Our
results also suggest that IRF7 is involved in the etiology of metabolic
abnormalities, which suggests a new strategy for treating obesity and type 2
diabetes.

PMID: 23695216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. PLoS One. 2013 May 17;8(5):e63182. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063182. Print 2013.

Prediction of response to treatment by gene expression profiling of peripheral
blood in patients with microscopic polyangiitis.

Ishizu A(1), Tomaru U, Murai T, Yamamoto T, Atsumi T, Yoshiki T, Yumura W,
Yamagata K, Yamada H, Kumagai S, Kurokawa MS, Suka M, Makino H, Ozaki S; JMAAV.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
aishizu@med.hokudai.ac.jp

The JMAAV study was an open-labeled prospective clinical trial, which proposed
severity-based treatment protocols for patients with microscopic polyangiitis
(MPA). The results suggest that the proposed protocols are useful (remission
rate: 89.4%), but are also indicative of relapse or patient demise regardless of 
the treatment (recurrence rate: 19.0%; mortality rate: 10.6%). The aim of this
study is to develop the method to predict response to the treatment in patients
with MPA. In the present study, transcriptome analysis was performed using
peripheral blood from patients enrolled in the JMAAV study before and 1-week
after the beginning of treatment. The gene expression profile before treatment
was not directly related to the response to the treatment. However, when the
samples from 9 patients with good response (persistent remission for 18 months)
were examined, the expression of 88 genes was significantly altered by the
treatment. Thirty statistically reliable genes were selected, and then the
alteration of expression by the treatment was examined among 22 patients,
including 17 with good response, which was defined as persistent remission for 18
months and 5 with poor response, which was defined as relapse after remission or 
no remission. Discrimination analysis between the alteration of expression of the
30 genes by the treatment and the response identified a combination of 16 genes
as the most valuable gene set to predict the response to the treatment. This
preliminary study identified IRF7, IFIT1, IFIT5, OASL, CLC, GBP-1, PSMB9, HERC5, 
CCR1, CD36, MS4A4A, BIRC4BP, PLSCR1, DEFA1/DEFA3, DEFA4, and COL9A2 as the
important genes that can predict the response to the treatment in patients with
MPA at an early point during the therapy.

PMCID: PMC3656865
PMID: 23690996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Nature. 2013 Jun 13;498(7453):236-40. doi: 10.1038/nature12172. Epub 2013 May 19.

Single-cell transcriptomics reveals bimodality in expression and splicing in
immune cells.

Shalek AK(1), Satija R, Adiconis X, Gertner RS, Gaublomme JT, Raychowdhury R,
Schwartz S, Yosef N, Malboeuf C, Lu D, Trombetta JJ, Gennert D, Gnirke A, Goren
A, Hacohen N, Levin JZ, Park H, Regev A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford
Street, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Recent molecular studies have shown that, even when derived from a seemingly
homogenous population, individual cells can exhibit substantial differences in
gene expression, protein levels and phenotypic output, with important functional 
consequences. Existing studies of cellular heterogeneity, however, have typically
measured only a few pre-selected RNAs or proteins simultaneously, because genomic
profiling methods could not be applied to single cells until very recently. Here 
we use single-cell RNA sequencing to investigate heterogeneity in the response of
mouse bone-marrow-derived dendritic cells (BMDCs) to lipopolysaccharide. We find 
extensive, and previously unobserved, bimodal variation in messenger RNA
abundance and splicing patterns, which we validate by RNA-fluorescence in situ
hybridization for select transcripts. In particular, hundreds of key immune genes
are bimodally expressed across cells, surprisingly even for genes that are very
highly expressed at the population average. Moreover, splicing patterns
demonstrate previously unobserved levels of heterogeneity between cells. Some of 
the observed bimodality can be attributed to closely related, yet distinct, known
maturity states of BMDCs; other portions reflect differences in the usage of key 
regulatory circuits. For example, we identify a module of 137 highly variable,
yet co-regulated, antiviral response genes. Using cells from knockout mice, we
show that variability in this module may be propagated through an interferon
feedback circuit, involving the transcriptional regulators Stat2 and Irf7. Our
study demonstrates the power and promise of single-cell genomics in uncovering
functional diversity between cells and in deciphering cell states and circuits.

PMCID: PMC3683364
PMID: 23685454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Jun;13(6):453-60. doi: 10.1038/nri3446. Epub 2013 May 17.

The history of Toll-like receptors - redefining innate immunity.

O'Neill LA(1), Golenbock D, Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, 
Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2, Ireland. laoneill@tcd.ie

The discovery of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) was an important event for immunology
research and was recognized as such with the awarding of the 2011 Nobel Prize in 
Physiology or Medicine to Jules Hoffmann and Bruce Beutler, who, together with
Ralph Steinman, the third winner of the 2011 Nobel Prize and the person who
discovered the dendritic cell, were pioneers in the field of innate immunity.
TLRs have a central role in immunity - in this Timeline article, we describe the 
landmark findings that gave rise to this important field of research.

PMID: 23681101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Virol. 2013 Jul;87(14):7966-76. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03525-12. Epub 2013 May 15.

Human parainfluenza virus type 2 V protein inhibits TRAF6-mediated ubiquitination
of IRF7 to prevent TLR7- and TLR9-dependent interferon induction.

Kitagawa Y(1), Yamaguchi M, Zhou M, Nishio M, Itoh M, Gotoh B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Department of Pathology,
Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta Tsukinowa-cho, Otsu, Shiga, Japan.

Paramyxovirus V proteins block Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7)- and TLR9-dependent
signaling leading to alpha interferon production. Our recent study has provided
evidence that interaction of the V proteins with IRF7 is important for the
blockade. However, the detailed mechanisms still remain unclear. Here we
reexamined the interaction of the human parainfluenza virus type 2 (HPIV2) V
protein with signaling molecules involved in TLR7/9-dependent signaling.
Immunoprecipitation experiments in HEK293T cells transfected with V protein and
one of the signaling molecules revealed that the V protein interacted with not
only IRF7 but also TRAF6, IKKa, and MyD88. Whereas overexpression of TRAF6
markedly enhanced the level of V protein associating with IRF7, IKKa, and MyD88
in HEK293T cells, the level of V protein associating with TRAF6 was little
affected by overexpression of IRF7, IKKa, and MyD88. Moreover, knockdown or
knockout of endogenous TRAF6 in HEK293T or mouse embryonic fibroblast cells
resulted in dissociation of the V protein from IRF7, IKKa, and MyD88. These
results demonstrate that binding of the V protein to IRF7, IKKa, and MyD88 is
largely indirect and mediated by endogenous TRAF6. It was found that the V
protein inhibited TRAF6-mediated lysine 63 (K63)-linked polyubiquitination of
IRF7, which is prerequisite for IRF7 activation. Disruption of the
tryptophan-rich motif of the V protein significantly affected its TRAF6-binding
efficiency, which correlated well with the magnitude of inhibition of K63-linked 
polyubiquitination and the resultant activation of IRF7. Taken together, these
results suggest that the HPIV2 V protein prevents TLR7/9-dependent interferon
induction by inhibiting TRAF6-mediated K63-linked polyubiquitination of IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3700191
PMID: 23678181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Viral Hepat. 2013 Jun;20(6):385-94. doi: 10.1111/jvh.12040. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Induction of interferon-<U+03BB> contributes to Toll-like receptor-3-activated hepatic
stellate cell-mediated hepatitis C virus inhibition in hepatocytes.

Wang Y(1), Li J, Wang X, Ye L, Zhou Y, Ho W.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Animal Experiment and ABSL-3 Laboratory, Wuhan University,
Hubei, China.

There is limited information about the role of hepatic stellate cells (HSC) in
liver innate immunity against hepatitis C virus (HCV). We thus examined whether
HSC can produce antiviral factors that inhibit HCV replication in human
hepatocytes. HSC expressed functional Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR-3), which could
be activated by its ligand, polyinosine-polycytidylic acid (poly I:C), leading to
the induction of interferon-<U+03BB> (IFN-<U+03BB>) at both mRNA and protein levels. TLR-3
signalling of HSC also induced the expression of IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7),
a key regulator of IFN signalling pathway. When HCV JFH-1-infected Huh7 cells
were co-cultured with HSC activated with poly I:C or incubated in media
conditioned with supernatant (SN) from poly I:C-activated HSC, HCV replication
was significantly suppressed. This HSC SN action on HCV inhibition was mediated
through IFN-<U+03BB>, which was evidenced by the observation that antibody to IFN-<U+03BB>
receptors could neutralize the HSC-mediated anti-HCV effect. The role of IFN-<U+03BB> in
HSC-mediated anti-HCV activity is further supported by the observation that HSC
SN treatment induced the expression of IRF-7 and IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs),
OAS-1 and MxA in HCV-infected Huh7 cells. These observations indicate that HSC
may be a key regulatory bystander, participating in liver innate immunity against
HCV infection using an IFN-<U+03BB>-dependent mechanism.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3648885
PMID: 23647955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS Pathog. 2013;9(4):e1003298. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1003298. Epub 2013 Apr
25.

Systems analysis of a RIG-I agonist inducing broad spectrum inhibition of virus
infectivity.

Goulet ML(1), Olagnier D, Xu Z, Paz S, Belgnaoui SM, Lafferty EI, Janelle V,
Arguello M, Paquet M, Ghneim K, Richards S, Smith A, Wilkinson P, Cameron M,
Kalinke U, Qureshi S, Lamarre A, Haddad EK, Sekaly RP, Peri S, Balachandran S,
Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute, Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, Montréal,
Canada.

The RIG-I like receptor pathway is stimulated during RNA virus infection by
interaction between cytosolic RIG-I and viral RNA structures that contain short
hairpin dsRNA and 5' triphosphate (5'ppp) terminal structure. In the present
study, an RNA agonist of RIG-I was synthesized in vitro and shown to stimulate
RIG-I-dependent antiviral responses at concentrations in the picomolar range. In 
human lung epithelial A549 cells, 5'pppRNA specifically stimulated multiple
parameters of the innate antiviral response, including IRF3, IRF7 and STAT1
activation, and induction of inflammatory and interferon stimulated genes -
hallmarks of a fully functional antiviral response. Evaluation of the magnitude
and duration of gene expression by transcriptional profiling identified a robust,
sustained and diversified antiviral and inflammatory response characterized by
enhanced pathogen recognition and interferon (IFN) signaling. Bioinformatics
analysis further identified a transcriptional signature uniquely induced by
5'pppRNA, and not by IFNa-2b, that included a constellation of IRF7 and NF-kB
target genes capable of mobilizing multiple arms of the innate and adaptive
immune response. Treatment of primary PBMCs or lung epithelial A549 cells with
5'pppRNA provided significant protection against a spectrum of RNA and DNA
viruses. In C57Bl/6 mice, intravenous administration of 5'pppRNA protected
animals from a lethal challenge with H1N1 Influenza, reduced virus titers in
mouse lungs and protected animals from virus-induced pneumonia. Strikingly, the
RIG-I-specific transcriptional response afforded partial protection from
influenza challenge, even in the absence of type I interferon signaling. This
systems approach provides transcriptional, biochemical, and in vivo analysis of
the antiviral efficacy of 5'pppRNA and highlights the therapeutic potential
associated with the use of RIG-I agonists as broad spectrum antiviral agents.

PMCID: PMC3635991
PMID: 23633948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Nat Immunol. 2013 Jun;14(6):593-602. doi: 10.1038/ni.2576. Epub 2013 Apr 21.

The microRNA miR-155 controls CD8(+) T cell responses by regulating interferon
signaling.

Gracias DT(1), Stelekati E, Hope JL, Boesteanu AC, Doering TA, Norton J, Mueller 
YM, Fraietta JA, Wherry EJ, Turner M, Katsikis PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Center for Immunology and Vaccine
Science, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

We found upregulation of expression of the microRNA miR-155 in primary effector
and effector memory CD8(+) T cells, but low miR-155 expression in naive and
central memory cells. Antiviral CD8(+) T cell responses and viral clearance were 
impaired in miR-155-deficient mice, and this defect was intrinsic to CD8(+) T
cells, as miR-155-deficient CD8(+) T cells mounted greatly diminished primary and
memory responses. Conversely, miR-155 overexpression augmented antiviral CD8(+) T
cell responses in vivo. Gene-expression profiling showed that miR-155-deficient
CD8(+) T cells had enhanced type I interferon signaling and were more susceptible
to interferon's antiproliferative effect. Inhibition of the type I
interferon-associated transcription factors STAT1 or IRF7 resulted in enhanced
responses of miR-155-deficient CD8(+) T cells in vivo. We have thus identified a 
previously unknown role for miR-155 in regulating responsiveness to interferon
and CD8(+) T cell responses to pathogens in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3664306
PMID: 23603793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059892. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

High yield production of influenza virus in Madin Darby canine kidney (MDCK)
cells with stable knockdown of IRF7.

Hamamoto I(1), Takaku H, Tashiro M, Yamamoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell-based Vaccine Development, Influenza Virus Research Center,
National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Musashimurayama-shi, Tokyo, Japan.

Influenza is a serious public health problem that causes a contagious respiratory
disease. Vaccination is the most effective strategy to reduce transmission and
prevent influenza. In recent years, cell-based vaccines have been developed with 
continuous cell lines such as Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) and Vero. However,
wild-type influenza and egg-based vaccine seed viruses will not grow efficiently 
in these cell lines. Therefore, improvement of virus growth is strongly required 
for development of vaccine seed viruses and cell-based influenza vaccine
production. The aim of our research is to develop novel MDCK cells supporting
highly efficient propagation of influenza virus in order to expand the capacity
of vaccine production. In this study, we screened a human siRNA library that
involves 78 target molecules relating to three major type I interferon (IFN)
pathways to identify genes that when knocked down by siRNA lead to enhanced
production of influenza virus A/Puerto Rico/8/1934 in A549 cells. The siRNAs
targeting 23 candidate genes were selected to undergo a second screening pass in 
MDCK cells. We examined the effects of knockdown of target genes on the viral
production using newly designed siRNAs based on sequence analyses. Knockdown of
the expression of a canine gene corresponding to human IRF7 by siRNA increased
the efficiency of viral production in MDCK cells through an unknown process that 
includes the mechanisms other than inhibition of IFN-a/ß induction. Furthermore, 
the viral yield greatly increased in MDCK cells stably transduced with the
lentiviral vector for expression of short hairpin RNA against IRF7 compared with 
that in control MDCK cells. Therefore, we propose that modified MDCK cells with
lower expression level of IRF7 could be useful not only for increasing the
capacity of vaccine production but also facilitating the process of seed virus
isolation from clinical specimens for manufacturing of vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3608535
PMID: 23555825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Blood. 2013 May 16;121(20):4090-100. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-10-461566. Epub 2013
Mar 27.

Tat engagement of p38 MAP kinase and IRF7 pathways leads to activation of
interferon-stimulated genes in antigen-presenting cells.

Kim N(1), Kukkonen S, Martinez-Viedma Mdel P, Gupta S, Aldovini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

As a result of its interaction with transcription factors, HIV type 1 (HIV-1) Tat
can modulate the expression of both HIV and cellular genes. In antigen-presenting
cells Tat induces the expression of a subset of interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes
(ISGs) in the absence of IFNs. We investigated the genome-wide Tat association
with promoters in immature dendritic cells and in monocyte-derived macrophages.
Among others, Tat associated with the MAP2K6, MAP2K3, and IRF7 promoters that are
functionally part of IL-1 and p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling pathways. The association correlated with their increased gene
expression, increased activation of p38 MAPK and of phosphorylated signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), and consequent induction of 
ISGs. Probing these pathways with RNA interference, pharmacological p38 MAPK
inhibition, and in cell lines lacking STAT1s or the type I IFN receptor chain
confirmed the role of MAPKKs and IRF7 in Tat-mediated modulation of ISGs and
excluded the involvement of IFNs in this modulation. Tat interaction with the 2
MAPKK and IRF7 promoters in HIV-1-infected cells and the resulting persistent
activation of ISGs, which include inflammatory cytokines and chemokines, can
contribute to the increased immune activation that characterizes HIV infection.

PMCID: PMC3656449
PMID: 23535064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Autoimmun. 2013 Mar;41:50-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2013.01.009. Epub 2013 Mar 11.

DNA methylation impairs TLR9 induced Foxp3 expression by attenuating IRF-7
binding activity in fulminant type 1 diabetes.

Wang Z(1), Zheng Y, Hou C, Yang L, Li X, Lin J, Huang G, Lu Q, Wang CY, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, 2nd Xiangya Hospital, and Institute of Metabolism and
Endocrinology, Key Laboratory of Diabetes Immunology, Ministry of Education,
Central South University, 139 Renmin Middle Rd, Changsha, Hunan 410011, China.

Fulminant type 1 diabetes (FT1D) is an extremely aggressive disease characterized
by the abrupt onset of insulin-deficient hyperglycemia. However, the precise
mechanisms underlying disease etiology almost remain unclear. As mice deficient
in regulatory T cells (Tregs) are prone to the development of an FT1D-like
phenotype, we thus investigated whether FT1D patients manifest Treg deficiency
and explored the related mechanisms. We first noted a significant reduction for
Foxp3 and CTLA4 expression levels in PBMCs of FT1D patients. IRF-7 was found to
selectively bind to the Foxp3 promoter, and by which it promotes Foxp3
transcription. Therefore, ectopic IRF-7 expression significantly promoted Foxp3
and CTLA4 expression in PBMCs, while knockdown of IRF-7 manifested opposite
effect. Importantly, stimulation of PBMCs with CpG ODN, a ligand for TLR9,
significantly induced Foxp3 expression, demonstrating that TLR9 signaling
positively regulates Treg development. However, knockdown of IRF-7 expression
almost completely diminished the enhancing effect of TLR9 signaling on Foxp3
expression, suggesting that IRF-7 is a downstream molecule of TLR9 signaling and 
is essential for TLR9 induced Treg generation. Of interestingly note, the Foxp3
promoter in FT1D patients was hypermethylated, indicating that DNA methylation
could be a causative factor responsible for the reduced Foxp3 expression in FT1D 
patients. Indeed, our mechanistic studies revealed that DNA methylation blocked
IRF-7 binding to the Foxp3 promoter. Together, our data support the notion that
environmental insults in genetic predisposed subjects trigger Foxp3 promoter
hypermethylation, which then prevents IRF-7 binding to the Foxp3 promoter and
impairs Treg development/functionality contributing to the pathogenesis of FT1D.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23490285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Virology. 2013 May 10;439(2):152-62. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.02.015. Epub 2013 
Mar 12.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is required for the optimal initial control
but not subsequent clearance of lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection in
mice.

Li W(1), Hofer MJ, Noçon AL, Manders P, Campbell IL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience and the Bosch Institute, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia.

The role of IRF7 in the host response to lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus
(LCMV) Armstrong 53b infection of mice was investigated. Intracranial infection
of IRF7 KO mice was associated with delayed onset of LCM, increased survival and 
significantly reduced expression of the Ifng gene in the brain but not in the
periphery. IRF7 KO mice showed impaired control of LCMV replication and delayed
clearance of LCMV. Similar numbers of activated anti-LCMV-GP(33-41) CD8+ T cells 
were present in the brain and spleens of infected WT and IRF7 KO mice. While
plasma IFN-ß was increased to similar levels, IFN-a was markedly reduced in IRF7 
KO compared with WT mice. Compared with IFN-ß, IFN-a was a less potent inhibitor 
of LCMV infection in vitro. In conclusion, IRF7 (1) is required for the early
innate control of LCMV infection, likely through the regulation of the
appropriate type I IFN response, and (2) is not required for the antiviral CD8+ T
cell-dependent clearance of LCMV from infected tissues.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23490048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 May;34(5):1236-43. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.02.012.
Epub 2013 Feb 24.

Impaired TLR2 and TLR7 response in olive flounder infected with viral
haemorrhagic septicaemia virus at host susceptible 15 °C but high at
non-susceptible 20 °C.

Avunje S(1), Oh MJ, Jung SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aqualife Medicine, Chonnam National University, San 96-1,
Dunduck Dong, Chonnam 550-749, Republic of Korea.

The olive flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus) is susceptible to viral haemorrhagic 
septicaemia virus (VHSV) at 15 °C but no mortality is observed at 20 °C even
though the virus can grow profusely in vitro. Thus, we designed an experiment to 
better understand the immune response of olive flounder to VHSV when the host
reared at 15 °C or 20 °C and infected with the virus. Olive flounder (18-22 g)
reared at 15 ± 0.5 °C or 20 ± 0.5 °C were intra-peritoneally injected with VHSV
(10(7.8) TCID50/fish) and sampled (n = 5) for head kidney at 3, 6, 12 hpi, 1, 2, 
4 and 7 dpi; similarly, mock injected control groups (n = 5). Real-time PCR-based
absolute quantification method was followed to quantify copies of VHSV gRNA and
mRNA, while the immune gene expression of the olive flounder was quantified
relative to internal control, ß-actin. Viral infection resulted in a cumulative
mortality of 24% in olive flounder reared at 15 °C, but no mortality was recorded
in the 20 °C group or control groups. TLR2 and TLR7 expression at 15 °C was
enhanced during early-infection phase (3-6 hpi) and recovery phase (4-7 dpi) when
viral transcription was low, but expression was significantly reduced (12 hpi-1
dpi) at peak-infection period. However, the 20 °C group showed low viral
transcription and expressed high level of TLR7 and a moderately higher unchanged 
level of TLR2. In both the groups, TLR3 expression was unaffected. Nevertheless, 
expression of MDA5 and LGP2 increased significantly irrespective of rearing
temperature at the time of peak infection, hence at 15 °C VHSV down-regulated
expression of TLR2 and TLR7 but not MDA5 or LGP2. Comparatively, at 15 °C IRF3
expressed high but IRF7 remained very low. Interleukins (IL-1ß, IL-6 and IL-8)
were significantly elevated in both the groups, but quicker and for a shorter
period at 20 °C. In the 15 °C group, an extended period of expression of ILs
could create an unsafe prolonged inflammatory condition. The olive flounders
expressed high ISGs at 15 °C but were lagging by 12 h than 20 °C group. Based on 
these findings, we concluded that viral-mediated disruption of TLR2 and TLR7
expression in the 15 °C group could have delayed the host interferon response and
provided a window for high viral growth. However, an effective host immune
response at 20 °C contained VHSV from reaching the critical limit.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23462148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):327-36. doi: 10.1038/ni.2548. Epub 2013 Mar 3.

Intracellular antibody-bound pathogens stimulate immune signaling via the Fc
receptor TRIM21.

McEwan WA(1), Tam JC, Watkinson RE, Bidgood SR, Mallery DL, James LC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Protein and Nucleic Acid Chemistry, Medical Research Council
Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK. wmcewan@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):309-11.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Apr;13(4):222-3.

During pathogen infection, antibodies can be carried into the infected cell,
where they are detected by the ubiquitously expressed cytosolic antibody receptor
TRIM21. Here we found that recognition of intracellular antibodies by TRIM21
activated immune signaling. TRIM21 catalyzed the formation of Lys63 (K63)-linked 
ubiquitin chains and stimulated the transcription factor pathways of NF-<U+03BA>B, AP-1,
IRF3, IRF5 and IRF7. Activation resulted in the production of proinflammatory
cytokines, modulation of natural killer stress ligands and induction of an
antiviral state. Intracellular antibody signaling was abrogated by genetic
deletion of TRIM21 and was restored by ectopic expression of TRIM21. The sensing 
of antibodies by TRIM21 was stimulated after infection by DNA or RNA nonenveloped
viruses or intracellular bacteria. Thus, the antibody-TRIM21 detection system
provides potent, comprehensive activation of the innate immune system
independently of known pattern-recognition receptors.

PMCID: PMC3672961
PMID: 23455675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Apr;13(4):221. doi: 10.1038/nri3425. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Cytokines: IRF7 lost in translation.

Papatriantafyllou M.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):346-55.

PMID: 23449338  [PubMed]


266. J Immunol. 2013 Apr 1;190(7):3289-98. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203086. Epub 2013
Feb 25.

IRF7-dependent IFN-ß production in response to RANKL promotes medullary thymic
epithelial cell development.

Otero DC(1), Baker DP, David M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

The contributions of IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3/7 and the type I IFNs IFN-a/ß 
to the innate host defense have been extensively investigated; however, their
role in thymic development is less clear. In this study, we show that mice
lacking the type I IFN receptor IFN-a/ß receptor (IFNAR) or the downstream
transcription factor STAT1 harbor a significant reduction in self-Ag-presenting, 
autoimmune regulator (AIRE)(+) medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTECs).
Constitutive IFNAR signaling occurs in the thymic medulla in the absence of
infection or inflammation. Receptor activator for NF-<U+03BA>B (RANK) ligand stimulation
results in IFN-ß upregulation, which in turn inhibits RANK signaling and
facilitates AIRE expression in mTECs. Finally, we find that IRF7 is required for 
thymic IFN-ß induction, maintenance of thymic architecture, and mTEC
differentiation. We conclude that spatially and temporally coordinated cross
talks between the RANK ligand/RANK and IRF7/IFN-ß/IFNAR/STAT1 pathways are
essential for differentiation of AIRE(+) mTECs.

PMCID: PMC3608802
PMID: 23440417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):346-55. doi: 10.1038/ni.2535. Epub 2013 Feb 17.

OASL1 inhibits translation of the type I interferon-regulating transcription
factor IRF7.

Lee MS(1), Kim B, Oh GT, Kim YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Science and Biotechnology, Yonsei 
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Apr;14(4):355.
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Aug;14(8):877.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2013 Apr;13(4):221.

The production of type I interferon is essential for viral clearance but is kept 
under tight control to avoid unnecessary tissue damage from hyperinflammatory
responses. Here we found that OASL1 inhibited translation of IRF7, the master
transcription factor for type I interferon, and thus negatively regulated the
robust production of type I interferon during viral infection. OASL1 inhibited
the translation of IRF7 mRNA by binding to the 5' untranslated region (UTR) of
IRF7 and possibly by inhibiting scanning of the 43S preinitiation complex along
the message. Oasl1-/- mice were resistant to viral infection because of the
greater abundance of type I interferon, which suggests that OASL1 could be a
potential therapeutic target for boosting the production of type I interferon
during viral infection.

PMID: 23416614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Immunol. 2013 Jul;54(3-4):443-52. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2013.01.010. Epub
2013 Feb 14.

Genomic analysis of the host response to nervous necrosis virus in Atlantic cod
(Gadus morhua) brain.

Krasnov A(1), Kileng Ø, Skugor S, Jørgensen SM, Afanasyev S, Timmerhaus G, Sommer
AI, Jensen I.

Author information: 
(1)Nofima AS P.O. Box 5010, NO-1430 Ås, Norway. Aleksei.Krasnov@nofima.no

Genome sequencing combined with transcriptome profiling promotes exploration of
defence against pathogens and discovery of immune genes. Based on sequences from 
the recently released genome of Atlantic cod, a genome-wide oligonucleotide
microarray (ACIQ-1) was designed and used for analyses of gene expression in the 
brain during infection with nervous necrosis virus (NNV). A challenge experiment 
with NNV was performed with Atlantic cod juveniles and brain samples from virus
infected and uninfected fish were used for microarray analysis. Expression of
virus induced genes increased at 5 days post challenge and persisted at stable
level to the last sampling at 25 days post challenge. A large fraction of the
up-regulated genes (546 features) were known or expected to have immune functions
and most of these have not previously been characterized in Atlantic cod.
Transcriptomic changes induced by the virus involved strong activation of genes
associated with interferon and tumour necrosis factor related responses and acute
inflammation. Up-regulation of genes involved in adaptive immunity suggested a
rapid recruitment of B and T lymphocytes to the NNV infected brain. QPCR analyses
of 15 candidate genes of innate immunity showed rapid induction by poly(I:C) in
Atlantic cod larvae cells suggesting an antiviral role. Earliest and greatest
expression changes after poly I:C stimulation was observed for interferon
regulatory factors IRF4 and IRF7. Comparative studies between teleost species
provided new knowledge about the evolution of innate antiviral immunity in fish. 
A number of genes is present or responds to viruses only in fish. Innate immunity
of Atlantic cod is characterized by selective expansion of several medium-sized
multigene families with ribose binding domains. An interesting finding was the
high representation of three large gene families among the early antiviral genes,
including tripartite motif proteins (TRIM) and proteins with PRY-SPRY and NACHT
domains. The latter two with respectively 52 and 114 members in Atlantic cod have
gone through expansions in different groups of fish. These proteins most likely
have ligand binding properties and their propagation could be linked to the loss 
of MHC class II in the Atlantic cod genome.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23416425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Innate Immun. 2013 Oct;19(5):516-30. doi: 10.1177/1753425912473345. Epub 2013 Feb
12.

Human kinome analysis reveals novel kinases contributing to virus infection and
retinoic-acid inducible gene I-induced type I and type III IFN gene expression.

Nousiainen L(1), Sillanpää M, Jiang M, Thompson J, Taipale J, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Infectious Disease Surveillance and Control, National Institute
for Health and Welfare (THL), Helsinki, Finland.

Activation of host innate antiviral responses are mediated by retinoic-acid
inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like receptors, RIG-I and melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5, and TLRs 3, 7, 8 and 9, recognising different 
types of viral nucleic acids. The major components of the RIG-I- and TLR pathways
have putatively been identified, but previously unrecognised kinases may
contribute to virus infection-induced activation of the IFN response. Here, we
screened a human kinase cDNA library, termed the kinome, using an IFN-<U+03BB>1
promoter-driven luciferase reporter assay in HEK293 cells during Sendai virus
infection. Of the 568 kinases analysed, nearly 50 enhanced IFN-<U+03BB>1 gene expression
at least twofold in response to Sendai virus infection. The best activators were 
FYN (FYN oncogene related to SRC, FGR, YES), serine/threonine kinase 24, activin 
A receptor type 1 and SRPK1 (SFRS protein kinase 1). These kinases enhanced
RIG-I-dependent IFN-<U+03BB>1 promoter activation via IFN-stimulated response and NF-<U+03BA>B 
elements, as confirmed using mutant IFN-<U+03BB>1 promoter constructs. FYN and SRPK1
enhanced IFN-<U+03BB>1 and CXCL10 protein production via the RIG-I pathway, and
stimulated RIG-I and MyD88-dependent phosphorylation of IRF3 and IRF7
transcription factors, respectively. We conclude that several previously
unrecognised kinases, particularly FYN and SRPK1, positively regulate IFN-<U+03BB>1 and 
similarly regulated cytokine and chemokine genes during viral infection.

PMID: 23405030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Innate Immun. 2013 Oct;19(5):531-44. doi: 10.1177/1753425912473668. Epub 2013 Feb
12.

Expression of innate immune genes, proteins and microRNAs in lung tissue of pigs 
infected experimentally with influenza virus (H1N2).

Skovgaard K(1), Cirera S, Vasby D, Podolska A, Breum SØ, Dürrwald R, Schlegel M, 
Heegaard PM.

Author information: 
(1)1Innate Immunology Group, National Veterinary Institute, Technical University 
of Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark.

This study aimed at providing a better understanding of the involvement of innate
immune factors, including miRNA, in the local host response to influenza virus
infection. Twenty pigs were challenged by influenza A virus subtype H1N2.
Expression of microRNA (miRNA), mRNA and proteins were quantified in lung tissue 
at different time points after challenge (24<U+2009>h, 72<U+2009>h and 14<U+2009>d post-infection
(p.i.). Several groups of genes were significantly regulated according to time
point and infection status including pattern recognition receptors (TLR2, TLR3,
TLR7, retinoic acid-inducible gene I, melanoma differentiation associated
protein-5), IFN and IFN-induced genes (IFN-ß, IFN-<U+03B3>, IRF7, STAT1, ISG15 and
OASL), cytokines (IL-1 ß, IL-1RN, IL-6, IL-7, IL-10, IL-12A, TNF-a, CCL2, CCL3
and CXCL10) and several acute phase proteins. Likewise, the following miRNAs were
differentially expressed in one or more time groups compared with the control
pigs: miR-15a, miR-21, miR-146, miR-206, miR-223 and miR-451. At d 1 p.i. lung
tissue protein levels of IL-6, IL-12 and IFN-a were significantly increased
compared with the control group, and haptoglobin and C-reactive protein were
significantly increased at d 3 p.i. Our results suggest that, in addition to a
wide range of innate immune factors, miRNAs may also be involved in controlling
acute influenza infection in pigs.

PMID: 23405029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Blood. 2013 Apr 11;121(15):2934-42. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-450353. Epub 2013 
Feb 11.

Immune activation of human brain microvascular endothelial cells inhibits HIV
replication in macrophages.

Li J(1), Wang Y, Wang X, Ye L, Zhou Y, Persidsky Y, Ho W.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biosafety Level 3 Laboratory, School of Medicine, Wuhan University,
Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

There is limited information about the role of blood-brain barrier (BBB)
endothelial cells (ECs) in the central nervous system (CNS) and their innate
immunity against HIV. We examined whether brain ECs can be immunologically
activated to produce antiviral factors that inhibit HIV replication in
macrophages. Human brain microvascular ECs expressed functional toll-like
receptor 3 (TLR3) that could be activated by polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid
(PolyI:C), resulting in the induction of endogenous interferon-ß (IFN-ß) and
IFN-<U+03BB>. The TLR3 activation of ECs also induced the phosphorylation of interferon 
regulatory transcription factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7, the key regulators of IFN
signaling pathway. When supernatant (SN) of PolyI:C-activated EC cultures was
applied to infected macrophage cultures, HIV replication was significantly
suppressed. This SN action of ECs on HIV was mediated through both IFN-ß and
IFN-<U+03BB> because antibodies to their receptors could neutralize the SN-mediated
anti-HIV effect. The role of IFNs in EC-mediated anti-HIV activity is further
supported by the observation that treatment with SN from EC cultures induced the 
expression of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs: ISG56, OAS-1, and MxA) in macrophages. 
These observations indicate that brain microvascular ECs may be a key regulatory 
bystander, playing a crucial role in the BBB innate immunity against HIV
infection.

PMCID: PMC3624939
PMID: 23401273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Immunol. 2013 Mar 15;190(6):2844-56. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1202042. Epub 2013
Feb 8.

A novel IRAK1-IKKe signaling axis limits the activation of TAK1-IKKß downstream
of TLR3.

Bruni D(1), Sebastia J, Dunne S, Schröder M, Butler MP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, National University of Ireland Maynooth, Maynooth,
County Kildare, Ireland.

IRAK1 is involved in the regulation of type I IFN production downstream of TLR3. 
Previous work indicated that IRAK1 negatively regulates TRIF-mediated activation 
of IRF3 and IRF7. We report that IRAK1 limits the activation of the TLR3-NF-<U+03BA>B
pathway. Following TLR3 stimulation, IRAK1-deficient macrophages produced
increased levels of IL-6 and IFN-ß compared with wild type macrophages.
Pharmacological inhibition of TAK1 reduced this increase in IFN-ß, together with 
the heightened activation of IRF3 and p65 found in TLR3-ligand stimulated
IRAK1-deficient macrophages. Recently, IKKe and TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) were
reported to limit activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway downstream of IL-1R, TNFR1, and
TLRs. We show that TBK1 has a positive role in the TLR3-NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, because we
detected reduced levels of IL-6 and reduced activation of p65 in TBK1-deficient
macrophages. In contrast, we show that IKKe limits the activation of the
TLR3-NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Furthermore, we show that IRAK1 is required for the
activation of IKKe downstream of TLR3. We report impaired activation of ERK1/2 in
IRAK1- and IKKe-deficient macrophages, a novel finding for both kinases.
Importantly, this work provides novel mechanistic insight into the regulation of 
the TLR3-signaling pathway, providing strong evidence that an
IRAK1-IKKe-signaling axis acts to limit the production of both type I IFNs and
proinflammatory cytokines by regulating TAK1 activity.

PMID: 23396947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Physiol Genomics. 2013 Apr 1;45(7):287-99. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00001.2013. Epub 2013 Feb 5.

RNA-sequencing analysis of high glucose-treated monocytes reveals novel
transcriptome signatures and associated epigenetic profiles.

Miao F(1), Chen Z, Zhang L, Wang J, Gao H, Wu X, Natarajan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases Research, Beckman Research
Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

We performed high throughput transcriptomic profiling with RNA sequencing
(RNA-Seq) to uncover network responses in human THP-1 monocytes treated with high
glucose (HG). Our data analyses revealed that interferon (IFN) signaling, pattern
recognition receptors, and activated interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) were
enriched among the HG-upregulated genes. Motif analysis identified an
HG-responsive IRF-mediated network in which interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs)
were enriched. Notably, this network showed strong overlap with a recently
discovered IRF7-driven network relevant to Type 1 diabetes. We next examined if
the HG-regulated genes possessed any characteristic chromatin features in the
basal state by profiling 15 active and repressive chromatin marks under normal
glucose conditions using chromatin immunoprecipitation linked to promoter
microarrays. Composite profiles revealed higher histone H3 lysine-9-acetylation
levels around the promoters of HG-upregulated genes compared with all RefSeq
promoters. Interestingly, within the HG-upregulated genes, active chromatin marks
were enriched not only at high CpG content promoters, but surprisingly also at
low CpG content promoters. Similar results were obtained with peripheral blood
monocytes exposed to HG. These new results reveal a novel mechanism by which HG
can exercise IFN-a-like effects in monocytes by upregulating a set of ISGs poised
for activation with multiple chromatin marks.

PMCID: PMC3633422
PMID: 23386205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54472. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054472. Epub 2013 Jan 25.

The bile acid sensor FXR is required for immune-regulatory activities of TLR-9 in
intestinal inflammation.

Renga B(1), Mencarelli A, Cipriani S, D'Amore C, Carino A, Bruno A, Francisci D, 
Zampella A, Distrutti E, Fiorucci S.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Clinica e Sperimentale, Università degli Studi di
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Toll like receptors (TLRs) sense the intestinal microbiota and
regulate the innate immune response. A dysregulation of TLRs function
participates into intestinal inflammation. Farnesoid X Receptor (FXR) is a
nuclear receptor and bile acid sensor highly expressed in entero-hepatic tissues.
FXR regulates lipid metabolism and innate immunity.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study we have investigated whether FXR
gene expression/function in the intestine is modulated by TLRs. We found that in 
human monocytes activation of membrane TLRs (i.e. TLR2, 4, 5 and 6)
downregulates, while activation of intracellular TLRs (i.e. TLR3, 7, 8 and 9)
upregulates the expression of FXR and its target gene SHP, small heterodimer
partner. This effect was TLR9-dependent and TNFa independent. Intestinal
inflammation induced in mice by TNBS downregulates the intestinal expression of
FXR in a TLR9-dependent manner. Protection against TNBS colitis by CpG, a TLR-9
ligand, was lost in FXR(-/-) mice. In contrast, activation of FXR rescued
TLR9(-/-) and MyD88(-/-) mice from colitis. A putative IRF7 response element was 
detected in the FXR promoter and its functional characterization revealed that
IRF7 is recruited on the FXR promoter under TLR9 stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Intestinal expression of FXR is selectively modulated
by TLR9. In addition to its role in regulating type-I interferons and innate
antiviral immunity, IRF-7 a TLR9-dependent factor, regulates the expression of
FXR, linking microbiota-sensing receptors to host's immune and metabolic
signaling.

PMCID: PMC3555871
PMID: 23372731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54406. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054406. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Toll-like receptor ligands induce expression of the costimulatory molecule CD155 
on antigen-presenting cells.

Kamran N(1), Takai Y, Miyoshi J, Biswas SK, Wong JS, Gasser S.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Programme, Department of Microbiology, National University of
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

Genotoxic stress and RAS induce the expression of CD155, a ligand for the immune 
receptors DNAM-1, CD96 and TIGIT. Here we show that antigen-presenting cells
upregulate CD155 expression in response to Toll-like receptor activation.
Induction of CD155 by Toll-like receptors depended on MYD88, TRIF and NF-<U+03BA>B. In
addition, IRF3, but not IRF7, modulated CD155 upregulation in response to TLR3
signals. Immunization of CD155-deficient mice with OVA and the TLR9 agonist CpG
resulted in increased OVA-specific IgG2a/c titers when compared to wild type
mice. Splenocytes of immunized CD155-deficient mice secreted lower levels of IL-4
and fewer IL-4 and GATA-3 expressing CD4(+) T cells were present in the spleen of
Cd155(-/-) mice. Our data suggest that CD155 regulates T(h)2 differentiation.
Targeting of CD155 in immunization protocols using peptides may represent a
promising new approach to boost protective humoral immunity in viral vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3547938
PMID: 23349877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Uirusu. 2012 Jun;62(1):103-12.

[Analysis of the application of host innate immune response to control and
prevent infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Abe T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Yamada-oka, Suita-shi, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
Tabe@med.miami.edu

The baculovirus Autographa californica multiple nuclear polyhedrosis virus
(AcMNPV) has been widely used not only to achieve a high level of foreign gene
expression in insect cells but also for efficient gene transduction into
mammalian cells without any replication. In addition to the efficient gene
delivery, baculovirus has been shown to induce host innate immune responses in
various mammalian cells and in mice. The baculovirus has abundant CpG motifs in
the viral genome and is capable of inducing pro-inflammatory cytokines and
interferons (IFNs) through Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent
signaling pathways in a cell-type-specific manner. The cytoplasmic helicase
proteins RIG-I (retinoic-acid-inducible protein I) and MDA5
(melanoma-differentiation-associated gene 5) have been identified as viral dsRNA 
detectors and the adaptor IPS-1 (IFN-beta promoter stimulator-1) interacts with
RIG-I and MDA5 to facilitate type-I IFN production mediated interferon regulatory
factor 3 (IRF3) and 7 (IRF7). These helicases and IPS-1, however, were not
essential for the type-I IFN and inflammatory cytokine responses to baculovirus. 
The baculovirus also has a strong adjuvant activity, and recombinant
baculoviruses encoding neutralization epitopes elicit protective immunity in
mice. This review deals with the current status of our knowledge of the induction
of host innate immune responses by baculovirus and discusses the future prospects
for baculovirus vectors.

PMID: 23189830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Uirusu. 2012 Jun;62(1):39-45.

[Nucleic acids recognition by innate immunity].

[Article in Japanese]

Akira S(1), Saitoh T, Kawai T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center (IFReC),
Osaka University Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial
Diseases. sakira@biken.osaka-u.ac.jp

The innate immune system detects pathogen-derived nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) and
induces type I interferon (IFN) and other cytokines, resulting in the host
defense against pathogen. We identified interferon-inducible tripartite-motif
(TRIM) 56 as a regulator of double-stranded DNA-mediated type I interferon
induction. TRIM56 interacted with STING and targeted it for lysine 63-linked
ubiquitination. This modification induced STING dimerization, which was a
prerequisite for recruitment of the antiviral kinase TBK1 and subsequent
induction of IFN-beta. Taken together, these results show that TRIM56 is an
interferon-inducible E3 ubiquitin ligase that modulates STING to confer
double-stranded DNA-mediated innate immune responses. It is well known that
Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) and TLR9 sense viral nucleic acids and induce
production of type I interferon (IFN) by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) to
protect the host from virus infection. We showed that the IFN-inducible antiviral
protein Viperin promoted TLR7- and TLR9-mediated production of type I IFN by
pDCs. Viperin expression was potently induced after TLR7 or TLR9 stimulation and 
Viperin localized to the cytoplasmic lipid-enriched compartments, lipid bodies,
in pDCs. Viperin interacted with the signal mediators IRAK1 and TRAF6 to recruit 
them to the lipid bodies and facilitated K63-linked ubiquitination of IRAK1 to
induce the nuclear translocation of transcription factor IRF7. Thus, besides
direct inhibition of viral replication, this finding reveals that Viperin
mediates its antiviral function via the regulation of the TLR7 and TLR9-IRAK1
signaling axis in pDCs.

PMID: 23189823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Clin Exp Allergy. 2012 Dec;42(12):1734-44. doi: 10.1111/cea.12005.

Nasal cytokine responses to natural colds in asthmatic children.

Lewis TC(1), Henderson TA, Carpenter AR, Ramirez IA, McHenry CL, Goldsmith AM,
Ren X, Mentz GB, Mukherjee B, Robins TG, Joiner TA, Mohammad LS, Nguyen ER, Burns
MA, Burke DT, Hershenson MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Communicable Diseases, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

BACKGROUND: The mechanisms by which viruses induce asthma exacerbations are not
well understood.
OBJECTIVE: We characterized fluctuations in nasal aspirate cytokines during
naturally occurring respiratory viral infections in children with asthma.
METHODS: Sixteen children underwent home collections of nasal aspirates when they
were without cold symptoms and again during self-reported respiratory illnesses. 
The presence of viral infection was ascertained by multiplex PCR. Cytokines were 
measured using multiplex immune assay. mRNA expression for selected markers of
viral infection was measured using RT-PCR. A cumulative respiratory symptom score
was calculated for each day of measurement. Generalized estimated equations were 
used to evaluate associations between viral infection and marker elevation, and
between marker elevation and symptom score.
RESULTS: The 16 patients completed a total of 37 weeks of assessment (15 'well'
weeks; 22 self-assessed 'sick' weeks). Viral infections were detected in 3 of the
'well' weeks and 17 of the 'sick' weeks (10 rhinovirus, three coronavirus, two
influenza A, two influenza B, two respiratory syncytial virus, one
parainfluenza). Compared to virus-negative well weeks, nasal aspirate IFN-<U+03B3>,
CXCL8/IL-8, CXCL10/IP-10, CCL5/RANTES, CCL11/eotaxin-1, CCL2/MCP-1, CCL4/MIP-1ß, 
CCL7/MCP-3, and CCL20/MIP3a protein levels increased during virus-positive sick
weeks. Only a subset of cytokines (IFN-<U+03B3>, CXCL8, CCL2, CCL4, CCL5, and CCL20)
correlated with self-reported respiratory tract symptoms. While many aspirates
were dilute and showed no mRNA signal, viral infection significantly increased
the number of samples that were positive for IFN-<U+03BB>1, IFN-<U+03BB>2/3, TLR3, RIG-I, and
IRF7 mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: We conclude that in children with asthma,
naturally occurring viral infections apparently induce a robust innate immune
response including expression of specific chemokines, IFNs, and IFN-responsive
genes.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4219353
PMID: 23181789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Virol. 2013 Feb;87(3):1690-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01855-12. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Cleavage of interferon regulatory factor 7 by enterovirus 71 3C suppresses
cellular responses.

Lei X(1), Xiao X, Xue Q, Jin Q, He B, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)MOH Key Laboratory of Systems Biology of Pathogens, Institute of Pathogen
Biology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Enterovirus 71 (EV71) is a positive-stranded RNA virus which is capable of
inhibiting innate immunity. Among virus-encoded proteins, the 3C protein
compromises the type I interferon (IFN-I) response mediated by retinoid
acid-inducible gene-I (RIG-I) or Toll-like receptor 3 that activates interferon
regulatory 3 (IRF3) and IRF7. In the present study, we report that enterovirus 71
downregulates IRF7 through the 3C protein, which inhibits the function of IRF7.
When expressed in mammalian cells, the 3C protein mediates cleavage of IRF7
rather than that of IRF3. This process is insensitive to inhibitors of caspase,
proteasome, lysosome, and autophagy. H40D substitution in the 3C active site
abolishes its activity, whereas R84Q or V154S substitution in the RNA binding
motif has no effect. Furthermore, 3C-mediated cleavage occurs at the Q189-S190
junction within the constitutive activation domain of IRF7, resulting in two
cleaved IRF7 fragments that are incapable of activating IFN expression. Ectopic
expression of wild-type IRF7 limits EV71 replication. On the other hand,
expression of the amino-terminal domain of IRF7 enhances EV71 infection, which
correlates with its ability to interact with and inhibit IRF3. These results
suggest that control of IRF7 by the 3C protein may represent a viral mechanism to
escape cellular responses.

PMCID: PMC3554134
PMID: 23175366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Immunology. 2013 Mar;138(3):190-7. doi: 10.1111/imm.12038.

Recent advances in understanding viral evasion of type I interferon.

Taylor KE(1), Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biomedical Sciences, McMaster Immunology
Research Centre, Michael DeGroote Centre for Learning and Discovery, McMaster
University, Hamilton, ON, Canada.

The type I interferon (IFN) system mediates a wide variety of antiviral effects
and represents an important first barrier to virus infection. Consequently,
viruses have developed an impressive diversity of tactics to circumvent IFN
responses. Evasion strategies can involve preventing initial virus detection, via
the disruption of the Toll-like receptors or the retinoic acid inducible gene I
(RIG-I) -like receptors, or by avoiding the initial production of the ligands
recognized by these receptors. An alternative approach is to preclude IFN
production by disarming or degrading the transcription factors involved in the
expression of IFN, such as interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3)/IRF7, nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), or ATF-2/c-jun, or by inducing a general block on host cell
transcription. Viruses also oppose IFN signalling, both by disturbing the type I 
IFN receptor and by impeding JAK/STAT signal transduction upon IFN receptor
engagement. In addition, the global expression of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) can
be obstructed via interference with epigenetic signalling, and specific ISGs can 
also be selectively targeted for inhibition. Finally, some viruses disrupt IFN
responses by co-opting negative regulatory systems, whereas others use antiviral 
mechanisms to their own advantage. Here, we review recent developments in this
field.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3573272
PMID: 23173987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Virus Res. 2013 Apr;173(1):87-100. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2012.10.013. Epub 2012
Nov 16.

Identification and utility of innate immune system evasion mechanisms of ASFV.

Correia S(1), Ventura S, Parkhouse RM.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Oeiras 2781-901, Portugal.
scorreia@igc.gulbenkian.pt

The interferon (IFN) system is an early innate anti-virus host defense mechanism 
that takes place shortly after entry of the pathogen and long before the onset of
adaptive immunity. Thus, African swine fever virus (ASFV), as an acute and
persistent virus in pigs, is predicted to have evolved multiple genes for the
manipulation and evasion of interferon. Although, ASFV is known to interfere with
signaling pathways controlling the transcription of cytokines, surprisingly no
individual virus gene manipulating the induction or impact of IFN has been
described. Since an initial bioinformatics search of the ASFV genome failed to
identify potential antagonists of the IFN response, our strategy was to
functionally screen early expressed, "unassigned" ASFV genes without existing
homologies, particularly from MGFs 360 and 530, in luciferase reporter assays for
their inhibition of the induction and impact of IFN. Specifically, we used
reporter plasmids containing the luciferase gene under the control of: (1) the
IFN-ß promoter, to screen for inhibition of induction of type I IFN stimulated by
the addition of Poly(I:C); (2) the ISRE DNA elements, to screen for the
inhibition of the impact of type I IFN; and (3) the GAS DNA elements to screen
for the inhibition of the impact of type II IFN. Our initial experiments revealed
six ASFV genes inhibiting one or more of the three luciferase assays. From these,
we have selected a total of 3 genes for presentation. The ASFV A276R gene from
MGF360 inhibited the induction of IFN-ß via both the TLR3 and the cytosolic
pathways, targeting IRF3, but not IRF7 or NF-<U+03BA>B. The ASFV A528R inhibited the
induction of both NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF3 branches of the type I IFN induction signaling
pathway and the impact of IFN response via both IFN type I and type II
stimulation. The ASFV I329L gene is a functional viral TLR3 homologue inhibiting 
the induction of IFN at the level of TRIF. Thus, these genes reduce the IFN
response by targeting different intracellular signaling intermediates. Their
deletion from wild type virus may strengthen the host interferon response and so 
provide an attenuated form with more restricted virus spread after the initial
infection, perhaps "buying" sufficient time to allow the development of a
protective adaptive immune response. The demonstration of multiple ASFV genes for
the evasion of IFN responses will demand technology to construct viruses with
multiple gene deletions. An alternative would be a multigene DNA vaccine.
Finally, our work clearly demonstrates that unassigned viral genes may be viewed 
as a repository of host evasion strategies, only identifiable through functional 
assays. These may be considered to be "ready-made tools" for the experimental
manipulation of cell biology and immune responses in health and disease and, as
proof of concept, we have constructed a T-cell restricted transgenic mouse
expressing the ASFV gene A238L, a dual inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B and NFAT activation.
The resulting T cell restricted A238L transgenic mice developed a lymphoma with a
phenotype reminiscent of some acute lymphoblastic lymphomas. In contrast,
transgenic mice similarly expressing a mutant A238L solely inhibiting
transcription mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B were indistinguishable from wild type mice,
suggesting a transgene-NFAT-dependent transformation. Elucidation of the
molecular events associated with the development of this virus host evasion
molecule induced tumor may clarify some mechanisms of tumorigenesis in general,
and in the development of T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in particular.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23165138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Nat Immunol. 2013 Jan;14(1):61-71. doi: 10.1038/ni.2475. Epub 2012 Nov 18.

Trex1 regulates lysosomal biogenesis and interferon-independent activation of
antiviral genes.

Hasan M(1), Koch J, Rakheja D, Pattnaik AK, Brugarolas J, Dozmorov I, Levine B,
Wakeland EK, Lee-Kirsch MA, Yan N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2013 Jan;14(1):10-2.

The sensing of viral nucleic acids by the innate immune system triggers the
production of type I interferons, which activates interferon-stimulated genes
(ISGs) and directs a multifaceted antiviral response. ISGs can also be activated 
through interferon-independent pathways, although the precise mechanisms remain
elusive. Here we found that the cytosolic exonuclease Trex1 regulated the
activation of a subset of ISGs independently of interferon. Both Trex1(-/-) mouse
cells and Trex1-mutant human cells had high expression of genes encoding
antiviral molecules ('antiviral genes') and were refractory to viral infection.
The interferon-independent activation of antiviral genes in Trex1(-/-) cells
required the adaptor STING, the kinase TBK1 and the transcription factors IRF3
and IRF7. We also found that Trex1-deficient cells had an expanded lysosomal
compartment, altered subcellular localization of the transcription factor TFEB
and diminished activity of the regulator mTORC1. Together our data identify Trex1
as a regulator of lysosomal biogenesis and interferon-independent activation of
antiviral genes and show that dysregulation of lysosomes can elicit innate immune
responses.

PMCID: PMC3522772
PMID: 23160154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Nov 27;109(48):19792-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1212597109. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

avß3-integrin is a major sensor and activator of innate immunity to herpes
simplex virus-1.

Gianni T(1), Leoni V, Chesnokova LS, Hutt-Fletcher LM, Campadelli-Fiume G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Alma Mater Studiorum-University of
Bologna, 40126 Bologna, Italy.

Pathogens are sensed by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and a growing number of
non-TLR receptors. Integrins constitute a family of signaling receptors exploited
by viruses and bacteria to access cells. By gain- and loss-of-function approaches
we found that avß3-integrin is a sensor of and plays a crucial role in the innate
defense against herpes simplex virus (HSV). avß3-integrin signaled through two
pathways. One concurred with TLR2, affected activation/induction of interferons
type 1 (IFNs-1), NF-<U+03BA>B (nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B 
cells), and a polarized set of cytokines and receptors. The virion glycoproteins 
gH/gL sufficed to induce IFN1 and NF-<U+03BA>B via this pathway. The other pathway was
TLR2-independent, involved sarcoma (SRC)-spleen tyrosine kinase (SYK)-Caspase
recruitment domain-containing protein 9 (CARD9)-TRIF (TIR-domain-containing
adapter-inducing interferon-ß), and affected interferon regulatory factor 3 and 7
(IRF3-IRF7). The importance of avß3-integrin-mediated defense is reflected in the
observation that HSV evolved the immediate-early infected cellular protein 0
(ICP0) protein to counteract it. We propose that avß3-integrin is considered a
class of non-TLR pattern recognition receptors, a role likely exerted toward
viruses and bacteria that interact with integrins and mount an innate response.

PMCID: PMC3511702
PMID: 23150579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Protein Cell. 2013 Feb;4(2):130-41. doi: 10.1007/s13238-012-2081-y. Epub 2012 Nov
12.

MicroRNA-548 down-regulates host antiviral response via direct targeting of
IFN-<U+03BB>1.

Li Y(1), Xie J, Xu X, Wang J, Ao F, Wan Y, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)The State Key Laboratory of Virology and College of Life Sciences, Wuhan
University, Wuhan 430072, China.

Interferon (IFN)-mediated pathways are a crucial part of the cellular response
against viral infection. Type III IFNs, which include IFN-<U+03BB>1, 2 and 3, mediate
antiviral responses similar to Type I IFNs via a distinct receptor complex.
IFN-<U+03BB>1 is more effective than the other two members. Transcription of IFN-<U+03BB>1
requires activation of IRF3/7 and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B), similar to the 
transcriptional mechanism of Type I IFNs. Using reporter assays, we discovered
that viral infection induced both IFN-<U+03BB>1 promoter activity and that of the
3'-untranslated region (UTR), indicating that IFN-<U+03BB>1 expression is also regulated
at the post-transcriptional level. After analysis with microRNA (miRNA)
prediction programs and 3'UTR targeting site assays, the miRNA-548 family,
including miR-548b-5p, miR-548c-5p, miR-548i, miR-548j, and miR-548n, was
identified to target the 3'UTR of IFN-<U+03BB>1. Further study demonstrated that
miRNA-548 mimics down-regulated the expression of IFN-<U+03BB>1. In contrast, their
inhibitors, the complementary RNAs, enhanced the expression of IFN-<U+03BB>1 and
IFN-stimulated genes. Furthermore, miRNA-548 mimics promoted infection by
enterovirus-71 (EV71) and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV), whereas their
inhibitors significantly suppressed the replication of EV71 and VSV. Endogenous
miRNA-548 levels were suppressed during viral infection. In conclusion, our
results suggest that miRNA-548 regulates host antiviral response via direct
targeting of IFN-<U+03BB>1, which may offer a potential candidate for antiviral therapy.

PMID: 23150165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48126. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048126. Epub 2012 Oct 29.

Splenic red pulp macrophages produce type I interferons as early sentinels of
malaria infection but are dispensable for control.

Kim CC(1), Nelson CS, Wilson EB, Hou B, DeFranco AL, DeRisi JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America.

Type I interferons (T1IFNs) are among the earliest cytokines produced during
infections due to their direct regulation by innate immune signaling pathways.
Reports have suggested that T1IFNs are produced during malaria infection, but
little is known about the in vivo cellular origins of T1IFNs or their role in
protection. We have found that in addition to plasmacytoid dendritic cells,
splenic red pulp macrophages (RPMs) can generate significant quantities of T1IFNs
in response to P. chabaudi infection in a TLR9-, MYD88-, and IRF7-dependent
manner. Furthermore, T1IFNs regulate expression of interferon-stimulated genes
redundantly with Interferon-gamma (IFNG), resulting in redundancy for resistance 
to experimental malaria infection. Despite their role in sensing and promoting
immune responses to infection, we observe that RPMs are dispensable for control
of parasitemia. Our results reveal that RPMs are early sentinels of malaria
infection, but that effector mechanisms previously attributed to RPMs are not
essential for control.

PMCID: PMC3483282
PMID: 23144737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Gen Virol. 2013 Feb;94(Pt 2):308-13. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.047076-0. Epub 2012 Oct
31.

West Nile virus NS2A protein facilitates virus-induced apoptosis independently of
interferon response.

Melian EB(1), Edmonds JH, Nagasaki TK, Hinzman E, Floden N, Khromykh AA.

Author information: 
(1)Australian Infectious Disease Research Centre, School of Chemistry and
Molecular Biosciences, University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4072, Australia.

The flavivirus NS2A protein is a small, multifunctional protein, involved in
replication, virion formation and regulation of the innate immune response. Using
the Kunjin strain of West Nile virus (WNV(KUN)) we previously demonstrated that a
single amino acid change from alanine to proline at position 30 of the NS2A
protein (A30P) reduced viral cytopathicity in cells and virulence in mice. To
further investigate functions of the NS2A protein we have substituted alanine at 
position 30 with different amino acids (A30 mutants) in a WNV(KUN) infectious
clone. The virulence of mutant viruses in wild-type (WT) and IRF3/IRF7
double-knockout mice was influenced by the amino acid change and ranged from high
to low in the order of WT>A30L>A30E>A30P/A30G. Moreover, infection of beta
interferon (IFN-ß)-deficient Vero cells with A30P virus showed less pronounced
chromosomal DNA degradation and lower percentage of cells with positive TUNEL
labelling than in WT virus infection, indicating a role for the WT NS2A protein
in IFN-independent apoptotic cell death.

PMCID: PMC3709616
PMID: 23114626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Genes Immun. 2013 Jan;14(1):19-34. doi: 10.1038/gene.2012.49. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Transcriptome characterization of immune suppression from battlefield-like
stress.

Muhie S(1), Hammamieh R, Cummings C, Yang D, Jett M.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Systems Biology Program, US Army Center for Environmental Health
Research, Fort Detrick, MD 21702-5010, USA.

Transcriptome alterations of leukocytes from soldiers who underwent 8 weeks of
Army Ranger training (RASP, Ranger Assessment and Selection Program) were
analyzed to evaluate impacts of battlefield-like stress on the immune response.
About 1400 transcripts were differentially expressed between pre- and post-RASP
leukocytes. Upon functional analysis, immune response was the most enriched
biological process, and most of the transcripts associated with the immune
response were downregulated. Microbial pattern recognition, chemotaxis, antigen
presentation and T-cell activation were among the most downregulated immune
processes. Transcription factors predicted to be stress-inhibited (IRF7, RELA,
NF<U+03BA>B1, CREB1, IRF1 and HMGB) regulated genes involved in inflammation, maturation
of dendritic cells and glucocorticoid receptor signaling. Many altered
transcripts were predicted to be targets of stress-regulated microRNAs. Post-RASP
leukocytes exposed ex vivo to Staphylococcal enterotoxin B showed a markedly
impaired immune response to this superantigen compared with pre-RASP leukocytes, 
consistent with the suppression of the immune response revealed by transcriptome 
analyses. Our results suggest that suppression of antigen presentation and
lymphocyte activation pathways, in the setting of normal blood cell counts, most 
likely contribute to the poor vaccine response, impaired wound healing and
infection susceptibility associated with chronic intense stress.

PMCID: PMC3564018
PMID: 23096155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Blood. 2012 Dec 13;120(25):4982-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-02-413229. Epub 2012 
Oct 22.

PI3K-PKB hyperactivation augments human plasmacytoid dendritic cell development
and function.

van de Laar L(1), van den Bosch A, Boonstra A, Binda RS, Buitenhuis M, Janssen
HL, Coffer PJ, Woltman AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC-University Medical 
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) are considered potential tools or targets for
immunotherapy. However, current knowledge concerning methodologies to manipulate 
their development or function remains limited. Here, we investigated the role of 
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-protein kinase B (PKB)-mammalian target 
of rapamycin (mTOR) axis in human pDC development, survival, and function. In
vitro pDC generation from human cord blood-derived CD34(+) hematopoietic
progenitors was reduced by pharmacologic inhibition of PI3K, PKB, or mTOR
activity, and peripheral blood pDCs required PI3K-PKB-mTOR signaling to survive. 
Accordingly, activity of this pathway in circulating pDCs correlated with their
abundance in peripheral blood. Importantly, introduction of constitutively active
PKB or pharmacologic inhibition of negative regulator phosphatase and tensin
homolog (PTEN) resulted in increased pDC numbers in vitro and in vivo.
Furthermore, MHC class II and costimulatory molecule expression, and production
of IFN-a and TNF-a, were augmented, which could be explained by enhanced IRF7 and
NF-<U+03BA>B activation. Finally, the numerically and functionally impaired pDCs of
chronic hepatitis B patients demonstrated reduced PI3K-PKB-mTOR activity. In
conclusion, intact PI3K-PKB-mTOR signaling regulates development, survival, and
function of human pDCs, and pDC development and functionality can be promoted by 
PI3K-PKB hyperactivation. Manipulation of this pathway or its downstream targets 
could be used to improve the generation and function of pDCs to augment immunity.

PMID: 23091295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2013 Jan;33(1):15-23. doi: 10.1089/jir.2012.0037. Epub
2012 Oct 15.

The blood transcriptional signature of chronic hepatitis C virus is consistent
with an ongoing interferon-mediated antiviral response.

Bolen CR(1), Robek MD, Brodsky L, Schulz V, Lim JK, Taylor MW, Kleinstein SH.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale
University, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

Blood transcriptional profiling is a powerful tool for understanding global
changes after infection, and may be useful for prognosis and prediction of drug
treatment responses. This study characterizes the effects of chronic hepatitis C 
virus (HCV) infection on gene expression by analyzing blood samples from 10
treatment-naïve HCV patients and 6 healthy volunteers. Differential expression
analysis of microarray data from peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs)
identified a 136-gene signature, including 66 genes elevated in infected
individuals. Most of the upregulated genes were associated with interferon (IFN) 
activity (including members of the OAS and MX families, ISG15, and IRF7),
suggesting an ongoing immune response. This HCV signature was also found to be
consistently enriched in many other viral infection and vaccination datasets.
These genes were validated using a second cohort composed of 5 HCV patients and 5
healthy volunteers, confirming the upregulation of the IFN signature. In summary,
this is the first study to directly compare blood transcriptional profiles from
HCV patients with healthy controls. The results show that chronic HCV infection
has a pronounced effect on gene expression in PBMCs of infected individuals, and 
significantly elevates the expression of a subset of IFN-stimulated genes.

PMCID: PMC3539252
PMID: 23067362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012 Dec 15;186(12):1248-55. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201207-1280OC. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Systemic steroid exposure is associated with differential methylation in chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease.

Wan ES(1), Qiu W, Baccarelli A, Carey VJ, Bacherman H, Rennard SI, Agustí A,
Anderson WH, Lomas DA, DeMeo DL.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Division of Network Medicine, Brigham and Womens Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. reesw@channing.harvard.edu

RATIONALE: Systemic glucocorticoids are used therapeutically to treat a variety
of medical conditions. Epigenetic processes such as DNA methylation may reflect
exposure to glucocorticoids and may be involved in mediating the responses and
side effects associated with these medications.
OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis that differences in DNA methylation are
associated with current systemic steroid use.
METHODS: We obtained DNA methylation data at 27,578 CpG sites in 14,475 genes
throughout the genome in two large, independent cohorts: the International COPD
Genetics Network (n(discovery) = 1,085) and the Boston Early Onset COPD study
(n(replication) = 369). Sites were tested for association with current systemic
steroid use using generalized linear mixed models.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: A total of 511 sites demonstrated significant
differential methylation by systemic corticosteroid use in all three of our
primary models. Pyrosequencing validation confirmed robust differential
methylation at CpG sites annotated to genes such as SLC22A18, LRP3, HIPK3,
SCNN1A, FXYD1, IRF7, AZU1, SIT1, GPR97, ABHD16B, and RABGEF1. Functional
annotation clustering demonstrated significant enrichment in intrinsic membrane
components, hemostasis and coagulation, cellular ion homeostasis, leukocyte and
lymphocyte activation and chemotaxis, protein transport, and responses to
nutrients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses suggest that systemic steroid use is associated with
site-specific differential methylation throughout the genome. Differentially
methylated CpG sites were found in biologically plausible and previously
unsuspected pathways; these genes and pathways may be relevant in the development
of novel targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC3622442
PMID: 23065012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Nat Immunol. 2012 Nov;13(11):1055-62. doi: 10.1038/ni.2429. Epub 2012 Oct 7.

Pellino3 targets the IRF7 pathway and facilitates autoregulation of TLR3- and
viral-induced expression of type I interferons.

Siednienko J(1), Jackson R, Mellett M, Delagic N, Yang S, Wang B, Tang LS,
Callanan JJ, Mahon BP, Moynagh PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Immunology, National University of Ireland
Maynooth, Maynooth, County Kildare, Ireland.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) sense pathogen-associated molecules and respond by
inducing cytokines and type I interferon. Here we show that genetic ablation of
the E3 ubiquitin ligase Pellino3 augmented the expression of type I interferon
but not of proinflammatory cytokines in response to TLR3 activation.
Pellino3-deficient mice had greater resistance against the pathogenic and lethal 
effects of encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV). TLR3 signaling induced Pellino3,
which in turn interacted with and ubiquitinated TRAF6. This modification
suppressed the ability of TRAF6 to interact with and activate IRF7, resulting in 
downregulation of type I interferon expression. Our findings highlight a new
physiological role for Pellino3 and define a new autoregulatory network for
controlling type I interferon expression.

PMID: 23042151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Jan;27(1):71-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2012.09.011. Epub 2012
Oct 2.

Peripubertal viral-like challenge and social isolation mediate overlapping but
distinct effects on behaviour and brain interferon regulatory factor 7 expression
in the adult Wistar rat.

Lukasz B(1), O'Sullivan NC, Loscher JS, Pickering M, Regan CM, Murphy KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neurotherapeutics Research Group, UCD School of Biomolecular and Biomedical
Science, UCD Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4,
Ireland.

A range of adverse, early life environmental influences such as viral infection
and social deprivation are thought to increase risk of psychiatric illness later 
in life. Here, we used peripheral administration of the viral infection mimic
polyriboinosinic-polyribocytidylic acid (polyI:C) to compare the consequences of 
peripubertal infection and isolation rearing. Isolation rearing induced deficits 
in sensorimotor gating and recognition memory while no changes in social
interaction or spatial learning were observed. PolyI:C injection during the
peripubertal period markedly increased expression of interferon-stimulated genes 
(Ifit2, Prkr, Mx2 and Irf7) in the hippocampal dentate gyrus demonstrating that
peripheral administration of the viral mimic in the adolescent animal does have
direct effects in the brain. Peripubertal infection mimicry induced a similar but
later emerging behavioural deficit in prepulse inhibition implying the existence 
of a peripubertal window of opportunity for viral-mediated cytokine increases to 
impact brain development and function. PolyI:C treatment also impaired novel
object recognition but did not alter spatial reference memory or social
interaction. Combining the polyI:C challenge with social isolation did not
exacerbate the behavioural deficits seen with isolation rearing alone. Using Irf7
as a marker, peripubertal viral infection mimicry, isolation rearing and a
combination of both were all seen to produce a long-lasting molecular imprint on 
the interferon-associated signalling pathway in the principal neuron population
of the hippocampal dentate gyrus. The data suggest that the sensitivity of brain 
structure and function to disruption by viral infection extends into the
peripubertal period. Moreover, augmented interferon signalling in hippocampus may
represent a common molecular imprint of environmental insults associated with
neuropsychiatric illnesses like schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23036922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(24):13515-23. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01824-12. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Critical role for interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and IRF-7 in type I
interferon-mediated control of murine norovirus replication.

Thackray LB(1), Duan E, Lazear HM, Kambal A, Schreiber RD, Diamond MS, Virgin HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Human noroviruses (HuNoV) are the major cause of epidemic, nonbacterial
gastroenteritis in the world. The short course of HuNoV-induced symptoms has
implicated innate immunity in control of norovirus (NoV) infection. Studies using
murine norovirus (MNV) confirm the importance of innate immune responses during
NoV infection. Type I alpha and beta interferons (IFN-a/ß) limit HuNoV replicon
function, restrict MNV replication in cultured cells, and control MNV replication
in vivo. Therefore, the cell types and transcription factors involved in
antiviral immune responses and IFN-a/ß-mediated control of NoV infection are
important to define. We used mice with floxed alleles of the IFNAR1 chain of the 
IFN-a/ß receptor to identify cells expressing lysozyme M or CD11c as cells that
respond to IFN-a/ß to restrict MNV replication in vivo. Furthermore, we show that
the transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 work in concert to initiate unique and 
overlapping antiviral responses to restrict MNV replication in vivo. IRF-3 and
IRF-7 restrict MNV replication in both cultured macrophages and dendritic cells, 
are required for induction of IFN-a/ß in macrophages but not dendritic cells, and
are dispensable for the antiviral effects of IFN-a/ß that block MNV replication. 
These studies suggest that expression of the IFN-a/ß receptor on
macrophages/neutrophils and dendritic cells, as well as of IRF-3 and IRF-7, is
critical for innate immune responses to NoV infection.

PMCID: PMC3503103
PMID: 23035219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Br J Dermatol. 2012 Dec;167(6):1236-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2012.11145.x.
Epub 2012 Sep 27.

Dysregulation of the type I interferon system in adult-onset clinically
amyopathic dermatomyositis has a potential contribution to the development of
interstitial lung disease.

Sun WC(1), Sun YC, Lin H, Yan B, Shi GX.

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Rheumatology, State Key Laboratory of Biotherapy, West China
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China.

BACKGROUND: It has been speculated that viral infection might be one of the
potential aetiologies for adult-onset clinically amyopathic dermatomyositis
(CADM). The molecular pathogenesis remains largely unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To explore whether dysregulation of the type I interferon (IFN)
system is involved in the pathogenesis of CADM.
METHODS: We studied 16 patients with CADM and compared them with healthy control 
subjects (n = 20) and patients with classic dermatomyositis (DM, n = 16) and
polymyositis (PM, n = 16). Expressions of mRNA for serial toll-like receptor
genes (TLR2, TLR3, TLR4, TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9) and type I IFN-regulated genes
(IRF7, ISG15 and MxA) in peripheral blood leucocytes (PBL) were detected by
real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis. The level of IFN-a in blood was
tested by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: The mRNA expressions of TLR7, TLR9 and IRF7 were greatly elevated in the
PBL from patients with CADM compared with controls. Upregulation of the ISG15 and
MxA genes was detected in the PBL from patients with CADM, as well as from
patients with classic DM. Among the four study groups, the overproduction of
IFN-a in blood was most significant in the CADM group. Especially, IFN-a level
was obviously high in the clinical interstitial lung disease (ILD) subgroup of
patients with CADM. Positive correlations were found between IFN-a concentration 
and other unfavourable prognostic factors of CADM-associated ILD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that the dysregulation of the type I IFN system may
be implicated in CADM pathogenesis. IFN-a may be a useful biomarker for assessing
the disease severity of CADM-associated ILD.

© 2012 The Authors. BJD © 2012 British Association of Dermatologists 2012.

PMID: 23013528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Protein Cell. 2013 Jan;4(1):27-39. doi: 10.1007/s13238-012-2063-0. Epub 2012 Sep 
21.

The essential adaptors of innate immune signaling.

Chen H(1), Jiang Z.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Microbial components and the endogenous molecules released from damaged cells can
stimulate germ-line-encoded pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) to transduce
signals to the hub of the innate immune signaling network-the adaptor proteins
MyD88/TRIF/MAVS/STING/Caspase-1, where integrated signals relay to the relevant
transcription factors IRF3/IRF7/NF-<U+03BA>B/ AP-1 and the signal transducer and
activator of transcription 6 (STAT6) to trigger the expression of type I
interferons and inflammatory cytokines or the assembly of inflammasomes. Most
pleiotropic cytokines are secreted and bind to specific receptors, activating the
signaling pathways including JAK-STAT for the proliferation, differentiation and 
functional capacity of immune cells. This review focuses on several critical
adaptors in innate immune signaling cascades and recent progress in their
molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 22996173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Neuroscience. 2012 Dec 13;226:10-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.09.007.
Epub 2012 Sep 15.

Transcriptional expression patterns triggered by chemically distinct
neuroprotective molecules.

Pappas DJ(1), Gabatto PA, Oksenberg D, Khankhanian P, Baranzini SE, Gan L,
Oksenberg JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA. djpappas75@gmail.com

Glutamate-mediated excitotoxicity has been purported to underlie many
neurodegenerative disorders. A subtype of glutamate receptors, namely
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors, has been recognized as potential targets
for neuroprotection. To increase our understanding of the mechanisms that
underlie this neuroprotection, we employed a mouse model of glutamate
receptor-induced excitotoxic injury. Primary cortical neurons derived from
postnatal day-0 CD-1 mice were cultured in the presence or absence of
neuroprotective molecules and exposed to NMDA. Following a recovery period, whole
genome expression was measured by microarray analysis. We used a combination of
database and text mining, as well as systems modeling to identify signatures
within the differentially expressed genes. While molecules differed in their
mechanisms of action, we found significant overlap in the expression of a core
group of genes and pathways. Many of these molecules have clear links to neuronal
protection and survival, including ion channels, transporters, as well as
signaling pathways including the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), the
Toll-like receptor (TLR), and the hypoxic inducible factor (HIF). Within the TLR 
pathway, we also discovered a significant enrichment of interferon regulatory
factor 7 (IRF7)-regulated genes. Knockdown of Irf7 by RNA interference resulted
in reduced survival following NMDA treatment. Given the prominent role that IRF7 
plays in the transduction of type-I interferons (IFNs), we also tested whether
type-I IFNs alone functioned as neuroprotective agents and found that type-I IFNs
were sufficient to promote neuronal survival. Our data suggest that the
TLR/IRF7/IFN axis plays a significant role in recovery from glutamate-induced
excitotoxicity.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3489981
PMID: 22986168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nature. 2012 Oct 18;490(7420):421-5. doi: 10.1038/nature11428. Epub 2012 Sep 16.

A FOXO3-IRF7 gene regulatory circuit limits inflammatory sequelae of antiviral
responses.

Litvak V(1), Ratushny AV, Lampano AE, Schmitz F, Huang AC, Raman A, Rust AG,
Bergthaler A, Aitchison JD, Aderem A.

Author information: 
(1)Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, Seattle, Washington 98109, USA.

Antiviral responses must be tightly regulated to defend rapidly against infection
while minimizing inflammatory damage. Type 1 interferons (IFN-I) are crucial
mediators of antiviral responses and their transcription is regulated by a
variety of transcription factors; principal among these is the family of
interferon regulatory factors (IRFs). The IRF gene regulatory networks are
complex and contain multiple feedback loops. The tools of systems biology are
well suited to elucidate the complex interactions that give rise to precise
coordination of the interferon response. Here we have used an unbiased systems
approach to predict that a member of the forkhead family of transcription
factors, FOXO3, is a negative regulator of a subset of antiviral genes. This
prediction was validated using macrophages isolated from Foxo3-null mice.
Genome-wide location analysis combined with gene deletion studies identified the 
Irf7 gene as a critical target of FOXO3. FOXO3 was identified as a negative
regulator of Irf7 transcription and we have further demonstrated that FOXO3, IRF7
and IFN-I form a coherent feed-forward regulatory circuit. Our data suggest that 
the FOXO3-IRF7 regulatory circuit represents a novel mechanism for establishing
the requisite set points in the interferon pathway that balances the beneficial
effects and deleterious sequelae of the antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC3556990
PMID: 22982991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043317. Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Toll-like receptor 7 stimulates the expression of Epstein-Barr virus latent
membrane protein 1.

Valente RM(1), Ehlers E, Xu D, Ahmad H, Steadman A, Blasnitz L, Zhou Y, Kastanek 
L, Meng B, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Center of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska, United States of America.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) is a ubiquitous human herpesvirus. Toll-like receptor 7 
(TLR7) is involved in host innate immunity against pathogens, and its aberrant
activation is linked to the development of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE,
also called "lupus"). Type I interferons (IFN) are apparently driving forces for 
lupus pathogenesis. Previously, we found that EBV latent membrane protein 1
(LMP1) primes cells for IFN production. In this report, the relationship among
EBV LMP1, TLRs, and IFN production are examined. We find that TLR7 activation
increases the expression of EBV LMP1, and IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is
involved in the stimulation process. TLR7 activation did not induce IFNs from
EBV-infected cells, but potentiates those cells for IFN production by TLR3 or
TLR9 activation. In addition, we find that LMP1 and IFNs are co-expressed in the 
same cells in some lupus patients. Therefore, the aberrant activation of TLR7
might induce LMP1 expression and LMP1-expression cells may be producing IFNs in
lupus patients. These results suggest EBV might be an exacerbating factor in some
lupus patients via promoting IFN production.

PMCID: PMC3432040
PMID: 22952664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Virol. 2012 Nov;86(22):12251-61. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01407-12. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 regulates the function of interferon
regulatory factor 7 by inducing its sumoylation.

Bentz GL(1), Shackelford J, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) induces multiple signal
transduction pathways during latent EBV infection via its C-terminal activating
region 1 (CTAR1), CTAR2, and the less-studied CTAR3. One mechanism by which LMP1 
regulates cellular activation is through the induction of protein
posttranslational modifications, including phosphorylation and ubiquitination. We
recently documented that LMP1 induces a third major protein modification by
physically interacting with the SUMO-conjugating enzyme Ubc9 through CTAR3 and
inducing the sumoylation of cellular proteins in latently infected cells. We have
now identified a specific target of LMP1-induced sumoylation, interferon
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7). We hypothesize that during EBV latency, LMP1 induces 
the sumoylation of IRF7, limiting its transcriptional activity and modulating the
activation of innate immune responses. Our data show that endogenously sumoylated
IRF7 is detected in latently infected EBV lymphoblastoid cell lines. LMP1
expression coincided with increased sumoylation of IRF7 in a CTAR3-dependent
manner. Additional experiments show that LMP1 CTAR3-induced sumoylation regulates
the expression and function of IRF7 by decreasing its turnover, increasing its
nuclear retention, decreasing its DNA binding, and limiting its transcriptional
activation. Finally, we identified that IRF7 is sumoylated at lysine 452. These
data demonstrate that LMP1 CTAR3 does in fact function in intracellular
signaling, leading to biologic effects. We propose that CTAR3 is an important
signaling region of LMP1 that regulates protein function by sumoylation. We have 
shown specifically that LMP1 CTAR3, in cooperation with CTAR2, can limit the
ability of IRF7 to induce innate immune responses by inducing the sumoylation of 
IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3486478
PMID: 22951831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. BMC Genomics. 2012 Aug 28;13:431. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-431.

A moderate increase in ambient temperature modulates the Atlantic cod (Gadus
morhua) spleen transcriptome response to intraperitoneal viral mimic injection.

Hori TS(1), Gamperl AK, Booman M, Nash GW, Rise ML.

Author information: 
(1)Ocean Sciences Centre, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St, John's, A1C
5S7, NL, Canada. tshori@mun.ca

BACKGROUND: Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) reared in sea-cages can experience large 
variations in temperature, and these have been shown to affect their immune
function. We used the new 20K Atlantic cod microarray to investigate how a water 
temperature change which, simulates that seen in Newfoundland during the
spring-summer (i.e. from 10°C to 16°C, 1°C increase every 5<U+2009>days) impacted the
cod spleen transcriptome response to the intraperitoneal injection of a viral
mimic (polyriboinosinic polyribocytidylic acid, pIC).
RESULTS: The temperature regime alone did not cause any significant increases in 
plasma cortisol levels and only minor changes in spleen gene transcription.
However, it had a considerable impact on the fish spleen transcriptome response
to pIC [290 and 339 significantly differentially expressed genes between 16°C and
10°C at 6 and 24<U+2009>hours post-injection (HPI), respectively]. Seventeen
microarray-identified transcripts were selected for QPCR validation based on
immune-relevant functional annotations. Fifteen of these transcripts (i.e. 88%), 
including DHX58, STAT1, IRF7, ISG15, RSAD2 and I<U+03BA>Ba, were shown by QPCR to be
significantly induced by pIC.
CONCLUSIONS: The temperature increase appeared to accelerate the spleen immune
transcriptome response to pIC. We found 41 and 999 genes differentially expressed
between fish injected with PBS vs. pIC at 10°C and sampled at 6HPI and 24HPI,
respectively. In contrast, there were 656 and 246 genes differentially expressed 
between fish injected with PBS vs. pIC at 16°C and sampled at 6HPI and 24HPI,
respectively. Our results indicate that the modulation of mRNA expression of
genes belonging to the NF-<U+03BA>B and type I interferon signal transduction pathways
may play a role in controlling temperature-induced changes in the spleen's
transcript expression response to pIC. Moreover, interferon effector genes such
as ISG15 and RSAD2 were differentially expressed between fish injected with pIC
at 10°C vs. 16°C at 6HPI. These results substantially increase our understanding 
of the genes and molecular pathways involved in the negative impacts of elevated 
ambient temperature on fish health, and may also be valuable to our understanding
of how accelerated global climate change could impact cold-water marine finfish
species.

PMCID: PMC3534563
PMID: 22928584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Gene. 2012 Nov 10;509(2):232-46. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.08.017. Epub 2012 Aug
19.

Dynamic expression profiles of virus-responsive and putative antimicrobial
peptide-encoding transcripts during Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) embryonic and
early larval development.

Rise ML(1), Hall JR, Alcock BP, Hori TS.

Author information: 
(1)Ocean Sciences Centre, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL,
Canada A1C 5S7. mrise@mun.ca

Early life stage mortality is one of the problems faced by Atlantic cod
aquaculture. However, our understanding of immunity in early life stage fish is
still incomplete, and the information available is restricted to a few species.
In the present work we investigated the expression of immune-relevant transcripts
in Atlantic cod during early development. The transcripts subjected to QPCR
analysis in the present study were previously identified as putative anti-viral
or anti-bacterial genes in Atlantic cod using suppression subtractive
hybridization (SSH) libraries, QPCR, and/or microarrays. Of the 11 genes involved
in this study, only atf3, cxc chemokine and gaduscidin-1 were not detected at the
transcript level in all developmental stages investigated from unfertilized egg
to early larval stage. Adam22, hamp, il8, irf1, irf7, lgp2, sacsin, and stat1
transcripts were detected in unfertilized egg and 7h post-fertilization (~2-cell 
stage) embryos, showing maternal contribution of these immune-relevant
transcripts to the early embryonic transcriptome. The Atlantic cod genes included
in this study presented diverse transcript expression profiles throughout
embryonic and early larval development. For example, adam22 and sacsin
transcripts rose abruptly during blastula/gastrula stage and were then expressed 
at relatively high levels through subsequent embryonic and early larval
developmental stages. A peak in irf1 and irf7 transcript expression during early 
segmentation suggests that these interferon pathway genes play developmental
stage-specific roles during cod embryogenesis. Stat1 had increasing transcript
expression throughout blastula/gastrula, segmentation, and early larval
developmental stages. Atf3, cxc chemokine, gaduscidin-1, and il8 transcripts rose
approximately 2-3 fold during hatching, supporting the hypothesis that there is
preparation at the immune-relevant transcript expression level to deal with
environmental pathogens that may be encountered during early larval development. 
The specific roles that interferon pathway and other immune-relevant genes play
in early life stage cod, and the potential impact of their dynamic transcript
expression on immune competence of Atlantic cod embryos and larvae, remain
unclear and warrant further study.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22925828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 15;189(6):2860-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103491. Epub 2012
Aug 15.

MyD88 drives the IFN-ß response to Lactobacillus acidophilus in dendritic cells
through a mechanism involving IRF1, IRF3, and IRF7.

Weiss G(1), Maaetoft-Udsen K, Stifter SA, Hertzog P, Goriely S, Thomsen AR,
Paludan SR, Frøkiær H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences and Environment, Molecular Immunology, Faculty of
Life Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 1871 Frederiksberg, Denmark.
gudrun.weiss@imperial.ac.uk

Type I IFNs are induced by pathogens to protect the host from infection and boost
the immune response. We have recently demonstrated that this IFN response is not 
restricted to pathogens, as the Gram-positive bacterium Lactobacillus
acidophilus, a natural inhabitant of the intestine, induces high levels of IFN-ß 
in dendritic cells. In the current study, we investigate the intracellular
pathways involved in IFN-ß upon stimulation of dendritic cells with L.
acidophilus and reveal that this IFN-ß induction requires phagosomal uptake and
processing but bypasses the endosomal receptors TLR7 and TLR9. The IFN-ß
production is fully dependent on the TIR adapter molecule MyD88, partly dependent
on IFN regulatory factor (IRF)1, but independent of the TIR domain-containing
adapter inducing IFN-ß MyD88 adapter-like, IRF and IRF7. However, our results
suggest that IRF3 and IRF7 have complementary roles in IFN-ß signaling. The IFN-ß
production is strongly impaired by inhibitors of spleen tyrosine kinase (Syk) and
PI3K. Our results indicate that L. acidophilus induces IFN-ß independently of the
receptors typically used by bacteria, as it requires MyD88, Syk, and PI3K
signaling and phagosomal processing to activate IRF1 and IRF3/IRF7 and thereby
the release of IFN-ß.

PMID: 22896628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Virol. 2012 Oct;86(20):11254-65. Epub 2012 Aug 8.

Role of interferon regulatory factor 7 in T cell responses during acute
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection.

Zhou S(1), Cerny AM, Fitzgerald KA, Kurt-Jones EA, Finberg RW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.

Type I interferons (IFNs), predominantly IFN-a and -ß, play critical roles in
both innate and adaptive immune responses against viral infections. Interferon
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a key innate immune molecule in the type I IFN
signaling pathway, is essential for the type I IFN response to many viruses,
including lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). Here, we show that although 
IRF7 knockout (KO) mice failed to control the replication of LCMV in the early
stages of infection, they were capable of clearing LCMV infection. Despite the
lack of type I IFN production, IRF7 KO mice generated normal CD4(+) T cell
responses, and the expansion of naïve CD8(+) T cells into primary CD8(+) T cells 
specific for LCMV GP(33-41) was relatively normal. In contrast, the expansion of 
the LCMV NP(396)-specific CD8(+) T cells was severely impaired in IRF7 KO mice.
We demonstrated that this defective CD8(+) T cell response is due neither to an
impaired antigen-presenting system nor to any intrinsic role of IRF7 in CD8(+) T 
cells. The lack of a type I IFN response in IRF7 KO mice did not affect the
formation of memory CD8(+) T cells. Thus, the present study provides new insight 
into the impact of the innate immune system on viral pathogenesis and
demonstrates the critical contribution of innate immunity in controlling virus
replication in the early stages of infection, which may shape the quality of
CD8(+) T cell responses.

PMCID: PMC3457134
PMID: 22875973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Lab Invest. 2012 Sep;92(9):1318-29. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.89. Epub 2012 Jul
23.

The suppression of TRIM21 and the accumulation of IFN-a play crucial roles in the
pathogenesis of osteonecrosis of the femoral head.

Tateda K(1), Okazaki S, Nagoya S, Katada R, Mizuo K, Watanabe S, Yamashita T,
Matsumoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Legal Medicine and Molecular Alcohology, Sapporo Medical
University School of Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

Osteonecrosis of the femoral head (ONFH), the pathogenesis of which remains
unclear, has been observed in autoimmune disease patients treated with
corticosteroids. Recently, it has been shown that anti-tripartite
motif-containing 21 (TRIM21) autoantibodies, which are often present in patients 
with systemic lupus erythematosis and Sjögren's syndrome, inhibit the E3 ligase
activity of TRIM21. TRIM21 negatively regulates nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and
interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 3 and 7, three downstream transcription
factors, via toll-like receptor 4 signaling. The aim of this study was to clarify
the role of TRIM21 in the pathogenesis of ONFH using an animal model. Male Wistar
rats were injected with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) twice and with
methylprednisolone (MPSL) or saline three times. N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) was
administered either concurrently with MPSL or once daily for the 3 days following
the last MPSL injection. The incidence of ONFH in the MPSL group was 23.5%.
Co-treatment of NAC and MPSL increased the incidence of ONFH to 55.6%. MPSL
treatment decreased the activity of NF-<U+03BA>B in the liver and significantly
increased the activity of both IRF3 and IRF7. No significant differences were
observed in the activity of any of these three transcription factors between the 
MPSL and the co-treatment groups. In the femoral head, co-treatment with NAC and 
MPSL significantly decreased the expression of TRIM21 at 3<U+2009>h and significantly
increased the expression of interferon (IFN)-a at 24<U+2009>h when compared with the
MPSL group. IFN-a is known to induce cell death. These findings suggest that the 
suppression of TRIM21 in the femoral head causes an accumulation of IFN-a, which 
in turn leads to the development of ONFH. In conclusion, the suppression of
TRIM21 resulting from altered NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF homeostasis accelerates the ONFH in
rats treated with corticosteroids following LPS administration.

PMID: 22825687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Nat Med. 2012 Aug;18(8):1224-31. doi: 10.1038/nm.2830. Epub 2012 Jul 22.

Silencing of Irf7 pathways in breast cancer cells promotes bone metastasis
through immune escape.

Bidwell BN(1), Slaney CY, Withana NP, Forster S, Cao Y, Loi S, Andrews D, Mikeska
T, Mangan NE, Samarajiwa SA, de Weerd NA, Gould J, Argani P, Möller A, Smyth MJ, 
Anderson RL, Hertzog PJ, Parker BS.

Author information: 
(1)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia; Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,
Australia.

Breast cancer metastasis is a key determinant of long-term patient survival. By
comparing the transcriptomes of primary and metastatic tumor cells in a mouse
model of spontaneous bone metastasis, we found that a substantial number of genes
suppressed in bone metastases are targets of the interferon regulatory factor
Irf7. Restoration of Irf7 in tumor cells or administration of interferon led to
reduced bone metastases and prolonged survival time. In mice deficient in the
interferon (IFN) receptor or in natural killer (NK) and CD8(+) T cell responses, 
metastasis was accelerated, indicating that Irf7-driven suppression of metastasis
was reliant on IFN signaling to host immune cells. We confirmed the clinical
relevance of these findings in over 800 patients in which high expression of
Irf7-regulated genes in primary tumors was associated with prolonged bone
metastasis-free survival. This gene signature may identify patients that could
benefit from IFN-based therapies. Thus, we have identified an innate immune
pathway intrinsic to breast cancer cells, the suppression of which restricts
immunosurveillance to enable metastasis.

PMID: 22820642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041050. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

IRF7 regulates TLR2-mediated activation of splenic CD11c(hi) dendritic cells.

Owens BM(1), Moore JW, Kaye PM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Infection, Hull York Medical School and Department
of Biology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.

Members of the Interferon Regulatory Factor (IRF) family of transcription factors
play an essential role in the development and function of the immune system. Here
we investigated the role of IRF7 in the functional activation of conventional
CD11c(hi) splenic dendritic cells (cDCs) in vitro and in vivo. Using mice
deficient in IRF7, we found that this transcription factor was dispensable for
the in vivo development of cDC subsets in the spleen. However, IRF7-deficient
cDCs showed enhanced activation in response to microbial stimuli, characterised
by exaggerated expression of CD80, CD86 and MHCII upon TLR2 ligation in vitro.
The hyper-responsiveness of Irf7(-/-) cDC to TLR ligation could not be reversed
with exogenous IFNa, nor by co-culture with wild-type cDCs, suggesting an
intrinsic defect due to IRF7-deficiency. Irf7(-/-) cDCs also had impaired
capacity to produce IL-12p70 when stimulated ex vivo, instead producing elevated 
levels of IL-10 that impaired their capacity to drive Th1 responses. Finally,
analysis of bone marrow microchimeric mice revealed that cDCs deficient in IRF7
were also hyper-responsive to TLR2-mediated activation in vivo. Our data suggest 
a previously unknown function for IRF7 as a component of the regulatory network
associated with cDC activation and adds to the wide variety of situations in
which these transcription factors play a role.

PMCID: PMC3398003
PMID: 22815909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Virol. 2012 Sep;86(18):10162-72. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05224-11. Epub 2012 Jul 11.

ORF45 of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus inhibits phosphorylation of
interferon regulatory factor 7 by IKKe and TBK1 as an alternative substrate.

Liang Q(1), Fu B, Wu F, Li X, Yuan Y, Zhu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee,
Florida, USA.

Open reading frame 45 (ORF45) of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV)
is an immediate-early and tegument protein that plays critical roles in
antagonizing host antiviral responses. We have previously shown (Zhu et al, Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 99:5573-5578, 2002) that ORF45 suppresses activation
of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a crucial regulator of type I
interferon gene expression, by blocking its virus-induced phosphorylation and
nuclear accumulation. We report here further characterization of the mechanisms
by which ORF45 inhibits IRF7 phosphorylation. In most cell types, IRF7 is
phosphorylated and activated by IKKe and TBK1 after viral infection. We found
that phosphorylation of IRF7 on Ser477 and Ser479 by IKKe or TBK1 is inhibited by
ORF45. The inhibition is specific to IRF7 because phosphorylation of its close
relative IRF3 is not affected by ORF45, implying that ORF45 does not inactivate
the kinases directly. In fact, we found that ORF45 is phosphorylated efficiently 
on Ser41 and Ser162 by IKKe and TBK1. We demonstrated that ORF45 competes with
the associated IRF7 and inhibits its phosphorylation by IKKe or TBK1 by acting as
an alternative substrate.

PMCID: PMC3446610
PMID: 22787218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Part Fibre Toxicol. 2012 Jul 9;9:25. doi: 10.1186/1743-8977-9-25.

Type I interferon and pattern recognition receptor signaling following
particulate matter inhalation.

Erdely A(1), Antonini JM, Salmen-Muniz R, Liston A, Hulderman T, Simeonova PP,
Kashon ML, Li S, Gu JK, Stone S, Chen BT, Frazer DG, Zeidler-Erdely PC.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Physiology Research Branch, Health Effects Laboratory Division, 
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, Morgantown, WV, USA.
efi4@cdc.gov

BACKGROUND: Welding, a process that generates an aerosol containing gases and
metal-rich particulates, induces adverse physiological effects including
inflammation, immunosuppression and cardiovascular dysfunction. This study
utilized microarray technology and subsequent pathway analysis as an exploratory 
search for markers/mechanisms of in vivo systemic effects following inhalation.
Mice were exposed by inhalation to gas metal arc - stainless steel (GMA-SS)
welding fume at 40<U+2009>mg/m3 for 3<U+2009>hr/d for 10<U+2009>d and sacrificed 4<U+2009>hr, 14<U+2009>d and 28<U+2009>d
post-exposure. Whole blood cells, aorta and lung were harvested for global gene
expression analysis with subsequent Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and confirmatory
qRT-PCR. Serum was collected for protein profiling.
RESULTS: The novel finding was a dominant type I interferon signaling network
with the transcription factor Irf7 as a central component maintained through
28<U+2009>d. Remarkably, these effects showed consistency across all tissues indicating 
a systemic type I interferon response that was complemented by changes in serum
proteins (decreased MMP-9, CRP and increased VCAM1, oncostatin M, IP-10). In
addition, pulmonary expression of interferon a and ß and Irf7 specific pattern
recognition receptors (PRR) and signaling molecules (Ddx58, Ifih1, Dhx58, ISGF3) 
were induced, an effect that showed specificity when compared to other
inflammatory exposures. Also, a canonical pathway indicated a coordinated
response of multiple PRR and associated signaling molecules (Tlr7, Tlr2, Clec7a, 
Nlrp3, Myd88) to inhalation of GMA-SS.
CONCLUSION: This methodological approach has the potential to identify
consistent, prominent and/or novel pathways and provides insight into mechanisms 
that contribute to pulmonary and systemic effects following toxicant exposure.

PMCID: PMC3537608
PMID: 22776377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Virol. 2012 Sep;86(18):9888-98. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00956-12. Epub 2012 Jul 3.

Interferon response factors 3 and 7 protect against Chikungunya virus hemorrhagic
fever and shock.

Rudd PA(1), Wilson J, Gardner J, Larcher T, Babarit C, Le TT, Anraku I, Kumagai
Y, Loo YM, Gale M Jr, Akira S, Khromykh AA, Suhrbier A.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Chikungunya virus (CHIKV) infections can produce severe disease and mortality.
Here we show that CHIKV infection of adult mice deficient in interferon response 
factors 3 and 7 (IRF3/7(-/-)) is lethal. Mortality was associated with
undetectable levels of alpha/beta interferon (IFN-a/ß) in serum, ~50- and
~10-fold increases in levels of IFN-<U+03B3> and tumor necrosis factor (TNF),
respectively, increased virus replication, edema, vasculitis, hemorrhage, fever
followed by hypothermia, oliguria, thrombocytopenia, and raised hematocrits.
These features are consistent with hemorrhagic shock and were also evident in
infected IFN-a/ß receptor-deficient mice. In situ hybridization suggested CHIKV
infection of endothelium, fibroblasts, skeletal muscle, mononuclear cells,
chondrocytes, and keratinocytes in IRF3/7(-/-) mice; all but the latter two
stained positive in wild-type mice. Vaccination protected IRF3/7(-/-) mice,
suggesting that defective antibody responses were not responsible for mortality. 
IPS-1- and TRIF-dependent pathways were primarily responsible for IFN-a/ß
induction, with IRF7 being upregulated >100-fold in infected wild-type mice.
These studies suggest that inadequate IFN-a/ß responses following virus infection
can be sufficient to induce hemorrhagic fever and shock, a finding with
implications for understanding severe CHIKV disease and dengue hemorrhagic
fever/dengue shock syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3446587
PMID: 22761364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Oct;92(4):765-74. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0811407. Epub 2012 Jul 2.

poly(I:C) costimulation induces a stronger antiviral chemokine and granzyme B
release in human CD4 T cells than CD28 costimulation.

Meyer T(1), Oberg HH, Peters C, Martens I, Adam-Klages S, Kabelitz D, Wesch D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel,
Kiel, Germany.

dsRNA is frequently associated with viral replication. Here, we compared the
costimulatory effect of the synthetic analog of dsRNA, poly(I:C), and the
agonistic anti-CD28 mAb on anti-CD3 mAb-activated, freshly isolated human CD4 T
cells. We tested the hyphothesis that poly(I:C) and anti-CD28 mAb costimulation
differ in their effect on the CD4 T cell immune response. Our study shows that
costimulation of CD4 T cells by poly(I:C) enhanced CD3-induced production of
IP-10, MIP1-a/ß, RANTES, and granzyme B involved in antiviral activity more than 
anti-CD28 mAb. poly(I:C) stimulation, on its own, activated the transcription of 
IRF7 in human CD4 T cells. Combined CD3 and poly(I:C) stimulation significantly
enhanced the transcription of IRF7 and additionally, NF-<U+03BA>Bp65 phosphorylation,
which might be involved in the induction of antiviral chemokines and the enhanced
cytotoxic activity of poly(I:C)-treated CD4 T cells. In comparison with
poly(I:C), anti-CD28 mAb as a costimulus induced a stronger proinflammatory
response, as indicated by enhanced TNF-a secretion. poly(I:C) had a costimulatory
effect on Akt phosphorylation, whereas anti-CD28 mAb only slightly enhanced Akt
phosphorylation. In contrast to poly(I:C), anti-CD28 mAb was essential for
proliferation of anti-CD3-stimulated CD4 T cells; however, poly(I:C) further
increased the anti-CD28/anti-CD3-mediated proliferation. These results indicate
that poly(I:C)- and anti-CD28 mAb-induced signaling differ in their costimulatory
effect on the CD3-driven, antiviral chemokine release and proinflammatory
cytokine secretion in freshly isolated human CD4 T cells.

PMID: 22750548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Glia. 2012 Oct;60(10):1555-66. doi: 10.1002/glia.22375. Epub 2012 Jun 26.

Oligodendroglia are limited in type I interferon induction and responsiveness in 
vivo.

Kapil P(1), Butchi NB, Stohlman SA, Bergmann CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, NC-30, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland
Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

Type I interferons (IFNa/ß) provide a primary defense against infection.
Nevertheless, the dynamics of IFNa/ß induction and responsiveness by central
nervous system (CNS) resident cells in vivo in response to viral infections are
poorly understood. Mice were infected with a neurotropic coronavirus with tropism
for oligodendroglia and microglia to probe innate antiviral responses during
acute encephalomyelitis. Expression of genes associated with the IFNa/ß pathways 
was monitored in microglia and oligodendroglia purified from naïve and infected
mice by fluorescent activated cell sorting. Compared with microglia,
oligodendroglia were characterized by low basal expression of mRNA encoding viral
RNA sensing pattern recognition receptors (PRRs), IFNa/ß receptor chains,
interferon sensitive genes (ISG), as well as kinases and transcription factors
critical in IFNa/ß signaling. Although PRRs and ISGs were upregulated by
infection in both cell types, the repertoire and absolute mRNA levels were more
limited in oligodendroglia. Furthermore, although oligodendroglia harbored higher
levels of viral RNA compared with microglia, Ifna/ß was only induced in
microglia. Stimulation with the double stranded RNA analogue poly I:C also failed
to induce Ifna/ß in oligodendroglia, and resulted in reduced and delayed
induction of ISGs compared with microglia. The limited antiviral response by
oligodendroglia was associated with a high threshold for upregulation of Ikke and
Irf7 transcripts, both central to amplifying IFNa/ß responses. Overall, these
data reveal that oligodendroglia from the adult CNS are poor sensors of viral
infection and suggest they require exogenous IFNa/ß to establish an antiviral
state.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3422432
PMID: 22736486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Oct;38(2):193-202. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2012.06.003. Epub
2012 Jun 18.

Molecular regulation of interferon antiviral response in fish.

Zhang YB(1), Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. ybzhang@ihb.ac.cn

Interferon (IFN) response is the first line of host defense against virus
infection. The recent years have witnessed tremendous progress in understanding
of fish IFN antiviral response. Varied number of IFN genes has been identified in
different fish species but obviously, they do not show a one-to-one orthologous
relationship with mammalian IFN homologs. These genes are divided into two groups
with different abilities to induce downstream gene expression through binding to 
different receptor complexes. Consistently, some fish IFN-stimulated genes such
as Mx and PKR have been confirmed for their antiviral effects. In this review, we
focus on how fish cells respond to IFNs and how fish IFNs are triggered through
TLR pathway and RLR pathway. We highlight the roles of IRF3 and IRF7 in
activation of fish IFN response. In addition, the unique mechanisms underlying
IRF3/7-dependent fish IFN response and auto-regulation of fish IFN gene
expression are discussed.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22721905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Neuroinflammation. 2012 Jun 18;9:131. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-9-131.

HIV-1 Tat C-mediated regulation of tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor-3 by microRNA 32 in human microglia.

Mishra R(1), Chhatbar C, Singh SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurovirology and Inflammation Biology, Centre for Cellular and 
Molecular Biology (CCMB), Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR),
Uppal Road, Hyderabad 500007, India.

BACKGROUND: HIV-1 Tat protein is known to be associated with neuroinflammation, a
condition that develops in almost half of patients infected with HIV-1. HIV-1 Tat
can alter glial neuroprotective functions, leading to neurotoxicity within the
CNS. HIV-1 Tat is known to be secreted from productively infected cells and can
affect neighboring uninfected cells by modulating cellular gene expression in a
bystander fashion.
METHODS: We were interested to study whether exogenous exposure to HIV-1 Tat-C
protein perturbs the microRNA (miRNA) expression profile of human microglial
cells, leading to altered protein expression. We used protein expression and
purification, miRNA overexpression, miRNA knockdown, transfection, site-directed 
mutagenesis, real-time PCR, luciferase assay and western blotting techniques to
perform our study.
RESULTS: HIV-1 Tat-C treatment of human microglial cells resulted in a
dose-dependent increase in miR-32 expression. We found that tumor necrosis
factor-receptor-associated factor 3 TRAF3) is a direct target for miR-32, and
overexpression of miR-32 in CHME3 cells decreased TRAF3 both at the mRNA and the 
protein level. Recovery of TRAF3 protein expression after transfection of
anti-miR-32 and the results of the luciferase reporter assay provided direct
evidence of TRAF3 regulation by miR-32. We found that the regulation of
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7 is controlled by cellular levels
of TRAF3 protein in microglial cells, as after overexpression of miR-32 and
application of anti-miR-32, expression levels of IRF3 and IRF7 were inversely
regulated by expression levels of TRAF3. Thus, our results suggest a novel miRNA 
mediated mechanism for regulation of TRAF3 in human microglial cells exposed to
HIV-1 Tat C protein. These results may help to elucidate the detrimental
neuroinflammatory consequences of HIV-1 Tat C protein in bystander fashion.
CONCLUSION: HIV-1 Tat protein can modulate TRAF3 expression through miRNA
mediated pathway and can change the downstream expression of IRF3 and IRF7. This 
study demonstrates a novel mechanism of HIV-1 Tat C protein-mediated perturbation
of miRNA, resulting in dysregulation of cellular TRAF3.

PMCID: PMC3418571
PMID: 22709905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cancer Cell. 2012 Jun 12;21(6):723-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.05.024.

Exploiting synthetic lethality for the therapy of ABC diffuse large B cell
lymphoma.

Yang Y(1), Shaffer AL 3rd, Emre NC, Ceribelli M, Zhang M, Wright G, Xiao W,
Powell J, Platig J, Kohlhammer H, Young RM, Zhao H, Yang Y, Xu W, Buggy JJ,
Balasubramanian S, Mathews LA, Shinn P, Guha R, Ferrer M, Thomas C, Waldmann TA, 
Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Knowledge of oncogenic mutations can inspire therapeutic strategies that are
synthetically lethal, affecting cancer cells while sparing normal cells.
Lenalidomide is an active agent in the activated B cell-like (ABC) subtype of
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), but its mechanism of action is unknown.
Lenalidomide kills ABC DLBCL cells by augmenting interferon ß (IFNß) production, 
owing to the oncogenic MYD88 mutations in these lymphomas. In a
cereblon-dependent fashion, lenalidomide downregulates IRF4 and SPIB,
transcription factors that together prevent IFNß production by repressing IRF7
and amplify prosurvival NF-<U+03BA>B signaling by transactivating CARD11. Blockade of B 
cell receptor signaling using the BTK inhibitor ibrutinib also downregulates IRF4
and consequently synergizes with lenalidomide in killing ABC DLBCLs, suggesting
attractive therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4059833
PMID: 22698399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38336. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038336. Epub 2012 Jun 7.

Recruitment of histone deacetylase 3 to the interferon-A gene promoters
attenuates interferon expression.

Génin P(1), Lin R, Hiscott J, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique-FRE3235, Paris Descartes
University, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Induction of Type I Interferon (IFN) genes constitutes an essential
step leading to innate immune responses during virus infection. Sendai virus
(SeV) infection of B lymphoid Namalwa cells transiently induces the
transcriptional expression of multiple IFN-A genes. Although transcriptional
activation of IFN-A genes has been extensively studied, the mechanism responsible
for the attenuation of their expression remains to be determined.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we demonstrate that virus infection of Namalwa
cells induces transient recruitment of HDAC3 (histone deacetylase 3) to IFN-A
promoters. Analysis of chromatin-protein association by Chip-QPCR demonstrated
that recruitment of interferon regulatory factor (IRF)3 and IRF7, as well as TBP 
correlated with enhanced histone H3K9 and H3K14 acetylation, whereas recruitment 
of HDAC3 correlated with inhibition of histone H3K9/K14 acetylation, removal of
IRF7 and TATA-binding protein (TBP) from IFN-A promoters and inhibition of
virus-induced IFN-A gene transcription. Additionally, HDAC3 overexpression
reduced, and HDAC3 depletion by siRNA enhanced IFN-A gene expression.
Furthermore, activation of IRF7 enhanced histone H3K9/K14 acetylation and IFN-A
gene expression, whereas activation of both IRF7 and IRF3 led to recruitment of
HDAC3 to the IFN-A gene promoters, resulting in impaired histone H3K9 acetylation
and attenuation of IFN-A gene transcription.
CONCLUSION: Altogether these data indicate that reversal of histone H3K9/K14
acetylation by HDAC3 is required for attenuation of IFN-A gene transcription
during viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3369917
PMID: 22685561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. J Immunol. 2012 Jul 1;189(1):80-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101686. Epub 2012 Jun 
1.

Myeloid dendritic cells from B6.NZM Sle1/Sle2/Sle3 lupus-prone mice express an
IFN signature that precedes disease onset.

Sriram U(1), Varghese L, Bennett HL, Jog NR, Shivers DK, Ning Y, Behrens EM,
Caricchio R, Gallucci S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Dendritic Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.
sriram@temple.edu

Patients with systemic lupus erythematosus show an overexpression of type I
IFN-responsive genes that is referred to as "IFN signature." We found that
B6.NZMSle1/Sle2/Sle3 (Sle1,2,3) lupus-prone mice also express an IFN signature
compared with non-autoimmune C57BL/6 mice. In vitro, myeloid dendritic cells
(mDCs) (GM-CSF bone marrow-derived dendritic cells; BMDCs) from Sle1,2,3 mice
constitutively overexpressed IFN-responsive genes such as IFN-ß, Oas-3, Mx-1,
ISG-15, and CXCL10 and members of the IFN signaling pathway STAT1, STAT2, and
IRF7. The IFN signature was similar in Sle1,2,3 BMDCs from young, pre-autoimmune 
mice and from mice with high titers of autoantibodies, suggesting that the IFN
signature in mDCs precedes disease onset and is independent from the
autoantibodies. Sle1,2,3 BMDCs hyperresponded to stimulation with IFN-a and the
TLR7 and TLR9 agonists R848 and CpGs. We propose that this hyperresponse is
induced by the IFN signature and only partially contributes to the signature, as 
oligonucleotides inhibitory for TLR7 and TLR9 only partially suppressed the
constitutive IFN signature, and pre-exposure to IFN-a induced the same
hyperresponse in wild-type BMDCs as in Sle1,2,3 BMDCs. In vivo, mDCs and to a
lesser extent T and B cells from young prediseased Sle1,2,3 mice also expressed
the IFN signature, although they lacked the strength that BMDCs showed in vitro. 
Sle1,2,3 plasmacytoid DCs expressed the IFN signature in vitro but not in vivo,
suggesting that mDCs may be more relevant before disease onset. We propose that
Sle1,2,3 mice are useful tools to study the role of the IFN signature in lupus
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3381850
PMID: 22661089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. BMC Biol. 2012 May 24;10:44. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-10-44.

MAVS ubiquitination by the E3 ligase TRIM25 and degradation by the proteasome is 
involved in type I interferon production after activation of the antiviral
RIG-I-like receptors.

Castanier C(1), Zemirli N, Portier A, Garcin D, Bidère N, Vazquez A, Arnoult D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR_S 1014, Hôpital Paul Brousse, Bâtiment Lavoisier, 14 avenue Paul
Vaillant Couturier, 94807 Villejuif cedex, France.

BACKGROUND: During a viral infection, the intracellular RIG-I-like receptors
(RLRs) sense viral RNA and signal through the mitochondrial antiviral signaling
adaptor MAVS (also known as IPS-1, Cardif and VISA) whose activation triggers a
rapid production of type I interferons (IFN) and of pro-inflammatory cytokines
through the transcription factors IRF3/IRF7 and NF-<U+03BA>B, respectively. While MAVS
is essential for this signaling and known to operate through the scaffold protein
NEMO and the protein kinase TBK1 that phosphorylates IRF3, its mechanism of
action and regulation remain unclear.
RESULTS: We report here that RLR activation triggers MAVS ubiquitination on
lysine 7 and 10 by the E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIM25 and marks it for proteasomal
degradation concomitantly with downstream signaling. Inhibition of this MAVS
degradation with a proteasome inhibitor does not affect NF-<U+03BA>B signaling but it
hampers IRF3 activation, and NEMO and TBK1, two essential mediators in type I IFN
production, are retained at the mitochondria.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that MAVS functions as a recruitment platform 
that assembles a signaling complex involving NEMO and TBK1, and that the
proteasome-mediated MAVS degradation is required to release the signaling complex
into the cytosol, allowing IRF3 phosphorylation by TBK1.

PMCID: PMC3372421
PMID: 22626058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Med Microbiol Immunol. 2012 Aug;201(3):371-9. doi: 10.1007/s00430-012-0247-0.
Epub 2012 May 24.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 induces simultaneous activation of Toll-like
receptors 2 and 4 and expression of the endogenous ligand serum amyloid A in
astrocytes.

Villalba M(1), Hott M, Martin C, Aguila B, Valdivia S, Quezada C, Zambrano A,
Concha MI, Otth C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Microbiología Clínica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Austral 
de Chile, P. O. Box 567, Valdivia, Chile.

Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is the most common pathogenic cause of
sporadic acute encephalitis and it produces latent persistent infection lifelong 
in infected individuals. Brain inflammation is associated with activation of
glial cells, which can detect pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs)
through a variety of pattern-recognition receptors (PRR), including Toll-like
receptors (TLRs). In this study, we evaluated the expression and activation of
TLR2, TLR3, and TLR4 in HSV-1-infected astrocyte and neuronal primary cultures.
Our results showed a clear induction in TLR2 and TLR4 expression in astrocytes as
early as 1 h after HSV-1 infection, whereas no significant change was observed in
neurons. In addition, infected astrocytes showed increased levels of interferon
regulatory factors IRF3 and IRF7, interferon ß (INFß), interleukin 6 (IL6), and
serum amyloid A (SAA3) transcripts, as well as phospho-IRF3 protein. These
effects seemed to be dependent on viral replication since previous treatment of
the cells with acyclovir resulted in low levels of TLRs expression and activation
even after 4 h post-infection. These results suggest that reactivation of HSV-1
at the central nervous system (CNS) would likely induce and activate TLR2 and
TLR4 receptors directly through interaction of astrocytes with the pathogen and
also indirectly by endogenous ligands produced locally, such as serum amyloid
protein, potentiating the neuroinflammatory response.

PMID: 22622619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Protein Cell. 2012 May;3(5):383-91. doi: 10.1007/s13238-012-2929-1. Epub 2012 May
20.

Crystal structure of the ubiquitin-like domain of human TBK1.

Li J(1), Li J, Miyahira A, Sun J, Liu Y, Cheng G, Liang H.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) is an important enzyme in the regulation of cellular
antiviral effects. TBK1 regulates the activity of the interferon regulatory
factors IRF3 and IRF7, thereby playing a key role in type I interferon (IFN)
signaling pathways. The structure of TBK1 consists of an N-terminal kinase
domain, a middle ubiquitin-like domain (ULD), and a C-terminal elongated helical 
domain. It has been reported that the ULD of TBK1 regulates kinase activity,
playing an important role in signaling and mediating interactions with other
molecules in the IFN pathway. In this study, we present the crystal structure of 
the ULD of human TBK1 and identify several conserved residues by multiple
sequence alignment. We found that a hydrophobic patch in TBK1, containing
residues Leu316, Ile353, and Val382, corresponding to the "Ile44 hydrophobic
patch" observed in ubiquitin, was conserved in TBK1, I<U+03BA>B kinase epsilon
(IKK<U+025B>/IKKi), I<U+03BA>B kinase alpha (IKKa), and I<U+03BA>B kinase beta (IKKß). In comparison
with the structure of the IKKß ULD domain of Xenopus laevis, we speculate that
the Ile44 hydrophobic patch of TBK1 is present in an intramolecular binding
surface between ULD and the C-terminal elongated helices. The varying surface
charge distributions in the ULD domains of IKK and IKK-related kinases may be
relevant to their specificity for specific partners.

PMCID: PMC4057185
PMID: 22610919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36823. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036823. Epub 2012 May 14.

Innate immune response of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells to poxvirus
infection is subverted by vaccinia E3 via its Z-DNA/RNA binding domain.

Cao H(1), Dai P, Wang W, Li H, Yuan J, Wang F, Fang CM, Pitha PM, Liu J, Condit
RC, McFadden G, Merghoub T, Houghton AN, Young JW, Shuman S, Deng L.

Author information: 
(1)Dermatology Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, United States of America.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) play important roles in antiviral innate
immunity by producing type I interferon (IFN). In this study, we assess the
immune responses of primary human pDCs to two poxviruses, vaccinia and myxoma
virus. Vaccinia, an orthopoxvirus, was used for immunization against smallpox, a 
contagious human disease with high mortality. Myxoma virus, a Leporipoxvirus,
causes lethal disease in rabbits, but is non-pathogenic in humans. We report that
myxoma virus infection of human pDCs induces IFN-a and TNF production, whereas
vaccinia infection does not. Co-infection of pDCs with myxoma virus plus vaccinia
blocks myxoma induction effects. We find that heat-inactivated vaccinia
(Heat-VAC; by incubating the virus at 55°C for 1 h) gains the ability to induce
IFN-a and TNF in primary human pDCs. Induction of IFN-a in pDCs by myxoma virus
or Heat-VAC is blocked by chloroquine, which inhibits endosomal acidification
required for TLR7/9 signaling, and by inhibitors of cellular kinases PI3K and
Akt. Using purified pDCs from genetic knockout mice, we demonstrate that
Heat-VAC-induced type I IFN production in pDCs requires the endosomal RNA sensor 
TLR7 and its adaptor MyD88, transcription factor IRF7 and the type I IFN feedback
loop mediated by IFNAR1. These results indicate that (i) vaccinia virus, but not 
myxoma virus, expresses inhibitor(s) of the poxvirus sensing pathway(s) in pDCs; 
and (ii) Heat-VAC infection fails to produce inhibitor(s) but rather produces
novel activator(s), likely viral RNA transcripts that are sensed by the
TLR7/MyD88 pathway. Using vaccinia gene deletion mutants, we show that the
Z-DNA/RNA binding domain at the N-terminus of the vaccinia immunomodulatory E3
protein is an antagonist of the innate immune response of human pDCs to poxvirus 
infection and TLR agonists. The myxoma virus ortholog of vaccinia E3 (M029) lacks
the N-terminal Z-DNA/RNA binding domain, which might contribute to the
immunostimulating properties of myxoma virus.

PMCID: PMC3351467
PMID: 22606294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jun 8;422(3):501-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.028. Epub 2012 May 12.

TRIM59 interacts with ECSIT and negatively regulates NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF-3/7-mediated
signal pathways.

Kondo T(1), Watanabe M, Hatakeyama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8638, Japan.

Innate immune responses are triggered by pathogen-associated molecular patterns
(PAMPs) through pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and then activate
intracellular signaling pathways including NF-<U+03BA>B and interferon regulatory
factors. Recently, it has been reported that tripartite motif (TRIM) proteins
function as crucial regulators via ubiquitin-mediated modifications for these
signaling pathways. In this study, we showed that one of the TRIM family
ubiquitin ligases, TRIM59, interacts with ECSIT as an adaptor protein required
for the TLR-mediated transduction pathway. Luciferase reporter assays using
reporter plasmids including NF-<U+03BA>B responsive element, interferon ß (IFN-ß)
promoter and interferon-sensitive response element (ISRE) showed that
overexpression of TRIM59 repressed their transcriptional activities, whereas
knockdown of TRIM59 enhanced their transcriptional activities. Furthermore,
TRIM59 inhibited phosphorylation and dimerization of IRF3 and IRF7, suggesting
that TRIM59 negatively regulates upstream kinases for IRFs. These findings
indicate that TRIM59 may serve as a multifunctional regulator for innate immune
signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22588174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Gene. 2012 Aug 1;504(1):31-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.04.091. Epub 2012 May 8.

Molecular characterization and transcription regulation analysis of type I IFN
gene in grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella).

Li D(1), Tan W, Ma M, Yu X, Lai Q, Wu Z, Lin G, Hu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, College of Life Science and Food Engineering,
Nanchang University, Nanchang 330031, China.

Type I interferons and interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), which are crucial
for innate immunity against viral infection, have been identified in many teleost
fishes in recent years. In this study, the complete genomic sequence of grass
carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) type I interferon (termed CiIFN) (GU139255) and
the full-length IRF7 cDNA sequence of grass carp (termed CiIRF7) (GQ141741) were 
cloned and characterized. CiIFN consists of 3368 bp, retaining the characteristic
5-exon/4-intron gene organization in fish type I IFNs. The CiIFN spans 5 exons
and encodes a polypeptide of 180 amino acids, with the first 22 amino acids
representing a putative signal peptide. The CiIFN promoter sequence was found to 
be 760 bp, which can be divided into a proximal region (from -1 to -140 bp) and a
distal region (from -400 to -700 bp). The cDNA of CiIRF7 was found to be 1808 bp 
in full length, with an ORF of 1293 bp that encodes a putative protein of 430
amino acids. The putative amino acid sequence of CiIRF7 possesses a DNA-binding
domain (DBD) in the N-terminal region. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that CiIFN
displayed a low constitutive expression in all the tissues tested. After
stimulation by polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (Poly I:C), the expression of
CiIFN was significantly up-regulated in most tissues of grass carp, with a
relatively strong expression in spleen, kidney and intestine. The recombinant
polypeptides of CiIRF7 and CiIRF7-nDBD were analyzed in gel mobility shift
assays, along with the PCR amplification products of the proximal region
(CiIFNP2), the distal region (CiIFNP6) and the full-length (CiIFNP7) of CiIFN
promoter sequence. The results revealed that CiIRF7 could bind to the distal
region as well as to the proximal region of CiIFN promoter sequence in vitro.
Subsequently, the CiIFNPs (CiIFNP7/2/6) were cloned into pGL3-Basic vectors and
CiIRF7 was subcloned into pcDNA3.1 vectors, then pGL3-CiIFNPs were separately
transiently transfected or co-transfected with pcDNA3.1-CiIRF7 into the mouse
myeloma cell lines (MMCL) SP2/0 and the grass carp kidney cell lines (CIK), and
the impact of CiIRF7 on CiIFN promoter activity was measured by luciferase assays
in the transfected cells. These results demonstrated that CiIRF7 acted as a
positive regulator on the transcription of CiIFN.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22579963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Immunol. 2012 Jun 1;188(11):5521-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1200133. Epub 2012
Apr 30.

CD40 stimulates a "feed-forward" NF-<U+03BA>B-driven molecular pathway that regulates
IFN-ß expression in carcinoma cells.

Moschonas A(1), Ioannou M, Eliopoulos AG.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Laboratory, Division of Basic Sciences,
University of Crete Medical School, 71003 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

IFN-ß and the CD40L (CD154) share important roles in the antiviral and antitumor 
immune responses. In this study, we show that CD40 receptor occupancy results in 
IFN-ß upregulation through an unconventional "feed-forward" mechanism, which is
orchestrated by canonical NF-<U+03BA>B and involves the sequential de novo synthesis of 
IFN regulatory factor (IRF)1 and Viperin (RSAD2), an IRF1 target. RelA (p65)
NF-<U+03BA>B, IRF1, and Viperin-dependent IRF7 binding to the IFN-ß promoter largely
controls its activity. However, full activation of IFN-ß also requires the
parallel engagement of noncanonical NF-<U+03BA>B2 signaling leading to p52 recruitment
to the IFN-ß promoter. These data define a novel link between CD40 signaling and 
IFN-ß expression and provide a telling example of how signal propagation can be
exploited to ensure efficient regulation of gene expression.

PMID: 22547704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2012 Jun;32(6):254-68. doi: 10.1089/jir.2011.0091.
Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Negative regulation of the type I interferon signaling pathway by synthetic
Toll-like receptor 7 ligands.

Forsbach A(1), Müller C, Montino C, Kritzler A, Nguyen T, Weeratna R, Jurk M,
Vollmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer Oligonucleotide Therapeutics Unit-Coley Pharmaceutical GmbH ,
Düsseldorf, Germany. aforsbach@gmx.de

Ten Toll-like receptor (TLR) family members have been reported in humans. Here,
the endoplasmatic receptors TLR9, TLR8, TLR7, and TLR3 respond to nucleic acids
and derivatives or to small molecules (TLR7 and 8). Another cytoplasmic RNA
receptor, retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I), is stimulated by 5'
triphosphate double-stranded RNA. We discovered that TLR7 small-molecule agonists
inhibit nucleic acid-mediated TLR3, TLR7, TLR9, or RIG-I-dependent interferon-a
(IFN-a) immune response. Other cytokines and chemokines stimulated by nucleic
acid agonists remained unaffected. The observed blockage of TLR3, TLR7, TLR9, and
RIG-I-mediated IFN-a response appears to be driven by a competitive mechanism at 
the type I IFN pathway. Besides type I IFN, IFN response genes such as IFIT-1,
Mx1, OAS1, or IRF7 were affected, which indicates that the key element driving
the inhibition is located in the type I IFN pathway. Indeed, the heterotrimeric
complex formation of phosphor-signal transducer and activator of transcription
factor 1 (STAT1), phosphor-STAT2, and IRF9 (called ISGF3, IFN-stimulated gene
factor 3) is inhibited through the TLR7 small-molecule agonists by phosphor-STAT2
blockage. These findings provide novel insights into the use of synthetic TLR7 or
TLR7/8 small molecules as ligands for immune activation and suppression.

PMID: 22540943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Syst Biol. 2012 Apr 24;8:577. doi: 10.1038/msb.2012.10.

Asymmetric positive feedback loops reliably control biological responses.

Ratushny AV(1), Saleem RA, Sitko K, Ramsey SA, Aitchison JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA, USA.

Positive feedback is a common mechanism enabling biological systems to respond to
stimuli in a switch-like manner. Such systems are often characterized by the
requisite formation of a heterodimer where only one of the pair is subject to
feedback. This ASymmetric Self-UpREgulation (ASSURE) motif is central to many
biological systems, including cholesterol homeostasis (LXRa/RXRa), adipocyte
differentiation (PPAR<U+03B3>/RXRa), development and differentiation (RAR/RXR),
myogenesis (MyoD/E12) and cellular antiviral defense (IRF3/IRF7). To understand
why this motif is so prevalent, we examined its properties in an evolutionarily
conserved transcriptional regulatory network in yeast (Oaf1p/Pip2p). We
demonstrate that the asymmetry in positive feedback confers a competitive
advantage and allows the system to robustly increase its responsiveness while
precisely tuning the response to a consistent level in the presence of varying
stimuli. This study reveals evolutionary advantages for the ASSURE motif, and
mechanisms for control, that are relevant to pharmacologic intervention and
synthetic biology applications.

PMCID: PMC3361002
PMID: 22531117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Virol. 2012 Jul;86(13):7384-92. doi: 10.1128/JVI.07090-11. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Differential impact of interferon regulatory factor 7 in initiation of the type I
interferon response in the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus-infected central
nervous system versus the periphery.

Christensen JE(1), Fenger C, Issazadeh-Navikas S, Krug A, Liljestrøm P, Goriely
S, Paludan SR, Finsen B, Christensen JP, Thomsen AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of International Health, Immunology and Microbiology, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRFs) are a family of transcription factors 
involved in regulating type I IFN genes and other genes participating in the
early antiviral host response. To better understand the mechanisms involved in
virus-induced central nervous system (CNS) inflammation, we studied the influence
of IRF1, -3, -7, and -9 on the transcriptional activity of key genes encoding
antiviral host factors in the CNS of mice infected with lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). A key finding is that neither IRF3 nor IRF7 is
absolutely required for induction of a type I IFN response in the LCMV-infected
CNS, whereas concurrent elimination of both factors markedly reduces the
virus-induced host response. This is unlike the situation in the periphery, where
deficiency of IRF7 almost eliminates the LCMV-induced production of the type I
IFNs. This difference is seemingly related to the local environment, as
peripheral production of type I IFNs is severely reduced in intracerebrally
(i.c.) infected IRF7-deficient mice, which undergo a combined infection of the
CNS and peripheral organs, such as spleen and lymph nodes. Interestingly, despite
the redundancy of IRF7 in initiating the type I IFN response in the CNS, the
response is not abolished in IFN-ß-deficient mice, as might have been expected.
Collectively, these data demonstrate that the early type I IFN response to LCMV
infection in the CNS is controlled by a concerted action of IRF3 and -7.
Consequently this work provides strong evidence for differential regulation of
the type I IFN response in the CNS versus the periphery during viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3416342
PMID: 22514347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e34177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034177. Epub 2012 Apr 3.

A novel intracellular isoform of matrix metalloproteinase-2 induced by oxidative 
stress activates innate immunity.

Lovett DH(1), Mahimkar R, Raffai RL, Cape L, Maklashina E, Cecchini G, Karliner
JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United
States of America. david.lovett@va.gov

BACKGROUND: Experimental and clinical evidence has pinpointed a critical role for
matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) in ischemic ventricular remodeling and
systolic heart failure. Prior studies have demonstrated that transgenic
expression of the full-length, 68 kDa, secreted form of MMP-2 induces severe
systolic failure. These mice also had unexpected and severe mitochondrial
structural abnormalities and dysfunction. We hypothesized that an additional
intracellular isoform of MMP-2, which affects mitochondrial function is induced
under conditions of systolic failure-associated oxidative stress.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Western blots of cardiac mitochondria from
the full length MMP-2 transgenics, ageing mice and a model of accelerated
atherogenesis revealed a smaller 65 kDa MMP-2 isoform. Cultured cardiomyoblasts
subjected to transient oxidative stress generated the 65 kDa MMP-2 isoform. The
65 kDa MMP-2 isoform was also induced by hypoxic culture of cardiomyoblasts.
Genomic database analysis of the MMP-2 gene mapped transcriptional start sites
and RNA transcripts induced by hypoxia or epigenetic modifiers within the first
intron of the MMP-2 gene. Translation of these transcripts yields a 65 kDa
N-terminal truncated isoform beginning at M(77), thereby deleting the signal
sequence and inhibitory prodomain. Cellular trafficking studies demonstrated that
the 65 kDa MMP-2 isoform is not secreted and is present in cytosolic and
mitochondrial fractions, while the full length 68 kDa isoform was found only in
the extracellular space. Expression of the 65 kDa MMP-2 isoform induced
mitochondrial-nuclear stress signaling with activation of the pro-inflammatory
NF-<U+03BA>B, NFAT and IRF transcriptional pathways. By microarray, the 65 kDa MMP-2
induces an innate immunity transcriptome, including viral stress response genes, 
innate immunity transcription factor IRF7, chemokines and pro-apoptosis genes.
CONCLUSION: A novel N-terminal truncated intracellular isoform of MMP-2 is
induced by oxidative stress. This isoform initiates a primary innate immune
response that may contribute to progressive cardiac dysfunction in the setting of
ischemia and systolic failure.

PMCID: PMC3317925
PMID: 22509276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Sci Rep. 2012;2:347. doi: 10.1038/srep00347. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

STING mediates neuronal innate immune response following Japanese encephalitis
virus infection.

Nazmi A(1), Mukhopadhyay R, Dutta K, Basu A.

Author information: 
(1)National Brain Research Centre , Manesar, Haryana-122051, India.

Flavivirus-mediated inflammation causes neuronal death, but whether the infected 
neurons can evoke an innate immune response to elicit their own protection, is
unknown. In an earlier study we have shown that neuronal RIG-I, play a
significant role in inducing production and release of molecules that are related
to inflammation. In this study, using a neuronal cell line, we show that RIG-I
acts with STING in a concerted manner following its interaction with Japanese
encephalitis viral RNA to induce a type 1 interferon response. Knock-down of
STING showed that the expressions of various inflammatory signaling molecules
were down-regulated along with increased intracellular viral load. Alternatively,
over-expressing STING decreased intracellular viral load. Our results indicate
that at the sub-cellular level, interaction between the pattern recognition
receptor RIG-I and the adapter molecule STING, is a major contributor to elicit
immunological responses involving the type 1 interferons in neurons following JEV
infections.

PMCID: PMC3317237
PMID: 22470840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cytokine. 2012 Jun;58(3):317-20. doi: 10.1016/j.cyto.2012.03.003. Epub 2012 Mar
27.

IRF7, a functional factor associates with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Xu WD(1), Zhang YJ, Xu K, Zhai Y, Li BZ, Pan HF, Ye DQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Anhui
Medical University, 81 Meishan Road, Hefei, Anhui 230032, PR China.

Systemic lupus erythematosus is an autoimmune disease attributing to a
combination of genetic and environmental factors. Abnormal expression/function of
type I interferons has been demonstrated with the pathogenesis of SLE, especially
IFN-a, which can be regulated by IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7). Single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near/in IRF7 have been substantiated related to
onset of SLE, moreover, regulation of IRF7 expression/function has been found
important in SLE. Therefore, we will discuss the association of IRF7 and SLE
based on recent understandings to render more information about the mechanisms of
IRF7 might perform in.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 22455868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Cell Res. 2012 Jul;22(7):1129-39. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.45. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Phospholipid scramblase 1 regulates Toll-like receptor 9-mediated type I
interferon production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Talukder AH(1), Bao M, Kim TW, Facchinetti V, Hanabuchi S, Bover L, Zal T, Liu
YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Cancer Immunology Research, University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) senses microbial DNA in the endosomes of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs) and triggers MyD88-dependent type I interferon (IFN)
responses. To better understand TLR9 biology in pDCs, we established a yeast
two-hybrid library for the identification of TLR9-interacting proteins. Here, we 
report that an IFN-inducible protein, phospholipid scramblase 1 (PLSCR1),
interacts with TLR9 in pDCs. Knockdown of PLSCR1 expression by siRNA in human pDC
cell line led to a 60-70% reduction of IFN-a responses following CpG-ODN
(oligodeoxynucleotide) stimulation. Primary pDCs from PLSCR1-deficient mice
produced lower amount of type 1 IFN than pDCs from the wild-type mice in response
to CpG-ODN, herpes simplex virus and influenza A virus. Following CpG-A
stimulation, there were much lower amounts of TLR9 in the early endosomes
together with CpG-A in pDCs from PLSCR1-deficient mice. Our study demonstrates
that PLSCR1 is a TLR9-interacting protein that plays an important role in pDC's
type 1 IFN responses by regulating TLR9 trafficking to the endosomal compartment.

PMCID: PMC3391020
PMID: 22453241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Lupus. 2012 Jul;21(8):890-5. doi: 10.1177/0961203312439333. Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Association of PHRF1-IRF7 region polymorphism with clinical manifestations of
systemic lupus erythematosus in a Japanese population.

Kawasaki A(1), Furukawa H, Kondo Y, Ito S, Hayashi T, Kusaoi M, Matsumoto I,
Tohma S, Takasaki Y, Hashimoto H, Sumida T, Tsuchiya N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology Laboratory, Doctoral Program in Biomedical 
Sciences, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Japan.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) has an essential role in the production of 
type I interferon. Although recent studies detected association of a single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) rs4963128 in PHD and ring finger domains 1
(PHRF1)/KIAA1542, located closely to IRF7, and IRF7 rs1131665 (glutamine (Gln)
412 arginine (Arg)) with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), causal variants have
not been established. In this study, we resequenced exons and introns of IRF7 to 
screen for all common polymorphisms, and examined whether they were associated
with SLE in 416 Japanese patients with SLE and 505 healthy controls. We also
tested whether the association of PHRF1 rs4963128 with SLE was replicated in a
Japanese population. None of the IRF7 polymorphisms was associated with SLE.
PHRF1 rs4963128T was not significantly associated with occurrence of SLE either; 
however, this allele was significantly increased in SLE with anti-Sm antibodies
(6.8%) as compared with healthy controls (3.1%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014, odds ratio [OR] 2.31) 
and SLE without anti-Sm antibodies (3.3%, P<U+2009>=0.041, OR 2.12). This allele was
also increased in SLE with renal disorder (5.1%) as compared with those without
renal disorder (2.4%, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.047, OR 2.17). These results confirmed recently
reported association of PHRF1 rs4963128T with anti-Sm antibody positive SLE in
African-American populations, and supported the role of PHRF1-IRF7 region in the 
genetics of SLE.

PMID: 22433914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33299. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033299. Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Both TLR2 and TRIF contribute to interferon-ß production during Listeria
infection.

Aubry C(1), Corr SC, Wienerroither S, Goulard C, Jones R, Jamieson AM, Decker T, 
O'Neill LA, Dussurget O, Cossart P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Unité des Interactions Bactéries-Cellules, Paris, France.

Synthesis of interferon-ß (IFN-ß) is an innate response to cytoplasmic infection 
with bacterial pathogens. Our recent studies showed that Listeria monocytogenes
limits immune detection and IFN-ß synthesis via deacetylation of its
peptidoglycan, which renders the bacterium resistant to lysozyme degradation.
Here, we examined signaling requirements for the massive IFN-ß production
resulting from the infection of murine macrophages with a mutant strain of L.
monocytogenes, <U+0394>pgdA, which is unable to modify its peptidoglycan. We report the 
identification of unconventional signaling pathways to the IFN-ß gene, requiring 
TLR2 and bacterial internalization. Induction of IFN-ß was independent of the
Mal/TIRAP adaptor protein but required TRIF and the transcription factors IRF3
and IRF7. These pathways were stimulated to a lesser degree by wild-type L.
monocytogenes. They operated in both resident and inflammatory macrophages
derived from the peritoneal cavity, but not in bone marrow-derived macrophages.
The novelty of our findings thus lies in the first description of TLR2 and TRIF
as two critical components leading to the induction of the IFN-ß gene and in
uncovering that individual macrophage populations adopt different strategies to
link pathogen recognition signals to IFN-ß gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3303824
PMID: 22432012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Stroke. 2012 May;43(5):1383-9. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.111.641522. Epub 2012 Mar
8.

Toll-like receptor 7 preconditioning induces robust neuroprotection against
stroke by a novel type I interferon-mediated mechanism.

Leung PY(1), Stevens SL, Packard AE, Lessov NS, Yang T, Conrad VK, van den Dungen
NN, Simon RP, Stenzel-Poore MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Systemic administration of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 and
TLR9 agonists before cerebral ischemia have been shown to reduce ischemic injury 
by reprogramming the response of the brain to stroke. Our goal was to explore the
mechanism of TLR-induced neuroprotection by determining whether a TLR7 agonist
also protects against stroke injury.
METHODS: C57Bl/6, TNF(-/-), interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 7(-/-), or type I 
IFN receptor (IFNAR)(-/-) mice were subcutaneously administered the TLR7 agonist 
Gardiquimod (GDQ) 72 hours before middle cerebral artery occlusion. Infarct
volume and functional outcome were determined after reperfusion. Plasma cytokine 
responses and induction of mRNA for IFN-related genes in the brain were measured.
IFNAR(-/-) mice also were treated with the TLR4 agonist (lipopolysaccharide) or
the TLR9 agonist before middle cerebral artery occlusion and infarct volumes
measured.
RESULTS: The results show that GDQ reduces infarct volume as well as functional
deficits in mice. GDQ pretreatment provided robust neuroprotection in TNF(-/-)
mice, indicating that TNF was not essential. GDQ induced a significant increase
in plasma IFNa levels and both IRF7(-/-) and IFNAR(-/-) mice failed to be
protected, implicating a role for IFN signaling in TLR7-mediated protection.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies provide the first evidence that TLR7 preconditioning can
mediate neuroprotection against ischemic injury. Moreover, we show that the
mechanism of protection is unique from other TLR preconditioning ligands in that 
it is independent of TNF and dependent on IFNAR.

PMCID: PMC3943206
PMID: 22403050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Autoimmun. 2012 Aug;39(1-2):77-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2012.01.014. Epub 2012
Mar 7.

The immunobiology of Ro52 (TRIM21) in autoimmunity: a critical review.

Oke V(1), Wahren-Herlenius M.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for Molecular Medicine
L8:04, Karolinska Institutet, 17176 Stockholm, Sweden.

Ro52 is a common target of circulating autoantibodies in autoimmune disease. Data
indicate that anti-Ro52 antibodies are associated with distinct clinical
manifestations. It is therefore of major interest to understand how it becomes an
antigenic target and what cells express this protein under what conditions and
what cellular function it has. Ro52 contains a RING and a B-box motif, followed
by a coiled-coil domain and a B30.2 (or PRYSPRY) region in the C-terminal end.
This molecular structure places Ro52 within the family of tripartite motif
proteins (TRIM), and it is also denoted TRIM21. Like several other TRIM proteins,
Ro52 has E3 ligase activity and functions in the process of ubiquitination. Ro52 
is expressed in the immune system as a predominantly cytoplasmic protein that can
be upregulated and translocate to the nucleus in a proinflammatory environment.
Reported substrates for Ro52-mediated ubiquitination include IRF3, IRF5, IRF7 and
IRF8, and via these transcription factors Ro52 regulates type 1 interferon and
cytokine production. Ro52 is upregulated at the site of autoimmune inflammation, 
such as cutaneous lupus lesions. This implies that Ro52 may have an important
role in the pathogenesis of autoimmunity, and this paper will review the
available data on the role of Ro52 in immune responses and autoimmune
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22402340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biomaterials. 2012 Jun;33(16):4059-68. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.02.025.
Epub 2012 Feb 28.

The cytotoxic and immunogenic hurdles associated with non-viral mRNA-mediated
reprogramming of human fibroblasts.

Drews K(1), Tavernier G, Demeester J, Lehrach H, De Smedt SC, Rejman J, Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology and Aging Group, Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestr. 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Delivery of reprogramming factor-encoding mRNAs by means of lipofection in
somatic cells is a desirable method for deriving integration-free iPSCs. However,
the lack of reproducibility implies there are major hurdles to overcome before
this protocol becomes universally accepted. This study demonstrates the
functionality of our in-house synthesized mRNAs expressing the reprogramming
factors (OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, c-MYC) within the nucleus of human fibroblasts.
However, upon repeated transfections, the mRNAs induced severe loss of cell
viability as demonstrated by MTT cytotoxicity assays. Microarray-derived
transcriptome data revealed that the poor cell survival was mainly due to the
innate immune response triggered by the exogenous mRNAs. We validated the
influence of mRNA transfection on key immune response-associated transcript
levels, including IFNB1, RIG-I, PKR, IL12A, IRF7 and CCL5, by quantitative
real-time PCR and directly compared these with the levels induced by other
methods previously published to mediate reprogramming in somatic cells. Finally, 
we evaluated chemical compounds (B18R, chloroquine, TSA, Pepinh-TRIF,
Pepinh-MYD), known for their ability to suppress cellular innate immune
responses. However, none of these had the desired effect. The data presented here
should provide the basis for further investigations into other immunosuppressing 
strategies that might facilitate efficient mRNA-mediated cellular reprogramming
in human cells.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22381475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Endocrinology. 2012 May;153(5):2076-81. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-2004. Epub 2012 Feb 
28.

Evidence that contamination by lipopolysaccharide confounds in vitro studies of
adiponectin activity in bone.

Naot D(1), Williams GA, Lin JM, Cornish J, Grey A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland
1142, New Zealand. d.naot@auckland.ac.nz

Adiponectin, a hormone produced and secreted from adipose tissue, circulates at
levels that are inversely related to visceral fat mass and bone mineral density. 
Adiponectin receptors are expressed in bone cells, and several studies have shown
that adiponectin affects bone phenotype and might play a role in the cross talk
between fat and bone tissues. In the current study, we determined global changes 
in gene expression induced by adiponectin in mouse bone marrow cells, in order to
identify the molecular mechanisms that mediate adiponectin's effect to inhibit
osteoclast differentiation in these cultures. The gene signature that was
produced by microarray analysis was very similar to a signature produced by
activation of type I interferons (IFN), and we therefore tested the hypothesis
that the adiponectin preparation, although marketed as "lipopolysaccharide (LPS) 
free", was contaminated with LPS that induced an IFN response in the bone marrow 
cells. Heat inactivation of the adiponectin preparation and the use of small
interfering RNA to knockdown the AdipoR1 receptor had not diminished the activity
of the adiponectin preparation to induce the IFN target genes Ccl5 and Irf7.
Thus, the changes in gene expression determined in the bone marrow cultures are
likely to be the result of a combination of adiponectin and LPS effects. Our
study suggests that the purity of commercially available proteins needs to be
verified and that experimental results of adiponectin activity in vitro should be
interpreted cautiously.

PMID: 22374965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2012 May;32(5):869-78. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.02.015.
Epub 2012 Feb 19.

Cloning and expression analysis of interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and 7 in 
large yellow croaker, Larimichthys crocea.

Yao CL(1), Huang XN, Fan Z, Kong P, Wang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Healthy Mariculture for East China Sea, Ministry of
Agriculture/Fisheries College, Jimei University, Jimei, Xiamen, China.
clyao@jmu.edu.cn

The interferon regulatory factor (IRF)3 and IRF7 are considered to play essential
roles in innate immune system's antiviral responses. In this report, the
full-length cDNA and genomic structure and immune response characterizations of
IRF3 and IRF7 were investigated in large yellow croaker, Larimichthys crocea. The
full-length cDNA of L. crocea (Lc)IRF3 was of 2204 bp, including a 5'-terminal
untranslated region (UTR) of 41 bp, a 3'-terminal UTR of 774 bp and an open
reading frame (ORF) of 1389 bp encoding a polypeptide of 462 amino acids
residues. The full-length cDNA of LcIRF7 was of 1979 bp, including a 5'-terminal 
UTR of 47 bp, a 3'-terminal UTR of 636 bp and an ORF of 1296 bp encoding a
polypeptide of 431 amino acids. The putative amino acid sequence of both LcIRF3
and LcIRF7 contained a typical IRF domain at the N-terminal and an IRF3 domain at
the C-terminal. Furthermore, we obtained 4517 nucleotides (nt) LcIRF3 genome
sequence based on the full-length cDNA, which contained 11 exons and 10 introns. 
The full-length genome sequence of LcIRF7 was of 3991 nucleotides, including 9
exons and 8 introns. Quantitative real-time reverse transcription PCR analysis
revealed a broad expression of LcIRF3 and LcIRF7 with the most predominant
expression of LcIRF3 and LcIRF7 in the liver and in the gill, respectively. The
expression levels of LcIRF3 and LcIRF7 after challenged with LPS, poly I:C and
Vibrio parahaemolyticus were tested in blood, spleen and liver. The results
showed that the highest relative expression of LcIRF3 was in the liver at 24 h
after poly I:C injection with 90 times greater than that of the non-injection
group (p < 0.05). Moreover, LcIRF3 transcription increased significantly at most 
time point in blood and spleen tissue after poly I:C stimulation compared with
that of the control group. After LPS injection, the peak value of LcIRF7 was in
the liver with 207 times (at 3 h) as much as that in the control group (p <
0.05). In addition, LcIRF7 expression was significantly induced by poly I:C
injection in spleen. Both LcIRF3 and LcIRF7 transcripts did not show significant 
change after V. parahaemolyticus stimulation. These results indicated that IRF3
and IRF7 might play an important role in large yellow croaker's defense against
viral and bacterial infection.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22374413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 1;188(7):2967-71. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103185. Epub 2012
Feb 27.

Cutting edge: independent roles for IRF-3 and IRF-7 in hematopoietic and
nonhematopoietic cells during host response to Chikungunya infection.

Schilte C(1), Buckwalter MR, Laird ME, Diamond MS, Schwartz O, Albert ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Immunobiologie des Cellules Dendritiques, Département d'Immunologie,
Institut Pasteur, Paris 75724, France.

The host response to Chikungunya virus is dependent on the direct action of type 
I IFN on infected nonhematopoietic cells. Prior studies have demonstrated that
multiple host sensors coordinate an antiviral response; however, the tissue
source(s) and signaling pathways for IFN production remain unknown. In this
study, we demonstrate that IRF-3 and IRF-7 are functionally redundant, but lack
of both factors results in lethal infection in adult mice. Reciprocal bone marrow
chimeras indicated that IRF-3 or IRF-7 expression in either hematopoietic or
nonhemotopoietic cell compartments was capable of inducing an antiviral response.
Interestingly, redundancy of IRF-3 and IRF-7 was age dependent, as neonatal
animals lacking either factor succumbed to infection. We further demonstrate that
IPS-1 is essential in nonhematopoietic cells and preferentially required during
early life. These results highlight the interplay between nonimmune and immune
cells during Chikungunya virus infection and suggest an important role for
nonhematopoietic cells as a critical source of IFN-a/ß.

PMID: 22371392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Hepatology. 2012 Jul;56(1):57-66. doi: 10.1002/hep.25642. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Major vault protein: a virus-induced host factor against viral replication
through the induction of type-I interferon.

Liu S(1), Hao Q, Peng N, Yue X, Wang Y, Chen Y, Wu J, Zhu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology and College of Life Sciences, Wuhan
University, Wuhan, China.

Major vault protein (MVP) is the major constituent of vaults and is involved in
multidrug resistance, nucleocytoplasmic transport, and cell signaling. However,
little is known about the role of MVP during viral infections. In this study,
high levels of MVP were found in peripheral blood mononuclear cells, sera, and
liver tissue from patients infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) relative to
healthy individuals. HCV infections resulted in elevated levels of MVP messenger 
RNA (mRNA) and protein expression in the hepatocyte cell lines Huh7.5.1 and Huh7.
Further studies demonstrated that the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and Sp1
pathways are involved in the induction of MVP expression by HCV. Interestingly,
MVP expression suppressed HCV replication and protein synthesis by way of
induction of type-I interferon mRNA expression and protein secretion. Upon
investigating the mechanisms behind this event, we found that MVP enhanced the
expression of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), but not IRF3. Translocation 
of activated IRF7 and NF-<U+03BA>B from the cytosol to the nucleus was involved in this 
process. Furthermore, vesicular stomatitis virus, influenza A virus, and
enterovirus 71 also induced MVP production, and MVP in turn hampered viral
replication and production.CONCLUSION: MVP is a novel virus-induced host factor
and its expression up-regulates type-I interferon production, leading to cellular
antiviral responses.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22318991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2012 May;32(5):221-9. doi: 10.1089/jir.2011.0068. Epub
2012 Feb 7.

N(pro) of classical swine fever virus prevents type I interferon-mediated priming
of conventional dendritic cells for enhanced interferon-a response.

Hüsser L(1), Ruggli N, Summerfield A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunoprophylaxis, Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.

A hallmark of acute classical swine fever is the high interferon (IFN)-a levels
found in the serum early after infection, followed by an inflammatory cytokine
storm. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) represent the only known cell type
that produces IFN-a upon classical swine fever virus (CSFV) infection in vitro.
In primary target cells of the virus the viral protein N(pro) inhibits the
induction of type I IFN via the degradation of IRF3. We hypothesized that the
early systemic pDC-derived IFN-a response sensitizes immune cells for enhanced
responsiveness and augment cytokine responses after CSFV infection through the
upregulation of IRF7. Therefore, bone marrow-derived granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor (GM-CSF)-induced DCs, were pretreated with
IFN-ß or conditioned medium from CSFV-activated enriched pDC, and expression of
the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-1ß, IL-6, and IFN-a was assessed 
after infection with wild-type CSFV and with an N(pro) mutant [N(pro)(D(136)N)]
unable to interact with IRF3 and IRF7. While type I IFN treatment sensitized the 
DCs for enhanced IFN and cytokine responses after stimulation with influenza
virus, lipopolysaccharide or poly(I):poly(C), this was not observed for CSFV. In 
contrast, the N(pro)(D(136)N) mutant CSFV induced elevated IFN-a responses in
type I IFN-pretreated GM-CSF DCs. These results indicate that CSFV has evolved to
prevent type I IFN sensitization in infected cells through the action of the
N(pro).

PMID: 22313263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Virology. 2012 Apr 10;425(2):82-94. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2012.01.006. Epub 2012
Feb 3.

Type 1 IFN-independent activation of a subset of interferon stimulated genes in
West Nile virus Eg101-infected mouse cells.

Pulit-Penaloza JA(1), Scherbik SV, Brinton MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30302, USA.

Although infection of mouse embryofibroblasts (MEFs) with WNV Eg101 induced
interferon (IFN) beta production and STAT1 and STAT2 phosphorylation, these
transcription factors (TFs) were not detected in the nucleus or on the promoters 
of four IRF-3-independent interferon stimulated genes (ISGs): Oas1a and Irf7
(previously characterized as IFN/ISGF3-dependent), Oas1b and Irf1. These ISGs
were upregulated in WNV Eg101-infected STAT1-/-, STAT2-/-, and IFN alpha/beta
receptor-/- MEFs. Although either IRF-3 or IRF-7 could amplify/sustain Oas1a and 
Oas1b upregulation at later times after infection, these factors were not
required for the initial gene activation. The lack of upregulation of these ISGs 
in WNV Eg101-infected IRF-3/9-/- MEFs suggested the involvement of IRF-9.
Activation of Irf1 in infected MEFs did not depend on any of these IRFs. The data
indicate that additional alternative activation mechanisms exist for subsets of
ISGs when a virus infection has blocked ISG activation by the canonical
IFN-mediated pathway.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3288888
PMID: 22305622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Sci Transl Med. 2012 Jan 18;4(117):117ra9. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003041.

Cigarette smoke induction of osteopontin (SPP1) mediates T(H)17 inflammation in
human and experimental emphysema.

Shan M(1), Yuan X, Song LZ, Roberts L, Zarinkamar N, Seryshev A, Zhang Y,
Hilsenbeck S, Chang SH, Dong C, Corry DB, Kheradmand F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Smoking-related lung diseases are among the leading causes of death worldwide,
underscoring the need to understand their pathogenesis and develop new effective 
therapies. We have shown that CD1a+ antigen-presenting cells (APCs) from lungs of
patients with emphysema can induce autoreactive T helper 1 (T(H)1) and T(H)17
cells. Similarly, the canonical cytokines interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) and
interleukin-17A (IL-17A) are specifically linked to lung destruction in smokers, 
but how smoke activates APCs to mediate emphysema remains unknown. Here, we show 
that, in addition to increasing IFN-<U+03B3> expression, cigarette smoke increased the
expression of IL-17A in both CD4+ and <U+03B3>d T cells from mouse lung. IL-17A
deficiency resulted in attenuation of, whereas lack of <U+03B3>d T cells exacerbated,
smoke-induced emphysema in mice. Adoptive transfer of lung APCs isolated from
mice with emphysema revealed that this cell population was capable of
transferring disease even in the absence of active smoke exposure, a process that
was dependent on IL-17A expression. Spp1 (the gene for osteopontin) was highly
expressed in the pathogenic lung APCs of smoke-exposed mice and was required for 
the T(H)17 responses and emphysema in vivo, in part through its inhibition of the
expression of the transcription factor Irf7. Thus, the Spp1-Irf7 axis is critical
for induction of pathological T(H)17 responses, revealing a major mechanism by
which smoke activates lung APCs to induce emphysema and identifying a pathway
that could be targeted for therapeutic purposes.

PMCID: PMC3956594
PMID: 22261033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. BMC Genomics. 2012 Jan 18;13:30. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-30.

Microarray analysis on germfree mice elucidates the primary target of a
traditional Japanese medicine juzentaihoto: acceleration of IFN-a response via
affecting the ISGF3-IRF7 signaling cascade.

Munakata K(1), Takashima K, Nishiyama M, Asano N, Mase A, Hioki K, Ohnishi Y,
Yamamoto M, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Kampo Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The traditional Japanese medicine juzentaihoto (JTX) is a
pharmaceutical grade multi-herbal medicine widely used for the prevention of
cancer metastasis and infection in immuno-compromized patients in Japan. The
effect of JTX has been supposed to be intimately affected by the immunological
properties of host and enteric microflora. The influence of JTX on the gene
expression profile in the large and small intestines was investigated by
microarray analyses using mice of different strains with or without enteric
microflora.
RESULTS: In all types of mice, including germfree (GF) animals, the genes most
affected by two-week oral JTX treatment were the type 1 interferon (IFN)-related 
genes including Stat1, Isgf3g and Irf7, which play a critical role in the
feedback loop of IFN-a production cascade. In IQI specific pathogen free (SPF)
mice JTX increased the steady state level of the expression of IFN-related genes,
but had the opposite effect in IQI GF and BALB/c SPF mice. Promoter analysis
suggests that tandem repeated $IRFF (the promoter sequences for interferon
regulatory factors) may be a primary target for JTX action. Pre-treatment of JTX 
accelerated the effects of an oral IFN "inducer"
2-amino-5-bromo-6-methyl-4-pyrimidinol (ABMP) (up-regulation of IFN-a production 
in IQI strain and down-regulation in BALB/c mice), which is in good accordance
with the effect of JTX on gene expression of type 1 IFN-related genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Microarray analysis revealed that the target of JTX might be the
transcription machinery regulating the steady-state level of genes involved in
the ISGF3-IRF7 cascade, whose effect is bi-directional in a strain- and
microbiota-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3298487
PMID: 22257721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Mar;32(6):1032-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06021-11. Epub 2012 Jan
17.

Contribution of a TANK-binding kinase 1-interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 7
pathway to IFN-<U+03B3>-induced gene expression.

Farlik M(1), Rapp B, Marie I, Levy DE, Jamieson AM, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and
Immunobiology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) and interferon
regulatory factors (IRFs) share common target genes. Here we show that the Irf7
gene is regulated by transcription factors STAT1 and IRF9 in response to the type
II interferon (IFN) IFN-<U+03B3>. IRF7 cooperated with STAT1 and IRF1 to stimulate the
expression of a subset of IFN-<U+03B3>-induced STAT1 target genes. IRF7-mediated control
of the Gbp2 gene required the presence and basal activity of the S/T kinase
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), whereas the binding of IRF7 to the Gbp2 promoter
did not. Analysis of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) recruitment to the Gbp2 promoter 
revealed a role for IRF7 at later stages of the IFN-<U+03B3> response. In support of the
role of IRF7 in establishing an effective antibacterial response,
IFN-<U+03B3>-pretreated Irf7(-/-) macrophages showed an increased bacterial burden after
infection with Listeria monocytogenes. Our data thus describe a biologically
relevant basal activity of TBK1 and identify IRF7 as a novel player in the IFN-<U+03B3> 
response.

PMCID: PMC3295005
PMID: 22252317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. BMC Genomics. 2012 Jan 12;13:17. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-17.

Lipopolysaccharide priming enhances expression of effectors of immune defence
while decreasing expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines in mammary epithelia
cells from cows.

Günther J(1), Petzl W, Zerbe H, Schuberth HJ, Koczan D, Goetze L, Seyfert HM.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology (FBN), Wilhelm-Stahl-Allee 2,
D-18196 Dummerstorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Udder infections with environmental pathogens like Escherichia coli
are a serious problem for the dairy industry. Reduction of incidence and severity
of mastitis is desirable and mild priming of the immune system either through
vaccination or with low doses of immune stimulants such as lipopolysaccharide LPS
was previously found to dampen detrimental effects of a subsequent infection.
Monocytes/macrophages are known to develop tolerance towards the endotoxin LPS
(endotoxin tolerance, ET) as adaptation strategy to prevent exuberant
inflammation.We have recently observed that infusion of 1 µg of LPS into the
quarter of an udder effectively protected for several days against an
experimentally elicited mastitis. We have modelled this process in primary
cultures of mammary epithelial cells (MEC) from the cow. MEC are by far the most 
abundant cells in the healthy udder coming into contact with invading pathogens
and little is known about their role in establishing ET.
RESULTS: We primed primary MEC cultures for 12 h with LPS (100 ng/ml) and
stimulated three cultures either 12 h or 42 h later with 107/ml particles of heat
inactivated E. coli bacteria for six hours. Priming-related alterations in the
global transcriptome of those cells were quantified with Affymetrix microarrays. 
LPS priming alone caused differential expression of 40 genes and mediated
significantly different response to a subsequent E. coli challenge of 226 genes. 
Expression of 38 genes was enhanced while that of 188 was decreased. Higher
expressed were anti-microbial factors (ß-defensin LAP, SLPI), cell and tissue
protecting factors (DAF, MUC1, TGM1, TGM3) as well as mediators of the sentinel
function of MEC (CCL5, CXCL8). Dampened was the expression of potentially harmful
pro-inflammatory master cytokines (IL1B, IL6, TNF-a) and immune effectors (NOS2, 
matrix metalloproteases). Functional network analysis highlighted the reduced
expression of IL1B and of IRF7 as key to this modulation.
CONCLUSION: LPS-primed MEC are fitter to repel pathogens and better protected
against misguided attacks of the immune response. Attenuated is the exuberant
expression of factors potentially promoting immunopathological processes. MEC
therefore recapitulate many aspects of ET known so far from professional immune
cells.

PMCID: PMC3315725
PMID: 22235868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Bonekey Rep. 2012 Sep 5;1:191. doi: 10.1038/bonekey.2012.191. eCollection 2012.

IRF7 expression associated with low risk of bone metastasis.

[No authors listed]

PMCID: PMC3727867
PMID: 24009981  [PubMed]


347. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2011 Dec;5(12):e1420. doi: 10.1371/journal.pntd.0001420. Epub
2011 Dec 20.

Activation of the innate immune response against DENV in normal non-transformed
human fibroblasts.

Bustos-Arriaga J(1), García-Machorro J, León-Juárez M, García-Cordero J,
Santos-Argumedo L, Flores-Romo L, Méndez-Cruz AR, Juárez-Delgado FJ,
Cedillo-Barrón L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biomedicina Molecular Centro de Investigación y de Estudios
Avanzados, México Distrito Federal, Mexico.

BACKGROUND: When mosquitoes infected with DENV are feeding, the proboscis must
traverse the epidermis several times ("probing") before reaching a blood vessel
in the dermis. During this process, the salivary glands release the virus, which 
is likely to interact first with cells of the various epidermal and dermal
layers, cells which could be physiologically relevant to DENV infection and
replication in humans. However, important questions are whether more abundant
non-hematopoietic cells such as fibroblasts become infected, and whether they
play any role in antiviral innate immunity in the very early stages of infection,
or even if they might be used by DENV as primary replication cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Fibroblasts freshly released from healthy skin
and infected 12 hours after their isolation show a positive signal for DENV. In
addition, when primary skin fibroblast cultures were established and subsequently
infected, we showed DENV-2 antigen-positive intracellular signal at 24 hours and 
48 hours post-infection. Moreover, the fibroblasts showed productive infection in
a conventional plaque assay. The skin fibroblasts infected with DENV-2 underwent 
potent signaling through both TLR3 and RIG- 1, but not Mda5, triggering
up-regulation of IFNß, TNFa, defensin 5 (HB5) and ß defensin 2 (HßD2). In
addition, DENV infected fibroblasts showed increased nuclear translocation of
interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), but not interferon regulatory factor
7 (IRF7), when compared with mock-infected fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In this work, we demonstrated the high susceptibility
to DENV infection by primary fibroblasts from normal human skin, both in situ and
in vitro. Our results suggest that these cells may contribute to the
pro-inflammatory and anti-viral microenvironment in the early stages of
interaction with DENV-2. Furthermore, the data suggest that fibroblast may also
be used as a primary site of DENV replication and provide viral particles that
may contribute to subsequent viral dissemination.

PMCID: PMC3243703
PMID: 22206025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 Dec 23;8:181. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-181.

Interferon regulatory factor-7 modulates experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis in mice.

Salem M(1), Mony JT, Løbner M, Khorooshi R, Owens T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory disease of the central
nervous system (CNS) with unknown etiology. Interferon-ß (IFN-ß), a member of the
type I IFN family, is used as a therapeutic for MS and the IFN signaling pathway 
is implicated in MS susceptibility. Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is
critical for the induction and positive feedback regulation of type I IFN. To
establish whether and how endogenous type I IFN signaling contributes to disease 
modulation and to better understand the underlying mechanism, we examined the
role of IRF7 in the development of MS-like disease in mice.
METHODS: The role of IRF7 in development of EAE was studied by immunizing IRF7-KO
and C57BL/6 (WT) mice with myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein using a standard
protocol for the induction of EAE. We measured leukocyte infiltration and
localization in the CNS using flow cytometric analysis and immunohistochemical
procedures. We determined levels of CD3 and selected chemokine and cytokine gene 
expression by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: IRF7 gene expression increased in the CNS as disease progressed. IRF7
message was localized to microglia and infiltrating leukocytes. Furthermore,
IRF7-deficient mice developed more severe disease. Flow cytometric analysis
showed that the extent of leukocyte infiltration into the CNS was higher in
IRF7-deficient mice with significantly higher number of infiltrating macrophages 
and T cells, and the distribution of infiltrates within the spinal cord was
altered. Analysis of cytokine and chemokine gene expression by quantitative
real-time PCR showed significantly greater increases in CCL2, CXCL10, IL-1ß and
IL17 gene expression in IRF7-deficient mice compared with WT mice.
CONCLUSION: Together, our findings suggest that IRF7 signaling is critical for
regulation of inflammatory responses in the CNS.

PMCID: PMC3260126
PMID: 22196084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e29060. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029060. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Regulation of cysteinyl leukotriene receptor 2 expression--a potential anti-tumor
mechanism.

Magnusson C(1), Bengtsson AM, Liu M, Liu J, Ceder Y, Ehrnström R, Sjölander A.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Experimental Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University, Skånes University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: The cysteinyl leukotrienes receptors (CysLTRs) are implicated in many
different pathological conditions, such as inflammation and cancer. We have
previously shown that colon cancer patients with high CysLT(1)R and low CysLT(2)R
expression demonstrate poor prognosis. Therefore, we wanted to investigate ways
for the transcriptional regulation of CysLT(2)R, which still remains to be poorly
understood.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We investigated the potential role of the
anti-tumorigenic interferon a (IFN-a) and the mitogenic epidermal growth factor
(EGF) on CysLT(2)R regulation using non-transformed intestinal epithelial cell
lines and colon cancer cells to elucidate the effects on the CysLT(2)R expression
and regulation. This was done using Western blot, qPCR, luciferase reporter assay
and a colon cancer patient array. We found a binding site for the transcription
factor IRF-7 in the putative promoter region of CysLT(2)R. This site was involved
in the IFN-a induced activity of the CysLT(2)R luciferase reporter assay. In
addition, IFN-a induced the activity of the differentiation marker alkaline
phosphatase along with the expression of mucin-2, which protects the epithelial
layer from damage. Interestingly, EGF suppressed both the expression and promoter
activity of the CysLT(2)R. E-boxes present in the CysLT(2)R putative promoter
region were involved in the suppressing effect. CysLT(2)R signaling was able to
suppress cell migration that was induced by EGF signaling.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The patient array showed that aggressive tumors
generally expressed less IFN-a receptor and more EGFR. Interestingly, there was a
negative correlation between CysLT(2)R and EGFR expression. Our data strengthens 
the idea that there is a protective role against tumor progression for CysLT(2)R 
and that it highlights new possibilities to regulate the CysLT(2)R.

PMCID: PMC3240642
PMID: 22194989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28683. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028683. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Epigenetic silencing of IRF7 and/or IRF5 in lung cancer cells leads to increased 
sensitivity to oncolytic viruses.

Li Q(1), Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Genetics, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

Defective IFN signaling results in loss of innate immunity and sensitizes cells
to enhanced cytolytic killing after Vesticular Stomatitis Virus (VSV) infection. 
Examination of the innate immunity status of normal human bronchial epithelial
cells Beas2B and 7 lung cancer cells revealed that the abrogation of IFN
signaling in cancer cells is associated with greater sensitivity to VSV
infection. The disruption of the IFN pathway in lung cancer cell lines and
primary tumor tissues is caused by epigenetic silencing of critical interferon
responsive transcription factors IRF7 and/or IRF5. Although
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment fails to reactivate IRF7 and IRF5 expression or 
protect cells from VSV infection, manipulating IFN signaling by altering IRF
expression changes the viral susceptibility of these cells. Lung cancer cells can
be partially protected from viral killing using IRF5+IRF7 overexpression, whereas
IFN pathway disruption by transfection of siRNAs to IRF5+IRF7 increases cells'
vulnerability to viral infection. Therefore, IRF5 and IRF7 are key transcription 
factors in IFN pathway that determine viral sensitivity of lung cancer cells; the
epigenetically impaired IFN pathway in lung cancer tissues provides potential
biomarkers for successful selective killing of cancer cells by oncolytic viral
therapy.

PMCID: PMC3237484
PMID: 22194884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Clin Immunol. 2012 Mar;142(3):296-307. doi: 10.1016/j.clim.2011.11.006. Epub 2011
Nov 25.

Galectin-9 signaling prolongs survival in murine lung-cancer by inducing
macrophages to differentiate into plasmacytoid dendritic cell-like macrophages.

Kadowaki T(1), Arikawa T, Shinonaga R, Oomizu S, Inagawa H, Soma G, Niki T,
Hirashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Immunopathology, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa
University, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.

Galectin-9 (Gal-9) expanded plasmacytoid dendritic cell-like macrophages
(pDC-M<U+03D5>s) in lung cancer-bearing mice and prolonged the survival. Gal-9 increased
the frequency of CD11c(high) cells in M-CSF- but not GM-CSF-induced M<U+03D5>s in vitro 
in a Tim-3 independent manner. CD11c(high) cells differentiated with M-CSF+Gal-9 
expressed pDC-M<U+03D5> markers, such as PDCA-1 and F4/80. These cells expressed high
TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9, although they exhibited decreased IFN-a mRNA levels. LPS or 
LLC stimulation further elevated pDC-M<U+03D5> markers, indicating that
M-CSF+Gal-9-induced M<U+03D5>s were pDC-M<U+03D5> precursors. Moreover, LPS stimulation
resulted in the increased IRF7 and E2-2 levels, suggesting that the pDC-M<U+03D5>
precursors matured into pDC-M<U+03D5>s. These matured pDC-M<U+03D5>s augmented NK cell-mediated
cytotoxicity though they did not produce IFN-a upon TLR7 or TLR9 stimulation. The
present results suggest that Gal-9 induces M<U+03D5>s to differentiate to pDC-M<U+03D5>s, and
that this switch in differentiation favors the activation of NK cells that are
able to prolong the survival of tumor-bearing mice.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22177847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e28125. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028125. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

TRAF6 and IRF7 control HIV replication in macrophages.

Sirois M(1), Robitaille L, Allary R, Shah M, Woelk CH, Estaquier J, Corbeil J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Infectious Disease Research Center, CHUL
Research Center and Laval University, Québec, Québec, Canada.

The innate immune system recognizes virus infection and evokes antiviral
responses which include producing type I interferons (IFNs). The induction of IFN
provides a crucial mechanism of antiviral defense by upregulating
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) that restrict viral replication. ISGs inhibit 
the replication of many viruses by acting at different steps of their viral
cycle. Specifically, IFN treatment prior to in vitro human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) infection stops or significantly delays HIV-1 production indicating that
potent inhibitory factors are generated. We report that HIV-1 infection of
primary human macrophages decreases tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor 6 (TRAF6) and virus-induced signaling adaptor (VISA) expression, which are
both components of the IFN signaling pathway controlling viral replication.
Knocking down the expression of TRAF6 in macrophages increased HIV-1 replication 
and augmented the expression of IRF7 but not IRF3. Suppressing VISA had no impact
on viral replication. Overexpression of IRF7 resulted in enhanced viral
replication while knocking down IRF7 expression in macrophages significantly
reduced viral output. These findings are the first demonstration that TRAF6 can
regulate HIV-1 production and furthermore that expression of IRF7 promotes HIV-1 
replication.

PMCID: PMC3225375
PMID: 22140520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Thromb Haemost. 2011 Dec;9(12):2477-85. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2011.04530.x.

Expression and functionality of type I interferon receptor in the megakaryocytic 
lineage.

Negrotto S(1), J De Giusti C, Lapponi MJ, Etulain J, Rivadeneyra L, Pozner RG,
Gomez RM, Schattner M.

Author information: 
(1)Thrombosis I Laboratory, National Academy of Medicine, CONICET, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

BACKGROUND: Type I interferons (IFN-I) negatively regulate
megakaryo/thrombopoiesis. However, expression of the IFN-I receptor (IFNAR) in
the megakaryocytic lineage is poorly characterized.
OBJECTIVES: To study the expression and functionality of IFNAR in the
megakaryocytic lineage.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Although IFNAR mRNA was found in every cell type studied,
its protein expression showed differences between them. According to flow
cytometry and immunofluorescence, IFNAR1 was observed in Meg-01, Dami, CD34+
cells and megakaryocytes, but not in proplatelets or platelets. Immunoblotting
assays showed that IFNAR1 and IFNAR2 were highly expressed in all cell types,
except in platelets where it was barely detectable. Regarding IFNAR1, 130- and
90-kDa bands were detected in Meg-01 and Dami, whereas 130- and 60-kDa bands were
found in CD34+ cells and megakaryocytes. Activation of megakaryocytic IFNAR by
IFN-ß induced pSTAT1/2 and upregulated the antiviral genes IRF7 and MXA. The
latter response was completely suppressed by IFNAR blockade. In contrast, the low
levels of IFNAR in platelets were not functional as pSTAT1/2, aggregation and
P-selectin expression were not induced by IFN-I. In addition, megakaryocytes
increased IFN-I transcript levels and produced IFN-ß upon stimulation with
PolyI:C, a synthetic dsRNA that mimics viral infection.
CONCLUSIONS: Early progenitors and mature megakaryocytes, but not platelets,
express functional IFNAR and synthetize/release IFN-ß, revealing not only that
megakaryo/thrombopoiesis regulation by IFN-I is associated with a specific
interaction with its receptor, but also that megakaryocytes may play a role in
the antiviral defense by being both IFN producers and responders.

© 2011 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMID: 22136495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Virol. 2012 Feb;86(3):1670-82. doi: 10.1128/JVI.06550-11. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Two microRNAs encoded within the bovine herpesvirus 1 latency-related gene
promote cell survival by interacting with RIG-I and stimulating NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent
transcription and beta interferon signaling pathways.

Silva LF(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, Morrison Life Science Center, University of Nebraska, Lincoln,
Nebraska, USA.

Sensory neurons latently infected with bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) abundantly
express latency-related (LR) RNA (LR-RNA). Genetic evidence indicates that LR
protein expression plays a role in the latency-reactivation cycle, because an LR 
mutant virus that contains three stop codons downstream of the first open reading
frame (ORF2) does not reactivate from latency. The LR mutant virus induces higher
levels of apoptotic neurons in trigeminal ganglia, and ORF2 interferes with
apoptosis. Although ORF2 is important for the latency-reactivation cycle, other
factors encoded by the LR gene are believed to play a supportive role. For
example, two microRNAs (miRNAs) encoded within the LR gene are expressed in
trigeminal ganglia of latently infected calves. These miRNAs interfere with bICP0
protein expression and productive infection in transient-transfection assays. In 
this report, we provide evidence that the two LR miRNAs cooperate with poly(I·C),
interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), or IRF7 to stimulate beta interferon
(IFN-ß) promoter activity. Both miRNAs also stimulated IFN-ß promoter activity
and nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B)-dependent transcription when cotransfected
with a plasmid expressing retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I). In the presence
of RIG-I, the LR miRNAs enhanced survival of mouse neuroblastoma cells, which
correlated with activation of the antiapoptosis cellular transcription factor,
NF-<U+03BA>B. Immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that both miRNAs stably interact
with RIG-I, suggesting that this interaction directly stimulates the RIG-I
signaling pathway. In summary, the results of these studies suggest that
interactions between LR miRNAs and RIG-I promote the establishment and
maintenance of latency by enhancing survival of infected neurons.

PMCID: PMC3264334
PMID: 22130548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Eur J Microbiol Immunol (Bp). 2011 Dec;1(4):279-88. doi:
10.1556/EuJMI.1.2011.4.3. Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Adenovirus-triggered innate signalling pathways.

Fejer G, Freudenberg M, Greber UF, Gyory I.

Adenoviruses are important infectious agents and also emerging vectors in
different biomedical applications. These viruses elicit a strong innate and
adaptive immune response, which influences both the course of disease and the
success of the applied vectors. Several Toll-like Receptor (TLR)-dependent and
-independent mechanisms contribute to these responses. Understanding of the
involved viral and cellular factors is crucial for the treatment of various
adenovirus diseases and the optimal design of adenovirus vector applications.
Here we summarize our current understanding of the complex nature of
adenovirus-induced innate immune mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3918130
PMID: 24516734  [PubMed]


356. Int J Rheumatol. 2011;2011:275617. doi: 10.1155/2011/275617. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Basal Activation of Type I Interferons (Alpha2 and Beta) and 2'5'OAS Genes:
Insights into Differential Expression Profiles of Interferon System Components in
Systemic Sclerosis.

de Oliveira DB(1), Almeida GM, Guedes AC, Santos FP, Bonjardim CA, Ferreira PC,
Kroon EG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Vírus, Instituto de Ciências Biológicas, Universidade Federal
de Minas Gerais, Avenue Antônio Carlos 6627, Pampulha 31270-901 Belo Horizonte,
MG, Brazil.

Objective. Systemic sclerosis (SSc) is a complex autoimmune disease in which
interferons (IFNs) may play an essential role. We hypothesized that type I and
III IFNs may be found in increased levels in patients and be responsible for SSc 
autoimmune status. Methods. Type I and III IFN and ISG basal expression profiles 
were measured by qPCR using RNA from PBMCs of patients and controls . Results.
Type I IFNs are increased in SSc patients, while no induction of type III IFNs
was detected. This induction cannot be related to IRF7, since no upregulation of 
this gene was seen on patients. Of the ISGs tested, 2'5'OAS levels were increased
in patients, while 6-16 and MxA levels were not. Conclusions. While there is no
indication of type III IFN induction, increased levels of type I IFNs may lead to
abnormal regulation of ISGs that can be responsible for immune system alterations
described for SSc.

PMCID: PMC3206376
PMID: 22121373  [PubMed]


357. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 15;187(12):6456-62. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003691. Epub 2011 
Nov 16.

Guanylate binding protein 4 negatively regulates virus-induced type I IFN and
antiviral response by targeting IFN regulatory factor 7.

Hu Y(1), Wang J, Yang B, Zheng N, Qin M, Ji Y, Lin G, Tian L, Wu X, Wu L, Sun B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

IRF7 is known as the master regulator in virus-triggered induction of type I IFNs
(IFN-I). In this study, we identify GBP4 virus-induced protein interacting with
IRF7 as a negative regulator for IFN-I response. Overexpression of GBP4 inhibits 
virus-triggered activation of IRF7-dependent signaling, but has no effect on
NF-<U+03BA>B signaling, whereas the knockdown of GBP4 has opposite effects. Furthermore,
the supernatant from Sendai virus-infected cells in which GBP4 have been silenced
inhibits the replication of vesicular stomatitis virus more efficiently.
Competitive coimmunoprecipitation experiments indicate that overexpression of
GBP4 disrupts the interactions between TRAF6 and IRF7, resulting in impaired
TRAF6-mediated IRF7 ubiquitination. Our results suggest that GBP4 is a negative
regulator of virus-triggered IFN-I production, and it is identified as a novel
protein targeting IRF7 and inhibiting its function.

PMID: 22095711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Virol. 2012 Jan;86(2):1090-6. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05444-11. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Hepatitis C virus fails to activate NF-<U+03BA>B signaling in plasmacytoid dendritic
cells.

Dental C(1), Florentin J, Aouar B, Gondois-Rey F, Durantel D, Baumert TF, Nunes
JA, Olive D, Hirsch I, Stranska R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (Inserm) UMR891,
Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Marseille, France.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) respond to viral infection by production of
alpha interferon (IFN-a), proinflammatory cytokines, and cell differentiation.
The elimination of hepatitis C virus (HCV) in more than 50% of chronically
infected patients by treatment with IFN-a suggests that pDCs can play an
important role in the control of HCV infection. pDCs exposed to HCV-infected
hepatoma cells, in contrast to cell-free HCV virions, produce large amounts of
IFN-a. To further investigate the molecular mechanism of HCV sensing, we studied 
whether exposure of pDCs to HCV-infected hepatoma cells activates, in parallel to
interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)-mediated production of IFN-a, nuclear
factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B)-dependent pDC responses, such as expression of the
differentiation markers CD40, CCR7, CD86, and tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and secretion of the proinflammatory cytokines 
TNF-a and interleukin 6 (IL-6). We demonstrate that exposure of pDCs to
HCV-infected hepatoma cells surprisingly did not induce phosphorylation of NF-<U+03BA>B 
or cell surface expression of CD40, CCR7, CD86, or TRAIL or secretion of TNF-a
and IL-6. In contrast, CpG-A and CpG-B induced production of TNF-a and IL-6 in
pDCs exposed to the HCV-infected hepatoma cells, showing that cell-associated
virus did not actively inhibit Toll-like receptor (TLR)-mediated NF-<U+03BA>B
phosphorylation. Our results suggest that cell-associated HCV signals in pDCs via
an endocytosis-dependent mechanism and IRF7 but not via the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. In
spite of IFN-a induction, cell-associated HCV does not induce a full functional
response of pDCs. These findings contribute to the understanding of evasion of
immune responses by HCV.

PMCID: PMC3255840
PMID: 22090103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 30;286(52):44750-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.250894. Epub
2011 Nov 7.

Nuclear factor <U+03BA>B subunits RelB and cRel negatively regulate Toll-like receptor
3-mediated ß-interferon production via induction of transcriptional repressor
protein YY1.

Siednienko J(1), Maratha A, Yang S, Mitkiewicz M, Miggin SM, Moynagh PN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, National University of Ireland Maynooth, County
Kildare, Ireland.

The induction of ß-interferon (IFN-ß) is a key anti-viral response to infection
by RNA viruses. Virus-induced expression of IFN-ß requires the co-operative
action of the transcription factors IRF-3/7, NF-<U+03BA>B, and ATF-2/c-Jun on the IFN-ß 
promoter leading to the orderly recruitment of chromatin remodeling complexes.
Although viruses strongly activate NF-<U+03BA>B and promote its binding to the IFN-ß
promoter, recent studies have indicated that NF-<U+03BA>B is not essential for
virus-induced expression of IFN-ß. Herein, we examined the role of NF-<U+03BA>B in
regulating IFN-ß expression in response to the viral-sensing Toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3). Intriguingly pharmacological inhibition of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway augments
late phase expression of IFN-ß expression in response to TLR3 stimulation. We
show that the negative effect of NF-<U+03BA>B on IFN-ß expression is dependent on the
induction of the transcriptional repressor protein YinYang1. We demonstrate that 
the TLR3 ligand polyriboinosinic:polyribocytidylic acid (poly(I:C)) induces
expression and nuclear translocation of YinYang1 where it interacts with the
IFN-ß promoter and inhibits the binding of IRF7 to the latter. Evidence is also
presented showing that the NF-<U+03BA>B subunits c-Rel and RelB are the likely key
drivers of these negative effects on IFN-ß expression. These findings thus
highlight for the first time a novel self-regulatory mechanism that is employed
by TLR3 to limit the level and duration of IFN-ß expression.

PMCID: PMC3247990
PMID: 22065573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26315. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026315. Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Hepatitis B virus impairs TLR9 expression and function in plasmacytoid dendritic 
cells.

Vincent IE(1), Zannetti C, Lucifora J, Norder H, Protzer U, Hainaut P, Zoulim F, 
Tommasino M, Trépo C, Hasan U, Chemin I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U871, Lyon, France. isabelle.vincent@inserm.fr

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) play a key role in detecting pathogens by
producing large amounts of type I interferon (IFN) by sensing the presence of
viral infections through the Toll-Like Receptor (TLR) pathway. TLR9 is a sensor
of viral and bacterial DNA motifs and activates the IRF7 transcription factor
which leads to type I IFN secretion by pDCs. However, during chronic hepatitis B 
virus (HBV) infection, pDCs display an impaired ability to secrete IFN-a
following ex vivo stimulation with TLR9 ligands. Here we highlight several
strategies used by HBV to block IFN-a production through a specific impairment of
the TLR9 signaling. Our results show that HBV particle internalisation could
inhibit TLR9- but not TLR7-mediated secretion of IFN-a by pDCs. We observed that 
HBV down-regulated TLR9 transcriptional activity in pDCs and B cells in which
TLR9 mRNA and protein levels were reduced. HBV can interfere with TLR9 activity
by blocking the MyD88-IRAK4 axis and Sendai virus targeting IRF7 to block IFN-a
production. Neutralising CpG motif sequences were identified within HBV DNA
genome of genotypes A to H which displayed a suppressive effect on TLR9-immune
activation. Moreover, TLR9 mRNA and protein were downregulated in PBMCs from
patients with HBV-associated chronic hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Thus
HBV has developed several escape mechanisms to avoid TLR9 activation in both pDCs
and B lymphocytes, which may in turn contribute to the establishment and/or
persistence of chronic infection.

PMCID: PMC3201951
PMID: 22046272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Viruses. 2010 Nov;2(11):2443-80. doi: 10.3390/v2112443. Epub 2010 Nov 5.

Inhibition of the type I interferon antiviral response during arenavirus
infection.

Borrow P(1), Martínez-Sobrido L, de la Torre JC.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine, The Jenner Institute, University of 
Oxford, Compton, Newbury, Berkshire RG20 7NN, UK; E-Mail:
persephone.borrow@jenner.ac.uk.

Arenaviruses merit interest both as tractable experimental model systems to study
acute and persistent viral infections, and as clinically-important human
pathogens. Several arenaviruses cause hemorrhagic fever (HF) disease in humans.
In addition, evidence indicates that the globally-distributed prototypic
arenavirus lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) is a human pathogen of
clinical significance in congenital infections, and also poses a great danger to 
immunosuppressed individuals. Arenavirus persistence and pathogenesis are
facilitated by their ability to overcome the host innate immune response.
Mammalian hosts have developed both membrane toll-like receptors (TLR) and
cytoplasmic pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that recognize specific
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), resulting in activation of the
transcription factors IRF3 or IRF7, or both, which together with NF-<U+03BA>B and
ATF-2/c-JUN induce production of type I interferon (IFN-I). IFN-I plays a key
role in host anti-microbial defense by mediating direct antiviral effects via
up-regulation of IFN-I stimulated genes (ISGs), activating dendritic cells (DCs) 
and natural killer (NK) cells, and promoting the induction of adaptive responses.
Accordingly, viruses have developed a plethora of strategies to disrupt the IFN-I
mediated antiviral defenses of the host, and the viral gene products responsible 
for these disruptions are often major virulence determinants. IRF3- and
IRF7-dependent induction of host innate immune responses is frequently targeted
by viruses. Thus, the arenavirus nucleoprotein (NP) was shown to inhibit the
IFN-I response by interfering with the activation of IRF3. This NP anti-IFN
activity, together with alterations in the number and function of DCs observed in
mice chronically infected with LCMV, likely play an important role in LCMV
persistence in its murine host. In this review we will discuss current knowledge 
about the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which arenaviruses can subvert the
host innate immune response and their implications for understanding HF
arenaviral disease as well as arenavirus persistence in their natural hosts.

PMCID: PMC3185579
PMID: 21994626  [PubMed]


362. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 9;286(49):42715-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.293969. Epub 2011
Oct 11.

MyD88 interacts with interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7 in Atlantic
salmon (Salmo salar): transgenic SsMyD88 modulates the IRF-induced type I
interferon response and accumulates in aggresomes.

Iliev DB(1), Sobhkhez M, Fremmerlid K, Jørgensen JB.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biosciences, Fisheries and Economics, University of Tromsø, N-9037 
Tromsø, Norway.

MyD88 is an intracellular adaptor protein that transmits signals downstream of
immune receptors such as the IL-1 receptor and the majority of the known
mammalian toll-like receptors. Homologs of MyD88 have been identified in many
vertebrate species; however, the adaptor has been studied mostly in mammals, and 
little is known about its function in lower vertebrates. The results presented in
the current paper demonstrate, for the first time, that the teleost MyD88,
through its Toll/Interleukin-1 receptor domain, interacts with SsIRF3 and two
SsIRF7 paralogs: transcription factors that are critically involved in the
virus-induced IFN responses. The data further highlight the potential of
transgenic SsMyD88 to modulate the IRF-induced type I IFN response as the adaptor
synergized with SsIRF3 to activate IRF-E/IFN-stimulated response
element-containing reporter gene constructs and endogenous myxovirus resistance
homolog expression. Microscopy analyses demonstrated that, similar to mammalian
MyD88, both endogenous and transgenic SsMyD88 accumulated in intracellular
aggregates. However, unlike the endogenous SsMyD88 clusters, which co-localized
with endocytosed CpGs and probably represented myddosomes, overexpressed SsMyD88 
accumulated in aggresomes. Although these structures accumulated ubiquitinated
proteins, they did not associate with the autophagosome markers p62 and light
chain 3-like protein, indicating that they are most likely classical aggresomes
rather than aggresome-like induced structures, aggregates of ubiquitinated
proteins induced by toll-like receptor/MyD88 signaling in antigen-presenting
cells. The significance of the accumulation of transgenic MyD88 in aggresomes is 
currently unknown; nevertheless it is tempting to speculate that it might
represent a defense mechanism against the potentially harmful effects of
excessive MyD88 signaling.

PMCID: PMC3234926
PMID: 21990356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Immunol. 2011 Nov 1;187(9):4754-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101704. Epub 2011
Sep 21.

Tripartite motif-containing protein 28 is a small ubiquitin-related modifier E3
ligase and negative regulator of IFN regulatory factor 7.

Liang Q(1), Deng H, Li X, Wu X, Tang Q, Chang TH, Peng H, Rauscher FJ 3rd, Ozato 
K, Zhu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306, USA.

IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a potent transcription factor of type I IFNs
and IFN-stimulated genes and is known as the master regulator of type I
IFN-dependent immune responses. Because excessive responses could harm the host, 
IRF7 itself is delicately regulated at the transcriptional, translational, and
posttranslational levels. Modification of IRF7 by small ubiquitin-related
modifiers (SUMOs) has been shown to regulate IFN expression and antiviral
responses negatively, but the specific E3 ligase needed for IRF7 SUMOylation has 
remained unknown. As reported in this article, we have identified the tripartite 
motif-containing protein 28 (TRIM28) as a binding partner of IRF7. We have
demonstrated that TRIM28 also interacts with the SUMO E2 enzyme and increases
SUMOylation of IRF7 both in vivo and in vitro, suggesting it acts as a SUMO E3
ligase of IRF7. Unlike the common SUMO E3 ligase, protein inhibitor of activated 
STAT1, the E3 activity of TRIM28 is specific to IRF7, because it has little
effect on IRF7's close relative IRF3. TRIM28 is therefore, so far as we know, the
first IRF7-specific SUMO E3 reported. TRIM28-mediated SUMOylation of IRF7 is
increased during viral infection, and SUMOylation of transcription factors
usually results in transcriptional repression. Overexpression of TRIM28 therefore
inhibits IRF7 transactivation activity, whereas knockdown of TRIM28 has the
opposite effect and potentiates IFN production and antiviral responses.
Collectively, our results suggest that TRIM28 is a specific SUMO E3 ligase and
negative regulator of IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3197880
PMID: 21940674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. PLoS Pathog. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002247. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002247. Epub 2011
Sep 8.

Vaccinia virus protein C6 is a virulence factor that binds TBK-1 adaptor proteins
and inhibits activation of IRF3 and IRF7.

Unterholzner L(1), Sumner RP, Baran M, Ren H, Mansur DS, Bourke NM, Randow F,
Smith GL, Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland.

Recognition of viruses by pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) causes
interferon-ß (IFN-ß) induction, a key event in the anti-viral innate immune
response, and also a target of viral immune evasion. Here the vaccinia virus
(VACV) protein C6 is identified as an inhibitor of PRR-induced IFN-ß expression
by a functional screen of select VACV open reading frames expressed individually 
in mammalian cells. C6 is a member of a family of Bcl-2-like poxvirus proteins,
many of which have been shown to inhibit innate immune signalling pathways. PRRs 
activate both NF-<U+03BA>B and IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) to activate the IFN-ß
promoter induction. Data presented here show that C6 inhibits IRF3 activation and
translocation into the nucleus, but does not inhibit NF-<U+03BA>B activation. C6
inhibits IRF3 and IRF7 activation downstream of the kinases TANK binding kinase 1
(TBK1) and I<U+03BA>B kinase-e (IKKe), which phosphorylate and activate these IRFs.
However, C6 does not inhibit TBK1- and IKKe-independent IRF7 activation or the
induction of promoters by constitutively active forms of IRF3 or IRF7, indicating
that C6 acts at the level of the TBK1/IKKe complex. Consistent with this notion, 
C6 immunoprecipitated with the TBK1 complex scaffold proteins TANK, SINTBAD and
NAP1. C6 is expressed early during infection and is present in both nucleus and
cytoplasm. Mutant viruses in which the C6L gene is deleted, or mutated so that
the C6 protein is not expressed, replicated normally in cell culture but were
attenuated in two in vivo models of infection compared to wild type and revertant
controls. Thus C6 contributes to VACV virulence and might do so via the
inhibition of PRR-induced activation of IRF3 and IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3169548
PMID: 21931555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 Jan;71(1):114-9. doi: 10.1136/annrheumdis-2011-200275. Epub
2011 Sep 16.

Novel identification of the IRF7 region as an anticentromere autoantibody
propensity locus in systemic sclerosis.

Carmona FD(1), Gutala R, Simeón CP, Carreira P, Ortego-Centeno N,
Vicente-Rabaneda E, García-Hernández FJ, García de la Peña P, Fernández-Castro M,
Martínez-Estupiñán L, Egurbide MV, Tsao BP, Gourh P, Agarwal SK, Assassi S, Mayes
MD, Arnett FC, Tan FK, Martín J; Spanish Scleroderma Group.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Parasitología y Biomedicina López-Neyra, Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Parque Tecnológico Ciencias de Salud, Avenida del
Conocimiento s/n 18100-Armilla, Granada, Spain. dcarmona@ipb.csic.es

OBJECTIVE: Systemic sclerosis (SSc) and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are
related chronic autoimmune diseases of complex aetiology in which the interferon 
(IFN) pathway plays a key role. Recent studies have reported an association
between IRF7 and SLE which confers a risk to autoantibody production. A study was
undertaken to investigate whether the IRF7 genomic region is also involved in
susceptibility to SSc and the main clinical features.
METHODS: Two case-control sets of Caucasian origin from the USA and Spain,
comprising a total of 2316 cases of SSc and 2347 healthy controls, were included 
in the study. Five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the PHRF1-IRF7-CDHR5
locus were genotyped using TaqMan allelic discrimination technology. A
meta-analysis was performed to test the overall effect of these genetic variants 
on SSc.
RESULTS: Four out of five analysed SNPs were significantly associated with the
presence of anticentromere autoantibodies (ACA) in the patients with SSc in the
combined analysis (rs1131665: p(FDR)=6.14 × 10(-4), OR=0.78; rs4963128:
p(FDR)=6.14 × 10(-4), OR=0.79; rs702966: p(FDR)=3.83 × 10(-3), OR=0.82; and
rs2246614: p(FDR)=3.83 × 10(-3), OR=0.83). Significant p values were also
obtained when the disease was tested globally; however, the statistical
significance was lost when the ACA-positive patients were excluded from the
study, suggesting that these associations rely on ACA positivity. Conditional
logistic regression and allelic combination analyses suggested that the
functional IRF7 SNP rs1131665 is the most likely causal variant.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that variation in the IRF7 genomic region is
associated with the presence of ACA in patients with SSc, supporting other
evidence that this locus represents a common risk factor for autoantibody
production in autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC3369428
PMID: 21926187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Exp Med. 2011 Sep 26;208(10):2099-112. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102667. Epub 2011 Sep
12.

E3 ubiquitin ligase CHIP facilitates Toll-like receptor signaling by recruiting
and polyubiquitinating Src and atypical PKC{zeta}.

Yang M(1), Wang C, Zhu X, Tang S, Shi L, Cao X, Chen T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou
310058, China; National Key Laboratory of Medical Immunology and Institute of
Immunology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai200433, China.

The carboxyl terminus of constitutive heat shock cognate 70 (HSC70)-interacting
protein (CHIP, also known as Stub1) is a U box-containing E3 ubiquitin ligase
that is important for protein quality control. The role of CHIP in innate
immunity is not known. Here, we report that CHIP knockdown inhibits Toll-like
receptor (TLR) 4- and TLR9-driven signaling, but not TLR3-driven signaling;
proinflammatory cytokine and type 1 interferon (IFN) production; and maturation
of antigen-presenting cells, including macrophages and dendritic cells. We
demonstrate that CHIP can recruit the tyrosine kinase Src and atypical protein
kinase C <U+03B6> (PKC<U+03B6>) to the TLR complex, thereby leading to activation of IL-1
receptor-associated kinase 1, TANK-binding kinase 1, and IFN regulatory factors 3
and 7. CHIP acts as an E3 ligase for Src and PKC<U+03B6> during TLR signaling.
CHIP-mediated enhancement of TLR signaling is inhibited by IFNAR deficiency or
expression of ubiquitination resistant mutant forms of Src or PKC<U+03B6>. These
findings suggest that CHIP facilitates the formation of a TLR signaling complex
by recruiting, ubiquitinating, and activating Src and PKC<U+03B6>.

PMCID: PMC3182058
PMID: 21911421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cell Immunol. 2011;271(2):342-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cellimm.2011.07.014. Epub 2011
Aug 10.

Targeting interferon regulatory factors to inhibit activation of the type I IFN
response: implications for treatment of autoimmune disorders.

Sweeney SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California,
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, United States. ssweeney@ucsd.edu

The type I interferon (IFN) response plays a critical role in autoimmunity and is
induced by innate receptor ligation and activation of IFN-regulatory factors
(IRF). The present study investigated the roles and functional hierarchy of IRF3,
IRF5, and IRF7 in expression of cytokines, chemokines, and matrix
metalloproteinases in human THP1 monocytic cells. Targeted IRF knockdown was
followed by evaluation of gene expression, promoter activation, and mRNA
stability to determine the role of IRF as potential targets for modulating IFN
responses in patients with autoimmune diseases. IRF played a distinct role in
regulation of type I IFN gene expression in human monocytic cells and
specifically regulated gene expression through the IFN-stimulated response
element, with no contribution to transcription of traditionally AP-1 or NF-kB
regulated genes. IRF7 regulated IL-6 gene expression by increasing IL-6 mRNA
stability. IRF regulation of inflammation and induction of the IFN signature
might contribute to the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases and therefore
represent novel therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3248225
PMID: 21872224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Virol. 2011 Oct;85(20):10814-25. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00104-11. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

Myxoma virus induces type I interferon production in murine plasmacytoid
dendritic cells via a TLR9/MyD88-, IRF5/IRF7-, and IFNAR-dependent pathway.

Dai P(1), Cao H, Merghoub T, Avogadri F, Wang W, Parikh T, Fang CM, Pitha PM,
Fitzgerald KA, Rahman MM, McFadden G, Hu X, Houghton AN, Shuman S, Deng L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
NY 10065, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2011 Dec;85(23):12835.

Poxviruses are large DNA viruses that replicate in the cytoplasm of infected
cells. Myxoma virus is a rabbit poxvirus that belongs to the Leporipoxvirus
genus. It causes a lethal disease called myxomatosis in European rabbits but
cannot sustain any detectable infection in nonlagomorphs. Vaccinia virus is a
prototypal orthopoxvirus that was used as a vaccine to eradicate smallpox. Myxoma
virus is nonpathogenic in mice, whereas systemic infection with vaccinia virus
can be lethal even in immunocompetent mice. Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs)
are potent type I interferon (IFN)-producing cells that play important roles in
antiviral innate immunity. How poxviruses are sensed by pDCs to induce type I IFN
production is not well understood. Here we report that infection of primary
murine pDCs with myxoma virus, but not with vaccinia virus, induces IFN-a, IFN-ß,
tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and interleukin-12p70 (IL-12p70) production. Using
pDCs derived from genetic knockout mice, we show that the myxoma virus-induced
innate immune response requires the endosomal DNA sensor TLR9 and its adaptor
MyD88, transcription factors IRF5 and IRF7, and the type I IFN positive-feedback 
loop mediated by IFNAR1. It is independent of the cytoplasmic RNA sensing pathway
mediated by the mitochondrial adaptor molecule MAVS, the TLR3 adaptor TRIF, or
the transcription factor IRF3. Using pharmacological inhibitors, we demonstrate
that myxoma virus-induced type I IFN and IL-12p70 production in murine pDCs is
also dependent on phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) and Akt. Furthermore, our 
results reveal that the N-terminal Z-DNA/RNA binding domain of vaccinia virulence
factor E3, which is missing in the orthologous M029 protein expressed by myxoma
virus, plays an inhibitory role in poxvirus sensing and innate cytokine
production by murine pDCs.

PMCID: PMC3187486
PMID: 21835795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Immunity. 2011 Aug 26;35(2):194-207. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.05.016. Epub 2011
Aug 4.

Innate immune recognition of an AT-rich stem-loop DNA motif in the Plasmodium
falciparum genome.

Sharma S(1), DeOliveira RB, Kalantari P, Parroche P, Goutagny N, Jiang Z, Chan J,
Bartholomeu DC, Lauw F, Hall JP, Barber GN, Gazzinelli RT, Fitzgerald KA,
Golenbock DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Department of Medicine,
University of Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 
01605, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Aug 26;35(2):149-51.
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2011 Sep;11(9):569.

Although Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) has been implicated in cytokine and type I
interferon (IFN) production during malaria in humans and mice, the high AT
content of the Plasmodium falciparum genome prompted us to examine the
possibility that malarial DNA triggered TLR9-independent pathways. Over 6000
ATTTTTAC ("AT-rich") motifs are present in the genome of P. falciparum, which we 
show here potently induce type I IFNs. Parasite DNA, parasitized erythrocytes and
oligonucleotides containing the AT-rich motif induce type I IFNs via a pathway
that did not involve the previously described sensors TLR9, DAI, RNA
polymerase-III or IFI16/p204. Rather, AT-rich DNA sensing involved an unknown
receptor that coupled to the STING, TBK1 and IRF3-IRF7 signaling pathway. Mice
lacking IRF3, IRF7, the kinase TBK1 or the type I IFN receptor were resistant to 
otherwise lethal cerebral malaria. Collectively, these observations implicate
AT-rich DNA sensing via STING, TBK1 and IRF3-IRF7 in P. falciparum malaria.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3162998
PMID: 21820332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Oct;9(10):1356-65. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0185. Epub 
2011 Aug 4.

Suppression of IRF4 by IRF1, 3, and 7 in Noxa expression is a necessary event for
IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated tumor elimination.

Piya S(1), Moon AR, Song PI, Hiscott J, Lin R, Seol DW, Kim TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Chosun University School of Medicine, Dong-Gu,
Gwang-ju 501-759, Korea.

IFN-<U+03B3> plays a critical role in tumor immunosurveillance by affecting either
immune cells or tumor cells; however, IFN-mediated effects on tumor elimination
are largely unknown. In this study, we showed that IFN regulatory factors (IRF)
modulated by IFNs up- and downregulated Noxa expression, a prodeath BH3 protein, 
in various cancer cells. Inhibition of Noxa expression using short hairpin RNA in
tumor cells leads to resistance against lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced tumor
elimination, in which IFN-<U+03B3> is known as a critical effecter in mice. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis in both CT26 cells and SP2/0 cells, sensitive and
resistant to LPS-induced tumor elimination, respectively, revealed that the
responsiveness of IRF1, 3, 4, and 7 in the Noxa promoter region in response to
IFN-<U+03B3> might be crucial in LPS-induced tumor elimination. IRF1, 3, and 7 were
upregulated by IFN-<U+03B3> and activated Noxa expression, leading to the death of Noxa 
wild-type baby mouse kidney (BMK) cells but not of Noxa-deficient BMK cells. In
contrast, IRF4 acts as a repressor for Noxa expression and inhibits cell death
induced by IRF1, 3, or 7. Therefore, although IFN-<U+03B3> alone are not able to induce 
cell death in tumor cells in vitro, Noxa induction by IFN-<U+03B3>, which is regulated
by the balance between its activators (IRF1, 3, and 7) and its repressor (IRF4), 
is crucial to increasing the susceptibility of tumor cells to immune
cell-mediated cytotoxicity.

PMID: 21816905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Oncogene. 2012 Mar 8;31(10):1242-53. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.320. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Absent in Melanoma 2 (AIM2) is an important mediator of interferon-dependent and 
-independent HLA-DRA and HLA-DRB gene expression in colorectal cancers.

Lee J(1), Li L, Gretz N, Gebert J, Dihlmann S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Institute of Pathology, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

Absent in Melanoma 2 (AIM2) is a member of the HIN-200 family of hematopoietic,
IFN-inducible, nuclear proteins, associated with both, infection defense and
tumor pathology. Recently, AIM2 was found to act as a DNA sensor in innate
immunity. In addition, we and others have previously demonstrated a high
frequency of AIM2-alterations in microsatellite unstable (MSI-H) tumors. To
further elucidate AIM2 function in colorectal tumors, we here addressed
AIM2-responsive target genes by microarray based gene expression profiling of
22<U+2009>244 human genes. A total of 111 transcripts were significantly upregulated,
whereas 80 transcripts turned out to be significantly downregulated in HCT116
cells, constitutively expressing AIM2, compared with AIM2-negative cells. Among
the upregulated genes that were validated by quantitative PCR and western
blotting we recognized several interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs: IFIT1, IFIT2,
IFIT3, IFI6, IRF7, ISG15, HLA-DRA, HLA-DRB, TLR3 and CIITA), as well as genes
involved in intercellular adhesion and matrix remodeling. Expression of ISGs
correlated with expression of AIM2 in 10 different IFN-<U+03B3> treated colorectal
cancer cell lines. Moreover, small interfering RNA-mediated knock-down of AIM2
resulted in reduced expression of HLA-DRA, HLA-DRB and CIITA in IFN-<U+03B3>-treated
cells. IFN-<U+03B3> independent induction of HLA-DR genes and their encoded proteins was
also demonstrated upon doxycyclin-regulated transient induction of AIM2.
Luciferase reporter assays revealed induction of the HLA-DR promoter upon AIM2
transfection in different cell lines. STAT-signaling was not involved in IFN-<U+03B3>
independent induction of ISGs, arguing against participation of cytokines
released in an autostimulating manner. Our data indicate that AIM2 mediates both 
IFN-<U+03B3> dependent and independent induction of several ISGs, including genes
encoding the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II antigens HLA-DR-a
and -ß. This suggests a novel role of the IFN/AIM2/ISG cascade likewise in cancer
cells.

PMCID: PMC3307062
PMID: 21804607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Immunol. 2011 Sep 1;187(5):2531-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100642. Epub 2011 Jul
27.

Fish MITA serves as a mediator for distinct fish IFN gene activation dependent on
IRF3 or IRF7.

Sun F(1), Zhang YB, Liu TK, Shi J, Wang B, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China.

In mammals, cytosolic sensors retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I)-like
receptors (RLRs) activate multiple signaling cascades initiating IFN-a/ß
expression. IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) is required for the activation of
IFN-ß, which, in turn, primes the expression of most IFN-a genes by IFN-induced
IRF7 through the STAT1 pathway. In fish, RIG-I overexpression inhibits virus
infection by induction of IFN response; however, the subtle signaling cascade
mechanism remains to be identified. In this study, we clone an ortholog of MITA, 
a recently identified adaptor responsible for RLR pathway, from crucian carp
(Carassius auratus L.), and demonstrate its ability to suppress viral replication
through IRF3/7-dependent IFN response. The pivotal signaling molecules of RLR
pathway, including RIG-I, melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5, laboratory 
of genetics and physiology 2, and TANK-binding kinase 1, are also cloned and
characterized, confirming that the RLR-mediated IFN activation is conserved from 
fish to mammals. Further characterization of distinct IFN gene activation reveals
that zebrafish IFN1 and IFN3 are induced by the MITA pathway but are dependent on
distinct transcription factors. Whereas fish IFN genes cannot be classified into 
IFN-a or IFN-ß, zebrafish IFN1 is primarily regulated by IRF3, thereby resembling
that of IFN-ß, and zebrafish IFN3 is regulated by IRF7, thereby resembling of
those of IFN-as. In contrast with mammalian IFN-a/ß, zebrafish IFN1 and IFN3 are 
induced by the basally expressed IRF3 or IRF7, both of which are upregulated by
IFN and virus infection. Collectively, these data suggest that IFN genes in fish 
and mammals have evolved independently to acquire a similar mechanism triggering 
their expression.

PMID: 21795596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Gastroenterol. 2011 Nov;46(11):1307-15. doi: 10.1007/s00535-011-0440-8. Epub
2011 Jul 23.

Early activation of interferon-stimulated genes in human liver allografts:
relationship with acute rejection and histological outcome.

Minisini R(1), Giarda P, Grossi G, Bitetto D, Toniutto P, Falleti E, Avellini C, 
Occhino G, Fabris C, Pirisi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Università del Piemonte
Orientale A. Avogadro, Via G. Solaroli 17, 28100 Novara, Italy.
rosalba.minisini@med.unipmn.it

BACKGROUND: Innate immunity mechanisms have been shown to play a paramount role
in organ transplantation. Our aim was to investigate the hypothesis that
activation of the interferon system may affect clinically relevant outcomes, such
as acute rejection and/or early fibrosis progression, after liver
transplantation.
METHODS: We studied 71 consecutive recipients (57 males; 25 with hepatitis C) who
underwent two per protocol graft biopsies: the first, within 60 days after the
transplant operation (median 24) and the second, after 1 year. The mRNA
expression for five interferon-stimulated genes (Mx1, OAS2, PKR, IRF7A, IFI16)
was measured on the first biopsy specimens. The main outcome measures were acute 
rejection during the first post-transplant year and fibrosis progression at the
second biopsy.
RESULTS: On multivariate analysis, the independent predictors of gene expression 
were hepatitis C (Mx1, OAS2, PKR and IFI16), donor age (IFI16) and recipient
gender (IRF7A) (P < .05 for all). During the first post-transplant year, 19/71
patients (27%) had acute cellular rejection. At multivariate analysis, acute
cellular rejection was independently predicted by high IRF7A mRNA expression. At 
the end of follow-up, 25 patients had some degree of fibrosis (F2 or higher in
seven cases). On multivariate analysis, hepatitis C etiology, recipient age, and 
OAS2 overexpression were independent predictors of early fibrosis progression.
CONCLUSIONS: In the early postoperative period of liver transplantation,
interferon-stimulated gene activation is dependent on hepatitis C recurrence (the
main factor responsible for early fibrosis progression) and donor age, and is
related to the risk of acute cellular rejection.

PMID: 21789480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Anim Genet. 2011 Aug;42(4):386-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2010.02154.x. Epub
2011 Feb 6.

An intronic polymorphism in the porcine IRF7 gene is associated with better
health and immunity of the host during Sarcocystis infection, and affects
interferon signalling.

Brock AJ(1), Matika O, Wilson AD, Anderson J, Morin AC, Finlayson HA, Reiner G,
Willems H, Bishop SC, Archibald AL, Ait-Ali T.

Author information: 
(1)The Roslin Institute and Royal School of Veterinary Studies, The University of
Edinburgh, Roslin BioCentre, Midlothian, UK.

Erratum in
    Anim Genet. 2012 Apr;43(2):238. Broke, A [corrected to Brock, A J].

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), as a key regulator of type I interferon
response, plays an important role during innate response against viral infection.
Although well conserved across species, the structure of IRF7 and its function
during parasite infection are not well documented in farm animals, such as the
pig. To bridge this gap, we have determined the porcine IRF7 gene structure and
identified two intronic single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), SNP g.748G>C and 
SNP g.761A>G, in commercial pig breeds. The distribution of SNP g.761A>G in
multiple breeds suggested that it was in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and allowed
us to map it at the top of SSC2. We found that during Sarcocystis miescheriana
infection, the G allele was associated with high lymphocyte levels (P < 0.02),
reduced drop in platelet levels (P < 0.002) and IgG1-Th2-dominated response (P < 
0.05). This suggests that the G allele was associated with better health and
immunity of the host during Sarcocystis infection. Furthermore, we have also
provided suggestive evidence that the G allele of SNPc.761A>G enhances the
transactivation activity of IRF7, possibly by improving IRF7 transcript splicing 
of intron-3. These findings would suggest that IRF7, as a transcriptional
regulator, is involved in the defence mechanism against a larger spectrum of
pathogens, and in more host species, than initially anticipated.

© 2011 The Authors, Animal Genetics © 2011 Stichting International Foundation for
Animal Genetics.

PMID: 21749421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jul 10;12(8):733-41. doi: 10.1038/ni.2069.

Essential role for the prolyl isomerase Pin1 in Toll-like receptor signaling and 
type I interferon-mediated immunity.

Tun-Kyi A(1), Finn G, Greenwood A, Nowak M, Lee TH, Asara JM, Tsokos GC,
Fitzgerald K, Israel E, Li X, Exley M, Nicholson LK, Lu KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) shape innate and adaptive immunity to microorganisms. 
The enzyme IRAK1 transduces signals from TLRs, but mechanisms for its activation 
and regulation remain unknown. We found here that TLR7 and TLR9 activated the
isomerase Pin1, which then bound to IRAK1; this resulted in activation of IRAK1
and facilitated its release from the receptor complex to activate the
transcription factor IRF7 and induce type I interferons. Consequently,
Pin1-deficient cells and mice failed to mount TLR-mediated, interferon-dependent 
innate and adaptive immune responses. Given the critical role of aberrant
activation of IRAK1 and type I interferons in various immune diseases,
controlling IRAK1 activation via inhibition of Pin1 may represent a useful
therapeutic approach.

PMCID: PMC3298750
PMID: 21743479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Aug;22(8):1443-52. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2010121260. Epub 2011 
Jul 8.

IRF4 deficiency abrogates lupus nephritis despite enhancing systemic cytokine
production.

Lech M(1), Weidenbusch M, Kulkarni OP, Ryu M, Darisipudi MN, Susanti HE,
Mittruecker HW, Mak TW, Anders HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Medizinische Poliklinik, University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.

The IFN-regulatory factors IRF1, IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 modulate processes involved
in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus and lupus nephritis, but the contribution
of IRF4, which has multiple roles in innate and adaptive immunity, is unknown. To
determine a putative pathogenic role of IRF4 in lupus, we crossed Irf4-deficient 
mice with autoimmune C57BL/6-(Fas)lpr mice. IRF4 deficiency associated with
increased activation of antigen-presenting cells in C57BL/6-(Fas)lpr mice,
resulting in a massive increase in plasma levels of TNF and IL-12p40, suggesting 
that IRF4 suppresses cytokine release in these mice. Nevertheless, IRF4
deficiency completely protected these mice from glomerulonephritis and lung
disease. The mice were hypogammaglobulinemic and lacked antinuclear and
anti-dsDNA autoantibodies, revealing the requirement of IRF4 for the maturation
of plasma cells. As a consequence, Irf4-deficient C57BL/6-(Fas)lpr mice neither
developed immune complex disease nor glomerular activation of complement. In
addition, lack of IRF4 impaired the maturation of Th17 effector T cells and
reduced plasma levels of IL-17 and IL-21, which are cytokines known to contribute
to autoimmune tissue injury. In summary, IRF4 deficiency enhances systemic
inflammation and the activation of antigen-presenting cells but also prevents the
maturation of plasma cells and effector T cells. Because these adaptive immune
effectors are essential for the evolution of lupus nephritis, we conclude that
IRF4 promotes the development of lupus nephritis despite suppressing
antigen-presenting cells.

PMCID: PMC3148699
PMID: 21742731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Med Virol. 2011 Sep;83(9):1597-607. doi: 10.1002/jmv.22158.

Inverse association of IL28B genotype and liver mRNA expression of genes
promoting or suppressing antiviral state.

Abe H(1), Hayes CN, Ochi H, Tsuge M, Miki D, Hiraga N, Imamura M, Takahashi S,
Kubo M, Nakamura Y, Kamatani N, Chayama K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Digestive Diseases, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN,
Hiroshima, Japan.

High intrahepatic expression levels of interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) in
chronic hepatitis C patients are associated with poor response to interferon plus
ribavirin combination therapy. Expression levels of 16 genes (OAS1, PKR, MxA,
ISG15, RIG-I, TLR8, IRF7, IRF9, NFKBIA, IL28A/IL28B, IL29, IL28RA, IL10RB,
IFNAR2, and STAT1) that promote antiviral state and 4 genes (SOCS1, SOCS3,
Zc3h12a, and A20) that suppress antiviral state were analyzed using real-time PCR
assays in 133 liver biopsy samples from patients infected with genotypes 1 or 2. 
Expression levels of genes promoting antiviral state were positively correlated
with each other but were not correlated with those that suppress antiviral state.
Expression levels of some ISGs were inversely associated with common
polymorphisms within the IL28B locus. Genes promoting antiviral state were
expressed lower (e.g., ISG15, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.42E-12 and MxA, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.40E-11) in individuals 
with the protective rs12979860 CC genotype, and genes suppressing antiviral state
were expressed higher (A20, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00107 and Zc3h12a, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00129, respectively), 
although some ISGs were not significant after the Bonferroni correction. The
expression levels of both an antiviral (MxA) and a suppressor (SOCS1) ISG were
independent predictors for non-response. These results suggest that rs12979860
genotype may be associated with response to combination therapy through an
inverse relationship between antiviral and suppressor ISGs in the liver.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21739451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Oct;63(10):3177-8; author reply 3178-9. doi:
10.1002/art.30519.

Association between functional IRF7 variant and systemic lupus erythematosus may 
need more critical examination: comment on the article by Fu et al.

Wang F, Zou YF, Sun GP.

Comment on
    Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Mar;63(3):749-54.

PMID: 21739418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin. 2011 Oct;29(8):573-80. doi:
10.1016/j.eimc.2011.04.006. Epub 2011 Jun 30.

[Gene expression profiling in the first twelve weeks of treatment in chronic
hepatitis C patients].

[Article in Spanish]

Jiménez-Sousa MÁ(1), Almansa R, de la Fuente C, Caro-Patón A, Ruiz L,
Sánchez-Antolín G, González JM, Aller R, Alcaide N, Largo P, Ortiz de Lejarazu R,
Bermejo-Martín JF.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación en Infección e Inmunidad, Servicio de Microbiología,
Hospital Clínico Universitario, IECSCYL, Valladolid, España.
jimenezsousa@yahoo.es

INTRODUCTION: Gene expression profiling in the first weeks of treatment of
patients with chronic hepatitis C may contribute to better evaluate the response 
to interferon-based therapy. The objective of this study was to evaluate the gene
expression profiles of early responders and non-responders before, and after 12
weeks of treatment with peginterferon alfa and ribavirin.
METHODS: Gene expression profiles were analysed in 12 patients with chronic
hepatitis C, and scheduled for treatment with peginterferon alpha and ribavirin.
RESULTS: Of the 12 patients studied, six showed a complete early virological
response, while six failed to control viremia. In early responders, treatment
with peginterferon and ribavirin induced an increased expression of a larger
number of interferon-induced genes (ISG15, IFI6, IFI44L, IFI27, MX1, OASL, IRF7, 
IFIT3, IFITM1, EIF2AK2, HERC5 and APOBEC3) than in non-responders (ISG15, IFI44L,
IFI27, IRF7, USP18) in the first twelve weeks of treatment (P<0.05). In both
groups, there were changes in the levels of certain genes poorly described in the
treatment of hepatitis C so far.
CONCLUSIONS: The gene expression profiles described in this study provide a new
insight to understanding the pathogenesis of the disease and treatment effect.
The more marked effect of the treatment on the expression of interferon-response 
genes observed in early responders could explain their better control of viral
load.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier España, S.L. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21722999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Infect Immun. 2011 Sep;79(9):3733-43. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05008-11. Epub 2011 Jun
20.

Beta interferon-mediated activation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription protein 1 interferes with Rickettsia conorii replication in human
endothelial cells.

Colonne PM(1), Eremeeva ME, Sahni SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, USA.

Infection of the endothelial cell lining of blood vessels with Rickettsia
conorii, the causative agent of Mediterranean spotted fever, results in
endothelial activation. We investigated the effects of R. conorii infection on
the status of the Janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and activator of
transcription protein (STAT) signaling pathway in human microvascular endothelial
cells (HMECs), the most relevant host cell type, in light of rickettsial tropism 
for microvascular endothelium in vivo. R. conorii infection induced
phosphorylation of STAT1 on tyrosine 701 and serine 727 at 24, 48, and 72 h
postinfection in HMECs. Employing transcription profile analysis and neutralizing
antibodies, we further determined that beta interferon (IFN-ß) production and
secretion are critical for STAT1 activation. Secreted IFN-ß further amplified its
own expression via a positive-feedback mechanism, while expression of
transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) and IRF9, implicated 
in the IFN-ß-STAT1 feedback loop, was also induced. Metabolic activity of
rickettsiae was essential for the IFN-ß-mediated response(s) because tetracycline
treatment inhibited R. conorii replication, IFN-ß expression, and STAT1
phosphorylation. Inclusion of IFN-ß-neutralizing antibody during infection
resulted in significantly enhanced R. conorii replication, whereas addition of
exogenous IFN-ß had the opposite inhibitory effect. Finally, small interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown further confirmed a protective role for STAT1 against
intracellular R. conorii replication. In concert, these findings implicate an
important role for IFN-ß-mediated STAT1 activation in innate immune responses of 
vascular endothelium to R. conorii infection.

PMCID: PMC3165482
PMID: 21690236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Virus Res. 2011 Sep;160(1-2):143-9. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.06.003. Epub
2011 Jun 12.

Cytoplasmic localized infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) encoded by bovine
herpesvirus 1 inhibits ß interferon promoter activity and reduces IRF3
(interferon response factor 3) protein levels.

da Silva LF(1), Gaudreault N, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University of Nebraska,
Lincoln, NE 68503, United States.

Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1), an alpha-herpesvirinae subfamily member,
establishes a life-long latent infection in sensory neurons. Periodically, BHV-1 
reactivates from latency, infectious virus is spread, and consequently virus
transmission occurs. BHV-1 acute infection causes upper respiratory track
infections and conjunctivitis in infected cattle. As a result of transient
immune-suppression, BHV-1 infections can also lead to life-threatening secondary 
bacterial pneumonia that is referred to as bovine respiratory disease. The
infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) encoded by BHV-1 reduces human ß-interferon
(IFN-ß) promoter activity, in part, by inducing degradation of interferon
response factor 3 (IRF3) and interacting with IRF7. In contrast to humans, cattle
contain three IFN-ß genes. All three bovine IFN-ß proteins have anti-viral
activity: but each IFN-ß gene has a distinct transcriptional promoter. We have
recently cloned and characterized the three bovine IFN-ß promoters. Relative to
the human IFN-ß promoter, each of the three IFN-ß promoters contain differences
in the four positive regulatory domains that are required for virus-induced
activity. In this study, we demonstrate that bICP0 effectively inhibits bovine
IFN-ß promoter activity following transfection of low passage bovine cells with
interferon response factor 3 (IRF3) or IRF7. A bICP0 mutant that localizes to the
cytoplasm inhibits bovine IFN-ß promoter activity as efficiently as wt bICP0. The
cytoplasmic localized bICP0 protein also induced IRF3 degradation with similar
efficiency as wt bICP0. In summary, these studies suggested that cytoplasmic
localized bICP0 plays a role in inhibiting the IFN-ß response during productive
infection.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3412422
PMID: 21689696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. J Virol. 2011 Aug;85(16):8002-11. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00330-11. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Classical swine fever virus N(pro) limits type I interferon induction in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells by interacting with interferon regulatory factor 7.

Fiebach AR(1), Guzylack-Piriou L, Python S, Summerfield A, Ruggli N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunoprophylaxis (IVI), Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.

Viruses are detected by different classes of pattern recognition receptors that
lead to the activation of interferon regulatory factors (IRF) and consequently to
the induction of alpha/beta interferon (IFN-a/ß). In turn, efficient viral
strategies to escape the type I IFN-induced antiviral mechanisms have evolved.
Previous studies established that pestivirus N(pro) antagonizes the early innate 
immune response by targeting the transcription factor IRF3 for proteasomal
degradation. Here, we report that N(pro) of classical swine fever virus (CSFV)
interacts also with IRF7, another mediator of type I IFN induction. We
demonstrate that the Zn-binding domain of N(pro) is essential for the interaction
of N(pro) with IRF7. For IRF3 and IRF7, the DNA-binding domain, the central
region, and most of the regulatory domain are required for the interaction with
N(pro). Importantly, the induction of IRF7-dependent type I IFN responses in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) is reduced after wild-type CSFV infection
compared with infection with virus mutants unable to interact with IRF7. This is 
associated with lower levels of IRF7 in pDC. Consequently, wild-type but not
N(pro) mutant CSFV-infected pDC show reduced responses to other stimuli. Taken
together, the results of this study show that CSFV N(pro) is capable of
manipulating the function of IRF7 in pDC and provides the virus with an
additional strategy to circumvent the innate defense.

PMCID: PMC3147952
PMID: 21680532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Virol. 2011 Aug;85(16):8328-37. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00570-11. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Oncogenic IRFs provide a survival advantage for Epstein-Barr virus- or human
T-cell leukemia virus type 1-transformed cells through induction of BIC
expression.

Wang L(1), Toomey NL, Diaz LA, Walker G, Ramos JC, Barber GN, Ning S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Viral Oncology Program, Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA. sning@med.miami.edu

miR-155, processed from the B-cell integration cluster (BIC), is one of the few
well-studied microRNAs (miRNAs) and is involved in both innate immunity and
tumorigenesis. BIC/miR-155 is induced by distinct signaling pathways, but little 
is known about the underlying mechanisms. We have identified two conserved
potential interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF)-binding/interferon-stimulated 
response element motifs in the Bic gene promoter. Two oncogenic IRFs, IRF4 and
-7, in addition to some other members of the family, bind to and significantly
transactivate the Bic promoter. Correspondingly, the endogenous levels of IRF4
and -7 are correlated with that of the BIC transcript in Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV)-transformed cells. However, RNA interference studies have shown that
depletion of IRF4, rather than of IRF7, dramatically decreases the endogenous
level of BIC by up to 70% in EBV- or human T-cell leukemia virus type 1
(HTLV1)-transformed cell lines and results in apoptosis and reduction of
proliferation rates that are restored by transient expression of miR-155.
Moreover, the endogenous levels of the miR-155 target, SHIP1, are consistently
elevated in EBV- and HTLV1-transformed cell lines stably expressing shIRF4. In
contrast, transient expression of IRF4 decreases the SHIP1 level in EBV-negative 
B cells. Furthermore, the level of IRF4 mRNA is significantly correlated with
that of BIC in adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia (ATLL) tumors. These results show
that IRF4 plays an important role in the regulation of BIC in the context of EBV 
and HTLV1 infection. Our findings have identified Bic as the first miRNA-encoding
gene for IRFs and provide evidence for a novel molecular mechanism underlying the
IRF/BIC pathway in viral oncogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3147954
PMID: 21680528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Neurology. 2011 Jun 14;76(24):2079-88. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31821f440a.

Type I interferon and Toll-like receptor expression characterizes inflammatory
myopathies.

Cappelletti C(1), Baggi F, Zolezzi F, Biancolini D, Beretta O, Severa M, Coccia
EM, Confalonieri P, Morandi L, Mora M, Mantegazza R, Bernasconi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology IV, Neurological Institute Foundation Carlo Besta, Via
Celoria 11, 20133 Milan, Italy.

OBJECTIVES: Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM), adult dermatomyositis, and
polymyositis (PM) are idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs) characterized by 
muscle infiltration and specific muscle fiber alterations. They are thought to
have an autoimmune etiology, but triggering factors, and how immunologic attack
induces muscle weakness, remain unknown. Recent evidence suggests a key role for 
type I interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immunity in dermatomyositis, which we
explored in JDM, dermatomyositis, and PM by gene expression profiling, and other 
methods.
METHODS: Ten IIM and 5 control muscle biopsies were assessed for expression of
approximately 16,000 genes by microarray; 37 additional IIM, 10
dystrophinopathic, and 14 nonmyopathic control muscles were studied for type I
IFN-dependent genes, and Toll-like receptor (TLR) expression by immunochemistry
and PCR.
RESULTS: Type I IFN-dependent transcripts were significantly upregulated in IIM
muscles compared to controls; in JDM the most expressed were ISG15 (408-fold),
IFIT3 (261-fold), MX1 (99-fold), and IRF7 (37-fold). IFN-ß (but not IFN-a)
transcripts were upregulated in PM as well as dermatomyositis/JDM. TLR3 was
upregulated particularly in JDM, being localized on vascular endothelial cells,
muscle infiltrating cells (mainly myeloid dendritic cells), and regenerating
myofibers; TLR7 and TLR9 proteins were present in IIM (prominently in PM), mainly
on cell infiltrates, particularly plasma cells, and on some injured myofibers.
CONCLUSIONS: IFN-ß and type I IFN-induced molecules are involved in PM as well as
JDM/dermatomyositis. Endosomal TLRs (effectors of innate immunity) are also
involved (but differently) in the 3 conditions, further suggesting viral
involvement, although TLR activation could be secondary to tissue damage.

PMID: 21670437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Neurosci. 2011 Jun 8;31(23):8456-63. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0821-11.2011.

Multiple preconditioning paradigms converge on interferon regulatory
factor-dependent signaling to promote tolerance to ischemic brain injury.

Stevens SL(1), Leung PY, Vartanian KB, Gopalan B, Yang T, Simon RP, Stenzel-Poore
MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon 97239, USA.

Ischemic tolerance can be induced by numerous preconditioning stimuli, including 
various Toll-like receptor (TLR) ligands. We have shown previously that systemic 
administration of the TLR4 ligand LPS or the TLR9 ligand unmethylated CpG
oligodeoxynucleotide before transient brain ischemia in mice confers substantial 
protection against ischemic damage. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of
preconditioning, we compared brain genomic profiles in response to
preconditioning with these TLR ligands and with preconditioning via exposure to
brief ischemia. We found that exposure to the TLR ligands and brief ischemia
induced genomic changes in the brain characteristic of a TLR pathway-mediated
response. Interestingly, all three preconditioning stimuli resulted in a
reprogrammed response to stroke injury that converged on a shared subset of 13
genes not evident in the genomic profile from brains that were subjected to
stroke without prior preconditioning. Analysis of the promoter region of these
shared genes showed sequences required for interferon regulatory factor
(IRF)-mediated transcription. The importance of this IRF gene network was tested 
using mice deficient in IRF3 or IRF7. Our data show that both transcription
factors are required for TLR-mediated preconditioning and neuroprotection. These 
studies are the first to discover a convergent mechanism of neuroprotection
induced by preconditioning--one that potentially results in reprogramming of the 
TLR-mediated response to stroke and requires the presence of IRF3 and IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3130521
PMID: 21653850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Rheumatol. 2011 Sep;38(9):1914-9. doi: 10.3899/jrheum.101004. Epub 2011 Jun 1.

The potential role of interferon-regulatory factor 7 among Taiwanese patients
with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Lin LH(1), Ling P, Liu MF.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology and Immunology, Department of Internal Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 138 Sheng Li Road, Tainan, Taiwan 704,
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Type I interferons (IFN), especially IFN-a, have been proposed to
underlie the pathogenesis of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Members of the
IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family, which regulate IFN expression, have been
implicated as risk factors for SLE. Our aims were to investigate the expression
of IRF7 and its correlation with disease activity and to explore the association 
in Taiwanese patients between 2 genetic single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) of 
IRF7 and SLE.
METHODS: IRF7 messenger RNA (mRNA) levels were measured in peripheral blood
mononuclear cells by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction in
51 adult patients with SLE and 65 age-matched and sex-matched controls. Their
serum IFN-a levels were determined by ELISA and the clinical manifestations were 
recorded at the same time. Two IRF7 SNP, rs1061501 and rs1061502, were examined
by genotyping across 92 patients with SLE and 92 age and sex-matched healthy
control subjects.
RESULTS: Compared with controls, the expression of IRF7 mRNA was significantly
increased in patients with SLE and was positively correlated with both the serum 
level of IFN-a and lupus disease activity. The distribution of SNP rs1061501 by
genotype (CC, CT, and TT) and by allele (C, T) was significantly different
between the SLE and the control group (p = 0.028 for genotype and p = 0.009 for
allele). There were no significant differences for SNP rs1061502.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that dysregulation of IRF7 might mediate an
excessive production of IFN-a, which then exerts a crucial effect on the
pathogenesis of human SLE. The IRF7 SNP rs1061501 TT genotype and T allele are
enriched in Taiwanese patients with SLE and thus would seem to be associated with
an increased risk of developing SLE.

PMID: 21632682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Apr;51(4):610-8. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ker154.
Epub 2011 May 25.

Synoviocyte innate immune responses: TANK-binding kinase-1 as a potential
therapeutic target in rheumatoid arthritis.

Hammaker D(1), Boyle DL, Firestein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California
San Diego, School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Dr. MC0656, La Jolla, USA.
dhammaker@ucsd.edu

Comment in
    Rheumatology (Oxford). 2012 Apr;51(4):588-9.

OBJECTIVES: Innate immune responses in the rheumatoid synovium contribute to
inflammation and joint destruction in RA. Two I<U+03BA>B kinase (IKK)-related kinases,
TNF receptor associated factor (TRAF) family member-associated nuclear factor
<U+03BA>-light-chain enhancer of activated B cells (NF-<U+03BA>B) activator (TANK)-binding
kinase 1 (TBK1) and IKKe, potentially regulate synovitis by activating IFN
response genes. These kinases induce the expression of inflammatory mediators
such as C-X-C motif ligand 10 (CXCL10)/IFN-<U+03B3>-induced protein 10<U+2009>kDa (IP-10) in
fibroblast-like synoviocytes (FLS). Since IP-10 is a promising therapeutic target
in RA, we evaluated whether blocking TBK1 might be an effective way to modulate
IP-10 expression.
METHODS: Wild-type (WT) and IKKe(-/-) FLS were transfected with TBK1 or control
small interfering RNA (siRNA) and stimulated with polyinosinic
acid<U+2009>:<U+2009>polycytidylic acid [poly(I:C)]. Gene expression was assayed using
quantitative PCR. Cytokine production in culture supernatants was measured by
Luminex multiplex analysis. IFN-regulatory factor (IRF3) dimerization was
determined by native PAGE. IFN-ß and IP-10 promoter activity was measured using
luciferase reporter constructs.
RESULTS: Initial studies showed that siRNA markedly decreased TBK1 expression in 
cultured FLS. Poly(I:C)-induced IRF7 gene expression was inhibited in the absence
of TBK1, but not IKKe. IRF3 gene expression was similar to WT cells in TBK1 or
IKKe-deficient FLS. IRF3 dimerization required both TBK1 and IKKe. Surprisingly, 
IRF3-mediated gene and protein expression of IFN-ß and IP-10 was dependent on
TBK1, not IKKe. Promoter constructs showed that TBK1 decreased IP-10 gene
transcription and IP-10 mRNA stability was unaffected by TBK1 deficiency.
CONCLUSION: Based on the selective regulation of IP-10 in FLS, TBK1 appears to be
the optimal IKK-related kinase to target in RA.

PMCID: PMC3306173
PMID: 21613249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Sep 1;39(16):7300-7. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr325. Epub 2011
May 19.

Structures of apo IRF-3 and IRF-7 DNA binding domains: effect of loop L1 on DNA
binding.

De Ioannes P(1), Escalante CR, Aggarwal AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Structural and Chemical Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine,
Box 1677, 1425 Madison Avenue, NY 10029, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 are transcription factors essential
in the activation of interferon-ß (IFN-ß) gene in response to viral infections.
Although, both proteins recognize the same consensus IRF binding site AANNGAAA,
they have distinct DNA binding preferences for sites in vivo. The X-ray
structures of IRF-3 and IRF-7 DNA binding domains (DBDs) bound to IFN-ß promoter 
elements revealed flexibility in the loops (L1-L3) and the residues that make
contacts with the target sequence. To characterize the conformational changes
that occur on DNA binding and how they differ between IRF family members, we have
solved the X-ray structures of IRF-3 and IRF-7 DBDs in the absence of DNA. We
found that loop L1, carrying the conserved histidine that interacts with the DNA 
minor groove, is disordered in apo IRF-3 but is ordered in apo IRF-7. This is
reflected in differences in DNA binding affinities when the conserved histidine
in loop L1 is mutated to alanine in the two proteins. The stability of loop L1 in
IRF-7 derives from a unique combination of hydrophobic residues that pack against
the protein core. Together, our data show that differences in flexibility of loop
L1 are an important determinant of differential IRF-DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC3167601
PMID: 21596780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Lupus. 2011 Aug;20(9):975-80. doi: 10.1177/0961203310394897. Epub 2011 May 16.

Hematopoietic stem cell transplant for systemic lupus erythematosus: Interferon
regulatory factor 7 activation correlates with the IFN signature and recurrent
disease.

Sweeney SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California
San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. ssweeney@ucsd.edu

The expression and activation of regulatory factors (IRF) and rinterferon (IFN)
response genes were evaluated in a patient treated with autologous hematopoietic 
stem cell transplant (HSCT) for refractory systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). In
SLE patients, genetic variants of IRF5 and IRF7 have been associated with
increased serum IFNa levels, suggesting a pathogenic role in the type I IFN
response. Clinical and molecular analyses of an SLE patient treated with
high-dose immunosuppressive therapy and autologous stem cell transplant was
performed. Western blot analysis showed that induction of IRF7 protein expression
correlated with recurrent lupus disease activity. In addition, phosphorylation of
IRF3 and activation of 4<U+2009>E-BP1, a translational repressor of IRF7, preceded the
disease flare. In SLE post-transplant, recurrent disease activity and induction
of IRF7 protein expression correlated with activation of the IFN signature. This 
unique trend in regulation of IRF warrants further mechanistic investigation and 
confirmation with increased numbers of SLE patients.

PMID: 21576205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Transl Res. 2011 Jun;157(6):326-31. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2011.01.006. Epub 2011
Feb 8.

Interferon regulatory factors in human lupus pathogenesis.

Salloum R(1), Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology and Gwen Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology
Research, University of Chicago, Pritzker School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60637, 
USA.

Comment in
    Transl Res. 2011 Jun;157(6):323-5.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a severe multisystem autoimmune disease
that results from both genetic predisposition and environmental factors. Many
lines of investigation support interferon alpha (IFN-a) as a causal agent in
human lupus, and high levels of serum IFN-a are a heritable risk factor for SLE. 
Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are a family of transcription factors
involved in host defense, which can induce transcription of IFN-a and other
immune response genes after activation. In SLE, circulating immune complexes that
contain nucleic acid are prevalent. These complexes are recognized by endosomal
Toll-like receptors, resulting in activation of downstream IRF proteins. Genetic 
variants in the IRF5 and IRF7 genes have been associated with SLE susceptibility,
and these same variants are associated with increased serum IFN-a in SLE
patients. The increase in serum IFN-a related to IRF5 and 7 genotypes is observed
only in patients with particular antibody specificities. This suggests that
chronic stimulation of the endosomal Toll-like receptors by autoantibody immune
complexes is required for IRF SLE-risk variants to cause elevation of circulating
IFN-a and subsequent risk of SLE. Recently, genetic variation in the IRF8 gene
has been associated with SLE and multiple sclerosis, and studies support an
impact of IRF8 genotype on the IFN-a pathway. In summary, the SLE-associated
polymorphisms in the IRF family of proteins seem to be gain-of-function variants,
and understanding the impact of these variants on the IFN-a pathway in vivo may
guide therapeutic strategies directed at the Toll-like receptor/IRF/IFN-a pathway
in SLE.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3096827
PMID: 21575916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Virol. 2011 Jul;85(13):6764-73. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00422-11. Epub 2011 May 4.

Canonical NF-kappaB activation is essential for Epstein-Barr virus latent
membrane protein 1 TES2/CTAR2 gene regulation.

Gewurz BE(1), Mar JC, Padi M, Zhao B, Shinners NP, Takasaki K, Bedoya E, Zou JY, 
Cahir-McFarland E, Quackenbush J, Kieff E.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) transforms rodent
fibroblasts and is expressed in most EBV-associated malignancies. LMP1
(transformation effector site 2 [TES2]/C-terminal activation region 2 [CTAR2])
activates NF-<U+03BA>B, p38, Jun N-terminal protein kinase (JNK), extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK), and interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)
pathways. We have investigated LMP1 TES2 genome-wide RNA effects at 4 time points
after LMP1 TES2 expression in HEK-293 cells. By using a false discovery rate
(FDR) of <0.001 after correction for multiple hypotheses, LMP1 TES2 caused
>2-fold changes in 1,916 mRNAs; 1,479 RNAs were upregulated and 437 were
downregulated. In contrast to tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-a) stimulation,
which transiently upregulates many target genes, LMP1 TES2 maintained most RNA
effects through the time course, despite robust and sustained induction of
negative feedback regulators, such as I<U+03BA>Ba and A20. LMP1 TES2-regulated RNAs
encode many NF-<U+03BA>B signaling proteins and secondary interacting proteins.
Consequently, many LMP1 TES2-regulated RNAs encode proteins that form an
extensive interactome. Gene set enrichment analyses found LMP1 TES2-upregulated
genes to be significantly enriched for pathways in cancer, B- and T-cell receptor
signaling, and Toll-like receptor signaling. Surprisingly, LMP1 TES2 and I<U+03BA>Ba
superrepressor coexpression decreased LMP1 TES2 RNA effects to only 5 RNAs, with 
FDRs of <0.001-fold and >2-fold changes. Thus, canonical NF-<U+03BA>B activation is
critical for almost all LMP1 TES2 RNA effects in HEK-293 cells and a more
significant therapeutic target than previously appreciated.

PMCID: PMC3126495
PMID: 21543491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. FEBS Lett. 2011 May 6;585(9):1331-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2011.04.001. Epub
2011 Apr 7.

Virus-induced differential expression of nuclear receptors and coregulators in
dendritic cells: implication to interferon production.

Ng SS(1), Chang TH, Tailor P, Ozato K, Kino T.

Author information: 
(1)Unit on Molecular Hormone Action, Program in Reproductive and Adult
Endocrinology, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1109, USA.

We investigated mRNA expression of 49 nuclear hormone receptors (NRs) and 35
transcriptional coregulators in mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells (DCs)
upon infection with Newcastle Disease virus (NDV) or murine cytomegalovirus
(MCMV). These viruses regulated mRNA expression of some NRs among which NOR1 and 
LXRa were highly induced at mRNA and protein levels. Exogenous expression of the 
latter NRs repressed IRF3- or IRF7-induced transactivation of the interferon ß
promoter and NDV infection further potentiated their repressive effect. The viral
infection also significantly regulated mRNA expression of some coregulators,
including HDAC1. Toll-like receptor ligands regulated NR and coregulator mRNA
expression similar to the viruses. Thus, NRs and coregulators are integral
components of DC-organizing anti-viral response wherein NOR1 and LXRa participate
in regulating interferon production.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3101080
PMID: 21492741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Genes Immun. 2011 Sep;12(6):399-414. doi: 10.1038/gene.2011.21. Epub 2011 Apr 14.

IRF7: activation, regulation, modification and function.

Ning S(1), Pagano JS, Barber GN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Viral Oncology
Program, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Miller School of Medicine,
University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA. sning@med.miami.edu

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) was originally identified in the context of
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, and has since emerged as the crucial
regulator of type I interferons (IFNs) against pathogenic infections, which
activate IRF7 by triggering signaling cascades from pathogen recognition
receptors (PRRs) that recognize pathogenic nucleic acids. Moreover, IRF7 is a
multifunctional transcription factor, underscored by the fact that it is
associated with EBV latency, in which IRF7 is induced as well as activated by the
EBV principal oncoprotein latent membrane protein-1 (LMP1). Aberrant production
of type I IFNs is associated with many types of diseases such as cancers and
autoimmune disorders. Thus, tight regulation of IRF7 expression and activity is
imperative in dictating appropriate type I IFN production for normal IFN-mediated
physiological functions. Posttranslational modifications have important roles in 
regulation of IRF7 activity, exemplified by phosphorylation, which is indicative 
of its activation. Furthermore, mounting evidence has shed light on the
importance of regulatory ubiquitination in activation of IRF7. Albeit these
exciting findings have been made in the past decade since its discovery, many
questions related to IRF7 remain to be addressed.

PMCID: PMC4437765
PMID: 21490621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Nutr. 2011 Jun;141(6):1023-8. doi: 10.3945/jn.110.135517. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

Lactobacillus johnsonii N6.2 stimulates the innate immune response through
Toll-like receptor 9 in Caco-2 cells and increases intestinal crypt Paneth cell
number in biobreeding diabetes-prone rats.

Kingma SD(1), Li N, Sun F, Valladares RB, Neu J, Lorca GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Shands Hospital and University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Lactobacillus johnsonii (Ljo) N6.2 has been shown to mitigate the development of 
type 1 diabetes when administered to diabetes-prone rats. The specific mechanisms
underlying this observed response remain under investigation. The objective of
this study was to assess the effect of Ljo N6.2 on mucosal inflammatory response 
using differentiated Caco-2 monolayers. The mRNA expression levels of CCL20,
CXCL8, and CXCL10 chemokines were determined by qRT-PCR. Ljo at 10(11) CFU/L
induced a strong response in all chemokines examined. To assess the specific
host-signaling pathways involved, we performed RT-PCR amplification of Toll-like 
receptors (TLR) and nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-like receptors.
TLR7 and TLR9 expression levels were induced 4.2- and 9-fold, respectively,
whereas other TLR and nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain receptors were
not modified. A similar effect was observed in Caco-2 monolayers treated with Ljo
cell-free extract or purified nucleic acids (NA). Increased levels of IFN type 1 
and IFN regulators Stat1 and IRF7 followed the upregulation of TLR9. Activation
of TLR9 was also evidenced by increased Frizzled 5 expression in Ljo-treated
Caco-2 cells and an increase in the number of Paneth cells in Ljo-fed,
diabetes-prone rats. These results are in agreement with the
polarizing-tolerizing mechanism recently described in which the apical
stimulation of TLR9 in intestinal epithelial cells leads to a higher state of
immunologic alertness. Furthermore, these results suggest that live probiotics
could be, in the future, replaced with select cellular components.

PMID: 21490291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Jun 15;253(3):235-43. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2011.03.024. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Nickel-induced down-regulation of <U+0394>Np63 and its role in the proliferation of
keratinocytes.

Zhang Z(1), Li W, Cheng S, Yao H, Zhang F, Chang Q, Ke Z, Wang X, Son YO, Luo J, 
Shi X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine and Environmental Health, University of
Kentucky, 121 Washington Avenue, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. zhuo.zhang@uky.edu

Epidemiological, animal, and cell studies have demonstrated that nickel compounds
are human carcinogens. The mechanisms of their carcinogenic actions remain to be 
investigated. p63, a close homologue of the p53 tumor suppressor protein, has
been linked to cell fate determination and/or maintenance of self-renewing
populations in several epithelial tissues, including skin, mammary gland, and
prostate. <U+0394>Np63, a dominant negative isoform of p63, is amplified in a variety of
epithelial tumors including squamous cell carcinomas and carcinomas of the
prostate and mammary glands. The present study shows that nickel suppressed <U+0394>Np63
expression in a short-time treatment (up to 48 h). Nickel treatment caused
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B. Blockage of NF-<U+03BA>B partially reversed nickel-induced <U+0394>Np63
suppression. Nickel decreased interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7,
IKKe, and Sp100. Over-expression of IRF3 increased <U+0394>Np63 expression suppressed by
nickel. Nickel was able to activate p21, and its activation was offset by the
over-expression of <U+0394>Np63. In turn, elevated p63 expression counteracted the
ability of nickel to restrict cell growth. The present study demonstrated that
nickel decreased interferon regulatory proteins IRF3 and IRF7, and activated
NF-<U+03BA>B, resulting in <U+0394>Np63 suppression and then p21 up-regulation. <U+0394>Np63 plays an 
important role in nickel-induced cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3113543
PMID: 21466819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Cancer. 2011 Oct 15;117(20):4696-706. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26096. Epub 2011 Mar 31.

Functional implications of microRNAs in acute myeloid leukemia by integrating
microRNA and messenger RNA expression profiling.

Havelange V(1), Stauffer N, Heaphy CC, Volinia S, Andreeff M, Marcucci G, Croce
CM, Garzon R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, USA.

BACKGROUND: The expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) is deregulated in acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML), but the corresponding functional miRNA-controlled pathways are
poorly understood. Integration of messenger RNA (mRNA) and miRNA expression
profiling may allow the identification of functional links between the whole
transcriptome and microRNome that are involved in myeloid leukemogenesis.
METHODS: We integrated miRNA and mRNA expression profiles obtained from 48 newly 
diagnosed AML patients by using 2 different microarray platforms and performed
correlation, gene ontology, and network analysis. Experimental validation was
also performed in AML cell lines using miRNA oligonucleotide mimics and
functional assays.
RESULTS: Our analysis identified a strong positive correlation between
HOX-related genes and miR-10 and miR-20a. Furthermore, we observed a negative
correlation between miR-181a and miR-181b, miR-155, and miR-146 expression with
that of genes involved in immunity and inflammation (eg, IRF7 and TLR4) and a
positive correlation between miR-23a, miR-26a, miR-128a, and miR-145 expression
with that of proapoptotic genes (eg, BIM and PTEN). These correlations were
confirmed by gene ontology analyses, which revealed the enrichment of members of 
the homeobox, immunity and inflammation, and apoptosis biological processes.
Furthermore, we validated experimentally the association of miR-145, miR-26a, and
miR-128a with apoptosis in AML.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that by integrating the transcriptome and
microRNome in AML cells, it is possible to identify previously unidentified
putative functional miRNA-mRNA interactions in AML.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC3154970
PMID: 21455993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Immunity. 2011 Mar 25;34(3):352-63. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2011.03.010.

Antiviral protein Viperin promotes Toll-like receptor 7- and Toll-like receptor
9-mediated type I interferon production in plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Saitoh T(1), Satoh T, Yamamoto N, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O, Kawai T, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Host Defense, WPI Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2011 Mar 25;34(3):285-7.

Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) and TLR9 sense viral nucleic acids and induce
production of type I interferon (IFN) by plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) to
protect the host from virus infection. We showed that the IFN-inducible antiviral
protein Viperin promoted TLR7- and TLR9-mediated production of type I IFN by
pDCs. Viperin expression was potently induced after TLR7 or TLR9 stimulation and 
Viperin localized to the cytoplasmic lipid-enriched compartments, lipid bodies,
in pDCs. Viperin interacted with the signal mediators IRAK1 and TRAF6 to recruit 
them to the lipid bodies and facilitated K63-linked ubiquitination of IRAK1 to
induce the nuclear translocation of transcription factor IRF7. Loss of Viperin
reduced TLR7- and TLR9-mediated production of type I IFN by pDCs. However,
Viperin was dispensable for the production of type I IFN induced by intracellular
nucleic acids. Thus, Viperin mediates its antiviral function via the regulation
of the TLR7 and TLR9-IRAK1 signaling axis in pDCs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21435586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Toxicol In Vitro. 2011 Aug;25(5):1106-13. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2011.03.011. Epub
2011 Mar 22.

Cigarette smoke suppresses TLR-7 stimulation in response to virus infection in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Castro SM(1), Chakraborty K, Guerrero-Plata A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, Louisiana State University, Baton
Rouge, LA 70803, USA.

Exposure to environmental tobacco smoke (ETS) is associated with an increase in
the frequency and severity of respiratory infections, including bronchiolitis, a 
clinical syndrome of infancy caused by viruses such as respiratory syncytial
virus (RSV). The mechanisms by which ETS increases the risk of viral respiratory 
infections are largely unknown. A major effector integrating early antiviral and 
immunostimulatory activities is interferon-a (IFN-a), which is highly produced by
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC). In this work, we determined the effect of
cigarette smoke extract (CSE) on human pDC immunity in response to a respiratory 
viral infection. We found that CSE inhibited RSV-induced IFN-a in pDC as well as 
the release of IL-1ß, IL-10 and CXCL10. However, the production of additional
cytokines and chemokines such as IL-6, TNF-a, CCL2, CCL3, CCL5 and CXCL8 was not 
altered. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis indicated that CSE decreased the expression
of toll-like receptor (TLR)-7 and interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-7 in
RSV-infected pDC. Furthermore, determination of IRF-7 phosphorylation by flow
cytometry showed that CSE prevented IRF-7 activation. These data provide evidence
that cigarette smoke suppresses key pDC functions upon viral infection by a
mechanism that involves downregulation of TLR7 expression and decreased
activation of IRF-7.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21435390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;130(4):547-61. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-0977-x. Epub 2011 Mar 
19.

The role of polymorphisms in Toll-like receptors and their associated
intracellular signaling genes in measles vaccine immunity.

Ovsyannikova IG(1), Haralambieva IH, Vierkant RA, Pankratz VS, Jacobson RM,
Poland GA.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Vaccine Research Group, Mayo Clinic, Guggenheim 611C, 200 1st Street
S.W., Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and their intracellular signaling molecules play an
important role in innate immunity. In this study, we examined associations
between polymorphisms in TLR family genes and measles vaccine-specific immune
responses. We genotyped 764 subjects (11-22 years old) after two doses of measles
vaccine for TLR signaling SNP markers (n = 454). The major alleles of coding SNPs
in the TLR2 (rs3804100) and TLR4 (rs5030710) genes were associated with a
dose-related increase (660 vs. 892 mIU/ml, p = 0.002) and a dose-related decrease
(2,209 vs. 830 mIU/ml, p = 0.001) in measles-specific antibodies, respectively. A
significant association was found between lower measles antibody levels and the
haplotype ACGGCGAGAAAAGAGAAGAGAGAGAA (p = 0.01) in the MAP3K7 gene. Furthermore, 
the minor allele of a SNP (rs702966) of the KIAA1542 (IRF7) gene was associated
with a dose-related decrease in IFN-<U+03B3> Elispot responses (38 vs. 26 spot-forming
cells per 2 × 10(5) PBMCs, p = 0.00002). We observed an additional 12
associations (p < 0.01) between coding (nonsynonymous and synonymous)
polymorphisms within the TLRs (TLR2, 7, and 8), IKBKE, TICAM1, NFKBIA, IRAK2, and
KIAA1542 genes and variations in measles-specific IL-2, IL-6, IFN-a, IFN-<U+03B3>,
IFN<U+03BB>-1, and TNF-a secretion levels. Our data demonstrate that polymorphisms in
TLR and other related immune response signaling molecules have significant
effects on measles vaccine-associated immune responses. These data help to
establish the genetic foundation for immune response variation in response to
measles immunization and provide important insights for the rational development 
of new measles vaccines.

PMCID: PMC3924423
PMID: 21424379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Infect Dis. 2011 May 15;203(10):1415-24. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir048. Epub 2011 
Mar 11.

Impaired interferon signaling in dendritic cells from older donors infected in
vitro with West Nile virus.

Qian F(1), Wang X, Zhang L, Lin A, Zhao H, Fikrig E, Montgomery RR.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

West Nile virus (WNV), a mosquito-borne, single-stranded RNA flavivirus, causes
significant human morbidity and mortality in the older population; thus, we
investigated the effects of aging on infection with WNV in dendritic cells (DCs).
We infected DCs with WNV in vitro and quantified cytokines and chemokines (type I
IFN and CXCL10), pathogen recognition receptors RIG-I, and Toll-like receptors 3 
and 7. The production of type I IFN was significantly lower in DCs from older
donors, compared with younger donors. Although we observed no significant
age-related difference in expression or nuclear translocation of signaling
molecules in initial antiviral responses, DCs from older donors have diminished
induction of late-phase responses (eg, STAT1, IRF7, and IRF1), suggesting
defective regulation of type I IFN. Our results identify deficits in critical
regulatory pathways in the antiviral response that may contribute to the enhanced
susceptibility to viral infections observed in aging.

PMCID: PMC3080893
PMID: 21398396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Clin Biochem Nutr. 2011 Mar;48(2):154-60. doi: 10.3164/jcbn.10-69. Epub 2011
Feb 26.

Rebamipide suppresses TLR-TBK1 signaling pathway resulting in regulating IRF3/7
and IFN-a/ß reduction.

Ogasawara N(1), Sasaki M, Itoh Y, Tokudome K, Kondo Y, Ito Y, Tanida S, Kamiya T,
Kataoka H, Joh T, Kasugai K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Aichi Medical University School of Medicine,
21 Karimata, Yazako, Nagakute-cho, Aichi 480-1195, Japan.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) regulates the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3
and IRF7 activation pathways by double strand RNA (dsRNA) via Toll-like receptor 
(TLR) 3 and by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) via TLR4. Rebamipide is useful for
treating inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Although IBD is associated with
nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), any association with the TBK1-IRF pathway remains
unknown. How rebamipide affects the TBK1-IRF pathway is also unclear. We analyzed
the relationship between IBD (particularly ulcerative colitis; UC) and the
TLR-TBK1-IRF3/7 pathway using human colon tissue, a murine model of colitis and
human colonic epithelial cells. Inflamed colonic mucosa over-expressed TKB1,
NAP1, IRF3, and IRF7 mRNA compared with normal mucosa. TBK1 was mainly expressed 
in inflammatory epithelial cells of UC patients. The expression of TBK1, IRF3,
IRF7, IFN-a and IFN-ß mRNA was suppressed in mice given oral dextran
sulfate-sodium (DSS) and daily rectal rebamipide compared with mice given only
DSS. Rebamipide reduced the expression of TBK1, IRF3 and IRF7 mRNA induced by
LPS/dsRNA, but not of NF-<U+03BA>B mRNA in colonic epithelial cells. Rebamipide might
suppress the TLR-TBK1 pathway, resulting in IRF3/7-induction of IFN-a/ß and
inflammatory factors. TBK1 is important in the induction of inflammation in
patients with UC. If rebamipide represses the TLR-TBK1 pathway, then rectal
administration should suppress inflammation of the colonic mucosa in patients
with UC.

PMCID: PMC3045689
PMID: 21373269  [PubMed]


402. Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Mar;63(3):749-54. doi: 10.1002/art.30193.

Association of a functional IRF7 variant with systemic lupus erythematosus.

Fu Q(1), Zhao J, Qian X, Wong JL, Kaufman KM, Yu CY; Hwee Siew Howe; Tan Tock
Seng Hospital Lupus Study Group, Mok MY, Harley JB, Guthridge JM, Song YW, Cho
SK, Bae SC, Grossman JM, Hahn BH, Arnett FC, Shen N, Tsao BP.

Collaborators: Thong BY, Kong KO, Chia FL, Chng HH, Leong KP, Lian TY, Law WG,
Koh ET, Chan GY, Tan J, Yong WH.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, and Joint Molecular Rheumatology
Laboratory of Institute of Health Sciences and Shanghai Renji Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, and Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2011 Oct;63(10):3177-8; author reply 3178-9.

OBJECTIVE: A previous genome-wide association study conducted in a population of 
European ancestry identified rs4963128, a KIAA1542 single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) 23 kb telomeric to IRF7 (the gene for interferon regulatory factor 7
[IRF-7]), to be strongly associated with systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). This
study was undertaken to investigate whether genetic polymorphism within IRF7 is a
risk factor for the development of SLE.
METHODS: We genotyped one KIAA1542 SNP (rs4963128) and one IRF7 SNP (rs1131665
[Q412R]) in an Asian population (1,302 cases, 1,479 controls), to assess their
association with SLE. Subsequently, rs1131665 was further genotyped in
independent panels of Chinese subjects (528 cases, 527 controls), European
American subjects (446 cases, 461 controls), and African American subjects (159
cases, 115 controls) by TaqMan genotyping assay, to seek confirmation of
association in various ethnic groups. A luciferase reporter assay was used to
assess the effect of Q412R polymorphism on the activation of IRF-7.
RESULTS: Consistent association of rs1131665 (Q412R) with SLE was identified in
Asian, European American, and African American populations (total 2,435 cases and
2,582 controls) (P(meta) = 6.18 × 10(-6) , odds ratio 1.42 [95% confidence
interval 1.22-1.65]). Expression of the IRF7 412Q risk allele resulted in a
2-fold increase in interferon-stimulated response element transcriptional
activity compared with expression of IRF7 412R (P = 0.0003), suggesting that IRF7
412Q confers elevated IRF-7 activity and may therefore affect a downstream
interferon pathway.
CONCLUSION: These findings show that the major allele of a nonsynonymous SNP,
rs1131665 (412Q) in IRF7, confers elevated activation of IRF-7 and predisposes to
the development of SLE in multiple ethnic groups. This result provides direct
genetic evidence that IRF7 may be a risk gene for human SLE.

Copyright © 2011 by the American College of Rheumatology.

PMCID: PMC3063317
PMID: 21360504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Cancer Res. 2011 Apr;9(4):476-84. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-10-0358. Epub
2011 Feb 25.

Activation of interferon-stimulated genes by gamma-ray irradiation independently 
of the ataxia telangiectasia mutated-p53 pathway.

Sugihara T(1), Murano H, Nakamura M, Ichinohe K, Tanaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiobiology, Institute for Environmental Sciences, 2-121
Hacchazawa, Takahoko, Rokkasho, Kamikita, Aomori 039-3213, Japan.
sugihara@ies.or.jp

The ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM)-p53 pathway is a well-known main signal
transduction pathway for cellular responses, which is activated by <U+03B3>-ray
irradiation. Microarray analysis showed changes in the expressions of
IFN-stimulated genes (ISG) in <U+03B3>-ray-irradiated Balb/cA/Atm-deficient mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) (ATM-KO), indicating that another pathway for
cellular responses besides the ATM-p53 pathway was activated by <U+03B3>-ray
irradiation. The basal expression levels of Irf7 and Stat1 in ATM-KO and
p53-deficient MEFs (p53-KO) were higher than those in Atm-wild-type MEFs (ATM-WT)
and p53-wild-type MEFs (p53-WT), respectively. Irradiation stimulated the
expressions of Irf7 and Stat1 in ATM-KO, p53-KO, ATM-WT, and p53-WT, indicating
that upregulation of Irf7 and Stat1 expressions by irradiation did not depend on 
the ATM-p53 pathway. When conditioned medium (CM) obtained from irradiated ATM-WT
or ATM-KO was added to nonirradiated MEFs, the expressions of Irf7 and Stat1
increased. We predicted that gene activation in nonirradiated MEFs was caused by 
IFN-a/ß. Unexpectedly, significant amount of IFN-a/ß could not be detected in the
CM from irradiated ATM-WT or ATM-KO. Meanwhile, increased expression of Ccl5
(RANTES) protein was detected in the CM from irradiated MEFs. These results
indicate that ISGs were activated by <U+03B3>-ray irradiation independently of the
ATM-p53 pathway and gene activation was caused by radiation-induced soluble
factors.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21357441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Virol. 2011 May;85(9):4606-11. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02012-10. Epub 2011 Feb 23.

A tryptophan-rich motif in the human parainfluenza virus type 2 V protein is
critical for the blockade of toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7)- and TLR9-dependent
signaling.

Kitagawa Y(1), Yamaguchi M, Zhou M, Komatsu T, Nishio M, Sugiyama T, Takeuchi K, 
Itoh M, Gotoh B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, Department of Pathology,
Shiga University of Medical Science, Seta Tsukinowa-cho, Otsu, Shiga 520-2192,
Japan.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) do not produce alpha interferon (IFN-a)
unless viruses cause a systemic infection or overcome the first-line defense
provided by conventional DCs and macrophages. We show here that even
paramyxoviruses, whose infections are restricted to the respiratory tract, have a
V protein able to prevent Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7)- and TLR9-dependent IFN-a
induction specific to pDCs. Mutational analysis of human parainfluenza virus type
2 demonstrates that the second Trp residue of the Trp-rich motif
(Trp-X(3)-Trp-X(9)-Trp) in the C-terminal domain unique to V, a determinant for
IRF7 binding, is critical for the blockade of TLR7/9-dependent signaling.

PMCID: PMC3126260
PMID: 21345944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Clin Invest. 2011 Mar;121(3):1088-101. doi: 10.1172/JCI44960. Epub 2011 Feb 21.

Spatiotemporal trafficking of HIV in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells defines a
persistently IFN-a-producing and partially matured phenotype.

O'Brien M(1), Manches O, Sabado RL, Baranda SJ, Wang Y, Marie I, Rolnitzky L,
Markowitz M, Margolis DM, Levy D, Bhardwaj N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10016, USA.

Plasmacytoid DCs (pDCs) are innate immune cells that are specialized to produce
IFN-a and to activate adaptive immune responses. Although IFN-a inhibits HIV-1
replication in vitro, the production of IFN-a by HIV-activated pDCs in vivo may
contribute more to HIV pathogenesis than to protection. We have now shown that
HIV-stimulated human pDCs allow for persistent IFN-a production upon repeated
stimulation, express low levels of maturation molecules, and stimulate weak T
cell responses. Persistent IFN-a production by HIV-stimulated pDCs correlated
with increased levels of IRF7 and was dependent upon the autocrine IFN-a/ß
receptor feedback loop. Because it has been shown that early endosomal
trafficking of TLR9 agonists causes strong activation of the IFN-a pathway but
weak activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway, we sought to investigate whether early
endosomal trafficking of HIV, a TLR7 agonist, leads to the IFN-a-producing
phenotype we observed. We demonstrated that HIV preferentially traffics to the
early endosome in human pDCs and therefore skews pDCs toward a partially matured,
persistently IFN-a-secreting phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3049388
PMID: 21339641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 1;108(9):3683-8. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1013776108.
Epub 2011 Feb 14.

Phagosomal signaling by Borrelia burgdorferi in human monocytes involves
Toll-like receptor (TLR) 2 and TLR8 cooperativity and TLR8-mediated induction of 
IFN-beta.

Cervantes JL(1), Dunham-Ems SM, La Vake CJ, Petzke MM, Sahay B, Sellati TJ,
Radolf JD, Salazar JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington,
CT 06030, USA.

Phagocytosed Borrelia burgdorferi (Bb) induces inflammatory signals that differ
both quantitatively and qualitatively from those generated by spirochetal
lipoproteins interacting with Toll-like receptor (TLR) 1/2 on the surface of
human monocytes. Of particular significance, and in contrast to lipoproteins,
internalized spirochetes induce transcription of IFN-ß. Using inhibitory
immunoregulatory DNA sequences (IRSs) specific to TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9, we show
that the TLR8 inhibitor IRS957 significantly diminishes production of TNF-a,
IL-6, and IL-10 and completely abrogates transcription of IFN-ß in Bb-stimulated 
monocytes. We demonstrate that live Bb induces transcription of TLR2 and TLR8,
whereas IRS957 interferes with their transcriptional regulation. Using confocal
and epifluorescence microscopy, we show that baseline TLR expression in
unstimulated monocytes is greater for TLR2 than for TLR8, whereas expression of
both TLRs increases significantly upon stimulation with live spirochetes. By
confocal microscopy, we show that TLR2 colocalization with Bb coincides with
binding, uptake, and formation of the phagosomal vacuole, whereas recruitment of 
both TLR2 and TLR8 overlaps with degradation of the spirochete. We provide
evidence that IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 7 is translocated into the nucleus of
Bb-infected monocytes, suggesting its activation through phosphorylation. Taken
together, these findings indicate that the phagosome is an efficient platform for
the recognition of diverse ligands; in the case of Bb, phagosomal signaling
involves a cooperative interaction between TLR2 and TLR8 in pro- and
antiinflammatory cytokine responses, whereas TLR8 is solely responsible for
IRF7-mediated induction of IFN-ß.

PMCID: PMC3048123
PMID: 21321205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Virus Res. 2011 Apr;157(1):54-60. doi: 10.1016/j.virusres.2011.02.004. Epub 2011 
Feb 23.

Infection of cultured bovine cells with bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1) or Sendai
virus induces different beta interferon subtypes.

da Silva LF(1), Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Fair Street at East Campus Loop,
Lincoln, NE 68583-0905, USA.

In contrast to mice or humans, cattle contain three beta interferon (IFN-ß) genes
with distinct transcriptional promoters suggesting IFN-ß gene expression is not
stimulated the same by different viruses. To test this hypothesis, we compared
expression of the three IFN-ß subtypes after infection with a RNA virus, Sendai, 
versus a large DNA virus, bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1). Infection of low passage 
bovine kidney (BK) or established bovine kidney cells (CRIB) with Sendai virus
has consistently led to high levels of IFN-ß1 RNA. Conversely, infection of CRIB 
cells, but not BK cells, with BHV-1 increased IFN-ß3 RNA levels and to a lesser
extent the other two IFN-ß subtypes. Inhibition of de novo protein synthesis with
cycloheximide resulted in higher levels of IFN-ß1 and IFN-ß2 RNA levels after
BHV-1 infection. Further studies demonstrated that BHV-1 immediate early and/or
early genes were primarily responsible for inhibiting the IFN response in BK
cells. The three bovine IFN-ß promoters were cloned upstream of a reporter gene
construct, and their properties analyzed in transient transfection assays. Only
the IFN-ß3 promoter was trans-activated by IRF3 (interferon responsive factor 3).
IRF7 and double stranded RNA (polyI:C) stimulated IFN-ß1 and IFN-ß3 promoter
activity, but not IFN-ß2. Relative to the human IFN-ß promoter, the IFN-ß3
promoter contained fewer nucleotide differences in the positive regulatory domain
III (PRD III), PRD IV, and PRD I compared to the IFN-ß1 and IFN-ß2 promoter.
Collectively, these studies provide evidence that virus infection differentially 
stimulates expression of the three bovine IFN-ß genes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3078687
PMID: 21316405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. AIDS. 2011 Mar 13;25(5):715-7. doi: 10.1097/QAD.0b013e328343c186.

Polymorphisms in interferon regulatory factor 7 reduce interferon-a responses of 
plasmacytoid dendritic cells to HIV-1.

Chang J(1), Lindsay RJ, Kulkarni S, Lifson JD, Carrington M, Altfeld M.

Author information: 
(1)Ragon Institute of MGH, MIT and Harvard, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.

Recognition of HIV-1 ssRNA by Toll-like receptor 7 induces the production of the 
pro-inflammatory cytokines that may contribute to the systemic immune activation 
associated with HIV-1 disease progression. Here, we describe a novel association 
between polymorphisms in interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a master
regulator of interferon-a (IFN-a), and the ability of plasmacytoid dendritic
cells to produce IFN-a in response to HIV-1. IRF7 polymorphisms may, therefore,
affect the ability of individuals to respond to HIV-1 and modulate HIV-1 disease 
progression.

PMCID: PMC3098498
PMID: 21297422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Dev Comp Immunol. 2011 Jun;35(6):672-84. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2011.01.021. Epub
2011 Feb 2.

Identification and functional characterization of an interferon regulatory factor
7-like (IRF7-like) gene from orange-spotted grouper, Epinephelus coioides.

Cui H(1), Yan Y, Wei J, Huang X, Huang Y, Ouyang Z, Qin Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biocontrol, School of life sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, 135 West Xingang Road, Guangzhou 510275, PR China.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 7 plays a crucial role in modulating cellular 
responses to viral infection and cytokines, including interferons (IFNs). In the 
present study, a novel IRF7 gene (designated as EcIRF7) was cloned and
characterized from orange-spotted grouper, Epinephelus coioides. The full-length 
EcIRF7 cDNA is composed of 2089 bp and encodes a polypeptide of 433 amino acids
with 81% identity to IRF7 of Siniperca chuatsi, and the genomic DNA of EcIRF7
consists of 9 exons and 8 introns, with a length of approximately 5629 bp. EcIRF7
contains three conserved domains including a DNA-binding domain (DBD), an IRF
associated domain (IAD) and a serine-rich domain, all of which are highly
conserved across species. Recombinant EcIRF7 was expressed in Escherichia coli
BL21 (DE3) and purified for mouse anti-EcIRF7 serum preparation. Realtime
quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) analysis revealed a broad expression of EcIRF7, with a
relative strong expression in spleen, kidney, skin and intestine. The expression 
of EcIRF7 was differentially up-regulated after stimulation with Vibrio
vulnificus, Staphylococcus aureus and Singapore grouper iridovirus (SGIV). EcIRF7
showed similar intracellular localization pattern to those of mammalian and
chicken, and translocated into nucleus after SGIV infection. Further more, EcIRF7
was proved to be capable of activating zebrafish type I IFN promoter and
inhibiting the replication of SGIV in grouper spleen (GS) cells. These results
suggest that EcIRF7 is potentially involved in grouper immune responses to
invasion of viral and bacterial pathogens.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21295068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Immunol. 2011 Mar 1;186(5):3006-14. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003217. Epub 2011
Jan 26.

The dual functions of IL-1 receptor-associated kinase 2 in TLR9-mediated IFN and 
proinflammatory cytokine production.

Wan Y(1), Kim TW, Yu M, Zhou H, Yamashita M, Kang Z, Yin W, Wang JA, Thomas J,
Sen GC, Stark GR, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH
44195, USA.

Bone marrow-derived plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) from IL-1R-associated
kinase (IRAK)2-deficient mice produced more IFNs than did wild-type pDCs upon
stimulation with the TLR9 ligand CpG. Furthermore, in CpG-stimulated
IRAK2-deficient pDCs there was increased nuclear translocation of IFN regulatory 
factor 7, the key transcription factor for IFN gene transcription in these cells.
In IRAK2-deficient macrophages, enhanced NF-<U+03BA>B activation and increased
expression of CpG-induced genes were detected within 2 h after treatment.
However, at later times, NF-<U+03BA>B activation was decreased and, in contrast to the
results with IFN, there was less secretion of other proinflammatory cytokines
(such as TNF-a) and chemokines in CpG-stimulated IRAK2-deficient pDCs and
macrophages. Therefore, although IRAK2 is a negative regulator of TLR9-mediated
IFN production through its modulation of the transcriptional activity of IFN
regulatory factor 7, it is also a positive regulator of TLR9-mediated
proinflammatory cytokine and chemokine production at some level subsequent to
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3163905
PMID: 21270393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Virol. 2011 Apr;85(7):3162-71. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02342-10. Epub 2011 Jan 26.

The measles virus V protein binds to p65 (RelA) to suppress NF-kappaB activity.

Schuhmann KM(1), Pfaller CK, Conzelmann KK.

Author information: 
(1)Max von Pettenkofer Institute & Gene Center, Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25, D-81377
Munich, Germany.

Nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) transcription factors are involved in controlling
numerous cellular processes, including inflammation, innate and adaptive
immunity, and cell survival. Here we show that the immunosuppressive measles
virus (MV; Morbillivirus genus, Paramyxoviridae) has evolved multiple functions
to interfere with canonical NF-<U+03BA>B signaling in epithelial cells. The MV P, V, and
C proteins, also involved in preventing host cell interferon responses, were
found to individually suppress NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent reporter gene expression in
response to activation of the tumor necrosis factor (TNF) receptor, RIG-I-like
receptors, or Toll-like receptors. NF-<U+03BA>B activity was most efficiently suppressed
in the presence of V, while expression of P or C resulted in moderate inhibition.
As indicated by reporter gene assays involving overexpression of the I<U+03BA>B kinase
(IKK) complex, which phosphorylates the inhibitor of <U+03BA>B to liberate NF-<U+03BA>B, V
protein targets a downstream step in the signaling cascade. Coimmunoprecipitation
experiments revealed that V specifically binds to the Rel homology domain of the 
NF-<U+03BA>B subunit p65 but not of p50. Notably, the short C-terminal domain of the V
protein, which is also involved in binding STAT2, IRF7, and MDA5, was sufficient 
for the interaction and for preventing reporter gene activity. As observed by
confocal microscopy, the presence of V abolished nuclear translocation of p65
upon TNF-a stimulation. Thus, MV V appears to prevent NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent gene
expression by retaining p65 in the cytoplasm. These findings reveal NF-<U+03BA>B as a
key target of MV and stress the importance of the V protein as the major viral
immune-modulatory factor.

PMCID: PMC3067892
PMID: 21270162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Feb;41(2):461-72. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040668. Epub 2010 Dec
29.

Counter-regulation mechanism of IL-4 and IFN-a signal transduction through
cytosolic retention of the pY-STAT6:pY-STAT2:p48 complex.

Kim SH(1), Lee CE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Biological Science, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon, Korea.

IFN-a and IL-4 induce Th1 and Th2 responses, respectively, and often display
antagonistic actions against each other. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of 
counter-regulation, we have investigated the signal interception by IFN-a and
IL-4, employing a human B-cell line Ramos, sensitive to both cytokines. In these 
cells, IFN-a effectively inhibited IL-4-induced Fc epsilon receptor II (CD23)
expression, whereas IL-4 suppressed IFN-a-mediated IRF7 expression. The
counter-regulatory action by IL-4 and IFN-a proceeded with a delayed kinetics
requiring 4<U+2009>h. Notably, IFN-a did not affect the IL-4-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT6, but induced a time-dependent cytoplasmic accumulation
of phosphotyrosine(pY)-STAT6 and a corresponding decrease in nuclear pY-STAT6. By
confocal analysis and co-immunoprecipitation assays, we demonstrated the
colocalization and molecular interaction of IL-4-induced pY-STAT6 with
IFN-a-induced pY-STAT2:p48 in the cytosol. In addition, the over-expression of
STAT2 or STAT6 induced the concomitant cytosolic accumulation of pY-STAT6 or
pY-STAT2, leading to the suppression of IL-4-induced CD23 or IFN-a-induced IRF7
gene expression, respectively. Our data suggest that the signals ensued by IFN-a 
and IL-4 induce cytoplasmic sequestration of IL-4-activated STAT6 and
IFN-a-activated STAT2:p48 in B cells through the formation of
pY-STAT6:pY-STAT2:p48 complex, which provides a novel mechanism by which IFN-a
and IL-4 cross-regulate their signaling into the nucleus.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21268015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011 Oct;89(7):792-802. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.169. Epub 2011
Jan 25.

Ebolavirus VP35 suppresses IFN production from conventional but not plasmacytoid 
dendritic cells.

Leung LW(1), Park MS, Martinez O, Valmas C, López CB, Basler CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L Levy
Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Ebolaviruses naturally infect a wide variety of cells including macrophages and
dendritic cells (DCs), and the resulting cytokine and interferon-a/ß (IFN)
responses of infected cells are thought to influence viral pathogenesis. The VP35
protein impairs RIG-I-like receptor-dependent signaling to inhibit IFN
production, and this function has been suggested to promote the ineffective host 
immune response characteristic of ebolavirus infection. To assess the impact of
VP35 on innate immunity in biologically relevant primary cells, we used a
recombinant Newcastle disease virus encoding VP35 (NDV/VP35) to infect
macrophages and conventional DCs, which primarily respond to RNA virus infection 
via RIG-I-like pathways. VP35 suppressed not only IFN but also tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-a secretion, which are normally produced from these cells upon NDV
infection. Additionally, in cells susceptible to the activity of VP35, IRF7
activation is impaired. In contrast, NDV/VP35 infection of plasmacytoid DCs,
which activate IRF7 and produce IFN through TLR-dependent signaling, leads to
robust IFN production. When plasmacytoid DCs deficient for TLR signaling were
infected, NDV/VP35 was able to inhibit IFN production. Consistent with this, VP35
was less able to inhibit TLR-dependent versus RIG-I-dependent signaling in vitro.
These data demonstrate that ebolavirus VP35 suppresses both IFN and cytokine
production in multiple primary human cell types. However, cells that utilize the 
TLR pathway can circumvent this inhibition, suggesting that the presence of
multiple viral sensors enables the host to overcome viral immune evasion
mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC4148147
PMID: 21263462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Neuroinflammation. 2011 Jan 24;8:8. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-8-8.

Cooperative contributions of interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1) and IRF8 to
interferon-<U+03B3>-mediated cytotoxic effects on oligodendroglial progenitor cells.

Horiuchi M(1), Itoh A, Pleasure D, Ozato K, Itoh T.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Neurology, University of California Davis, School of
Medicine, Sacramento, California, USA.

BACKGROUND: Administration of exogenous interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN<U+03B3>) aggravates the
symptoms of multiple sclerosis (MS), whereas interferon-ß (IFNß) is used for
treatment of MS patients. We previously demonstrated that IFN<U+03B3> induces apoptosis 
of oligodendroglial progenitor cells (OPCs), suggesting that IFN<U+03B3> is more toxic
to OPCs than IFNß. Thus we hypothesized that a difference in expression profiles 
between IFN<U+03B3>-inducible and IFNß-inducible genes in OPCs would predict the genes
responsible for IFN<U+03B3>-mediated cytotoxic effects on OPCs. We have tested this
hypothesis particularly focusing on the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs)
well-known transcription factors up-regulated by IFNs.
METHODS: Highly pure primary rat OPC cultures were treated with IFN<U+03B3> and IFNß.
Cell death and proliferation were assessed by MTT reduction, caspase-3-like
proteinase activity, Annexin-V binding, mitochondrial membrane potential, and
BrdU-incorporation. Induction of all nine IRFs was comprehensively compared by
quantitative PCR between IFN<U+03B3>-treated and IFNß-treated OPCs. IRFs more strongly
induced by IFN<U+03B3> than by IFNß were selected, and tested for their ability to
induce OPC apoptosis by overexpression and by inhibition by dominant-negative
proteins or small interference RNA either in the presence or absence of IFN<U+03B3>.
RESULTS: Unlike IFN<U+03B3>, IFNß did not induce apoptosis of OPCs. Among nine IRFs,
IRF1 and IRF8 were preferentially up-regulated by IFN<U+03B3>. In contrast, IRF7 was
more robustly induced by IFNß than by IFN<U+03B3>. Overexpressed IRF1 elicited apoptosis
of OPCs, and a dominant negative IRF1 protein partially protected OPCs from
IFN<U+03B3>-induced apoptosis, indicating a substantial contribution of IRF1 to
IFN<U+03B3>-induced OPC apoptosis. On the other hand, overexpression of IRF8 itself had 
only marginal proapoptotic effects. However, overexpressed IRF8 enhanced the
IFN<U+03B3>-induced cytotoxicity and the proapoptotic effect of overexpressed IRF1, and 
down-regulation of IRF8 by siRNA partially but significantly reduced preapoptotic
cells after treatment with IFN<U+03B3>, suggesting that IRF8 cooperatively enhances
IFN<U+03B3>-induced OPC apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has identified that IRF1 and IRF8 mediate IFN<U+03B3>-signaling 
leading to OPC apoptosis. Therapies targeting at these transcription factors and 
their target genes could reduce IFN<U+03B3>-induced OPC loss and thereby enhance
remyelination in MS patients.

PMCID: PMC3039583
PMID: 21261980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Hepatology. 2011 Jan;53(1):32-41. doi: 10.1002/hep.23985. Epub 2010 Oct 26.

Ribavirin potentiates interferon action by augmenting interferon-stimulated gene 
induction in hepatitis C virus cell culture models.

Thomas E(1), Feld JJ, Li Q, Hu Z, Fried MW, Liang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2011 Apr;53(4):1400-1; author reply 1402.

The combination of pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN) and ribavirin is the standard
treatment for chronic hepatitis C. Our recent clinical study suggests that
ribavirin augments the induction of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) in
patients treated for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. In order to further
characterize the mechanisms of action of ribavirin, we examined the effect of
ribavirin treatment on ISG induction in cell culture. In addition, the effect of 
ribavirin on infectious HCV cell culture systems was studied. Similar to
interferon (IFN)-a, ribavirin potently inhibits JFH-1 infection of Huh7.5.1 cells
in a dose-dependent manner, which spans the physiological concentration of
ribavirin in vivo. Microarray analysis and subsequent quantitative polymerase
chain reaction assays demonstrated that ribavirin treatment resulted in the
induction of a distinct set of ISGs. These ISGs, including IFN regulatory factors
7 and 9, are known to play an important role in anti-HCV responses. When
ribavirin is used in conjunction with IFN-a, induction of specific ISGs is
synergistic when compared with either drug applied separately. Direct
up-regulation of these antiviral genes by ribavirin is mediated by a novel
mechanism different from those associated with IFN signaling and intracellular
double-stranded RNA sensing pathways such as RIG-I and MDA5. RNA interference
studies excluded the activation of the Toll-like receptor and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
pathways in the action of ribavirin.CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that
ribavirin, acting by way of a novel innate mechanism, potentiates the anti-HCV
effect of IFN. Understanding the mechanism of action of ribavirin would be
valuable in identifying novel antivirals.

Copyright © 2010 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3498496
PMID: 21254160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 6;6(1):e15967. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015967.

Elimination of hepatitis C virus from hepatocytes by a selective activation of
therapeutic molecules.

Wen X(1), Abe T, Kukihara H, Taguwa S, Mori Y, Tani H, Kato N, Suzuki T, Tatsumi 
M, Moriishi K, Matsuura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

To eliminate hepatitis C virus (HCV) from infected hepatocytes, we generated two 
therapeutic molecules specifically activated in cells infected with HCV. A
dominant active mutant of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) and a
negative regulator of HCV replication, VAP-C (Vesicle-associated membrane
protein-associated protein subtype C), were fused with the C-terminal region of
IPS-1 (IFNß promoter stimulator-1), which includes an HCV protease cleavage site 
that was modified to be localized on the ER membrane, and designated cIRF7 and
cVAP-C, respectively. In cells expressing the HCV protease, cIRF7 was cleaved and
the processed fragment was migrated into the nucleus, where it activated various 
IFN promoters, including promoters of IFNa6, IFNß, and IFN stimulated response
element. Activation of the IFN promoters and suppression of viral RNA replication
were observed in the HCV replicon cells and in cells infected with the JFH1
strain of HCV (HCVcc) by expression of cIRF7. Suppression of viral RNA
replication was observed even in the IFN-resistant replicon cells by the
expression of cIRF7. Expression of the cVAP-C also resulted in suppression of HCV
replication in both the replicon and HCVcc infected cells. These results suggest 
that delivery of the therapeutic molecules into the liver of hepatitis C
patients, followed by selective activation of the molecules in HCV-infected
hepatocytes, is a feasible method for eliminating HCV.

PMCID: PMC3017098
PMID: 21253612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Immunol. 2011 Feb 15;186(4):2514-22. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003093. Epub 2011
Jan 19.

Absence of MyD88 results in enhanced TLR3-dependent phosphorylation of IRF3 and
increased IFN-ß and RANTES production.

Siednienko J(1), Gajanayake T, Fitzgerald KA, Moynagh P, Miggin SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Immunology, National University of Ireland
Maynooth, Maynooth, County Kildare, Ireland.

Toll-like receptors are a group of pattern-recognition receptors that play a
crucial role in "danger" recognition and induction of the innate immune response 
against bacterial and viral infections. TLR3 has emerged as a key sensor of viral
dsRNA, resulting in the induction of the anti-viral molecule, IFN-ß. Thus, a
clearer understanding of the biological processes that modulate TLR3 signaling is
essential. Previous studies have shown that the TLR adaptor, Mal/TIRAP, an
activator of TLR4, inhibits TLR3-mediated IFN-ß induction through a mechanism
involving IRF7. In this study, we sought to investigate whether the TLR adaptor, 
MyD88, an activator of all TLRs except TLR3, has the ability to modulate TLR3
signaling. Although MyD88 does not significantly affect TLR3 ligand-induced TNF-a
induction, MyD88 negatively regulates TLR3-, but not TLR4-, mediated IFN-ß and
RANTES production; this process is mechanistically distinct from that employed by
Mal/TIRAP. We show that MyD88 inhibits IKKe-, but not TBK1-, induced activation
of IRF3. In doing so, MyD88 curtails TLR3 ligand-induced IFN-ß induction. The
present study shows that while MyD88 activates all TLRs except TLR3, MyD88 also
functions as a negative regulator of TLR3. Thus, MyD88 is essential in
restricting TLR3 signaling, thereby protecting the host from unwanted
immunopathologies associated with the excessive production of IFN-ß. Our study
offers a new role for MyD88 in restricting TLR3 signaling through a hitherto
unknown mechanism whereby MyD88 specifically impairs IKKe-mediated induction of
IRF3 and concomitant IFN-ß and RANTES production.

PMID: 21248248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 5;6(1):e15324. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0015324.

Hepatitis B virus lacks immune activating capacity, but actively inhibits
plasmacytoid dendritic cell function.

Woltman AM(1), Op den Brouw ML, Biesta PJ, Shi CC, Janssen HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC-University Medical
Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. a.woltman@erasmusmc.nl

Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is caused by inadequate anti-viral
immunity. Activation of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) leading to IFNa
production is important for effective anti-viral immunity. Hepatitis B virus
(HBV) infection lacks IFNa induction in animal models and patients and chronic
HBV patients display impaired IFNa production by pDC. Therefore, HBV and
HBV-derived proteins were examined for their effect on human pDC in vitro. In
addition, the in vitro findings were compared to the function of pDC derived from
chronic HBV patients ex vivo. In contrast to other viruses, HBV did not activate 
pDC. Moreover, HBV and HBsAg abrogated CpG-A/TLR9-induced, but not
Loxoribine/TLR7-induced, mTOR-mediated S6 phosphorylation, subsequent IRF7
phosphorylation and IFNa gene transcription. HBV/HBsAg also diminished
upregulation of co-stimulatory molecules, production of TNFa, IP-10 and IL-6 and 
pDC-induced NK cell function, whereas TLR7-induced pDC function was hardly
affected. In line, HBsAg preferentially bound to TLR9-triggered pDC demonstrating
that once pDC are able to bind HBV/HBsAg, the virus exerts its immune regulatory 
effect. HBV not only directly interfered with pDC function, but also indirectly
by interfering with monocyte-pDC interaction. Also HBeAg diminished pDC function 
to a certain extent, but via another unknown mechanism. Interestingly, patients
with HBeAg-positive chronic hepatitis B displayed impaired CpG-induced IFNa
production by pDC without significant alterations in Loxoribine-induced pDC
function compared to HBeAg-negative patients and healthy controls. The lack of
activation and the active inhibition of pDC by HBV may both contribute to HBV
persistence. The finding that the interaction between pDC and HBV may change upon
activation may aid in the identification of a scavenging receptor supporting
immunosuppressive effects of HBV and also in the design of novel treatment
strategies for chronic HBV.

PMCID: PMC3016396
PMID: 21246041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Cell Res. 2011 May;21(5):793-806. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.5. Epub 2011 Jan 11.

A human herpesvirus miRNA attenuates interferon signaling and contributes to
maintenance of viral latency by targeting IKKe.

Liang D(1), Gao Y, Lin X, He Z, Zhao Q, Deng Q, Lan K.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology, Institute Pasteur of
Shanghai, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, 225 South Chongqing Road, Shanghai 200025, China.

Type I interferon (IFN) signaling is the principal response mediating antiviral
innate immunity. IFN transcription is dependent upon the activation of
transcription factors IRF3/IRF7 and NF-<U+03BA>B. Many viral proteins have been shown as
being capable of interfering with IFN signaling to facilitate evasion from the
host innate immune response. Here, we report that a viral miRNA, miR-K12-11,
encoded by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is critical for the
modulation of IFN signaling and acts through targeting I-kappa-B kinase epsilon
(IKK<U+025B>). Ectopic expression of miR-K12-11 resulted in decreased IKK<U+025B> expression,
while inhibition of miR-K12-11 was found to restore IKK<U+025B> expression in
KSHV-infected cells. Importantly, expression of miR-K12-11 attenuated IFN
signaling by decreasing IKK<U+025B>-mediated IRF3/IRF7 phosphorylation and by inhibiting
the activation of IKK<U+025B>-dependent IFN stimulating genes (ISGs), allowing
miR-K12-11 suppression of antiviral immunity. Our data suggest that IKK<U+025B>
targeting by miR-K12-11 is an important strategy utilized by KSHV to modulate IFN
signaling during the KSHV lifecycle, especially in latency. We also demonstrated 
that IKK<U+025B> was able to enhance KSHV reactivation synergistically with the
treatment of 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate. Moreover, inhibition of
miR-K12-11 enhanced KSHV reactivation induced by vesicular stomatitis virus
infection. Taken together, our findings also suggest that miR-K12-11 can
contribute to maintenance of KSHV latency by targeting IKK<U+025B>.

PMCID: PMC3325102
PMID: 21221132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 11;286(10):7865-72. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.191452. Epub 2011
Jan 6.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus degrades cellular Toll-interleukin-1
receptor domain-containing adaptor-inducing beta-interferon (TRIF).

Ahmad H(1), Gubbels R, Ehlers E, Meyer F, Waterbury T, Lin R, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Nebraska
68588, USA.

Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is a human <U+03B3>-herpesvirus associated 
with several human malignancies. The replication and transcription activator
(RTA) is necessary and sufficient for the switch from KSHV latency to lytic
replication. Toll-interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) domain-containing adaptor-inducing
ß-interferon (TRIF, also called TIR-domain-containing adaptor molecule-1
(TICAM-1)) is a signaling adaptor molecule that is critically involved in the
Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR-3) and TLR-4 signaling pathways for type I interferon
(IFN) production, a key component of innate immunity against microbial infection.
In this report, we find a new mechanism by which RTA blocks innate immunity by
targeting cellular TRIF. RTA specifically degrades TRIF by shortening the
half-life of TRIF protein. This RTA-mediated degradation is at least partially
mediated through the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway because proteasome inhibitors
as well as knockdown of cellular ubiquitin expression alleviate the degradation. 
RTA may not directly interact with TRIF and may activate TRIF degradation
indirectly through an unknown mediator(s). RTA targets multiple regions of TRIF
and may use its ubiquitin ligase domain for the degradation. In addition,
physiological levels of TRIF protein are down-regulated during KSHV lytic
replication when RTA is expressed. Finally, RTA down-regulates double-stranded
RNA-initiated activation of TLR-3 pathway, in the absence of degradation of IFN
regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7). Taken together, these data suggest that KSHV employs
a novel mechanism to block the innate immunity by degrading TRIF protein. This
work may contribute to our understandings on how KSHV evades host immunity for
its survival in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3048673
PMID: 21212282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 1;71(1):255-65. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1452.

Higher miRNA tolerance in immortal Li-Fraumeni fibroblasts with abrogated
interferon signaling pathway.

Li Q(1), Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Genetics, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan 48201,
USA.

The IFN pathway is abrogated in fibroblasts from Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS)
patients during spontaneous cellular immortalization, a necessary step in
carcinogenesis. Microarray profiling of differentially expressed microRNAs
(miRNA) revealed that most miRNAs were upregulated in IFN pathway-defective
MDAH087-10 fibroblasts compared with MDAH087-N cells with relatively normal IFN
signaling. Overexpression of Dicer, a critical enzyme in miRNA biogenesis,
promoted cell growth and colony formation in MDAH087-10 cells. However,
double-stranded miRNA produced by Dicer enhanced the expression of IFN-stimulated
genes in MDAH087-N cells resulting in significant cell death and reduced cell
growth. Furthermore, manipulation of the IFN pathway in immortal LFS fibroblasts 
through transcription factor IRF7 reversed their response to Dicer overexpression
due to changed IFN pathway activity. Dicer overexpressing MDAH087-N cells
contained lower levels of miRNA than vector control, and conversely much higher
miRNA expression was detected in Dicer-transfected MDAH087-10 cells. Therefore,
cells with a defective IFN pathway have a higher miRNA tolerance than cells with 
normal IFN pathway. This work indicates for the first time that the IFN pathway
as mediated through the transcription factor IRF7 must be disrupted to permit
miRNA upregulation to occur in early carcinogenesis. The IFN pathway appears to
provide a checkpoint for miRNA level tolerance and its abrogation leads to
cellular immortalization.

© 2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3838707
PMID: 21199806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Transl Psychiatry. 2011 Jun 21;1:e13. doi: 10.1038/tp.2011.12.

Gene expression biomarkers of response to citalopram treatment in major
depressive disorder.

Mamdani F(1), Berlim MT, Beaulieu MM, Labbe A, Merette C, Turecki G.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Group for Suicide Studies and Depressive Disorders Program, Douglas
Mental Health University Institute, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

There is significant variability in antidepressant treatment outcome, with
~30-40% of patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) not presenting with
adequate response even following several trials. To identify potential biomarkers
of response, we investigated peripheral gene expression patterns of response to
antidepressant treatment in MDD. We did this using Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus2
microarrays in blood samples, from untreated individuals with MDD (N=63)
ascertained at a community outpatient clinic, pre and post 8-week treatment with 
citalopram, and used a regression model to assess the impact of gene expression
differences on antidepressant response. We carried out technical validation of
significant probesets by quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR and conducted
central nervous system follow-up of the most significant result in post-mortem
brain samples from 15 subjects who died during a current MDD episode and 11
sudden-death controls. A total of 32 probesets were differentially expressed
according to response to citalopram treatment following false discovery rate
correction. Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) was the most significant
differentially expressed gene and its expression was upregulated by citalopram
treatment in individuals who responded to treatment. We found these results to be
concordant with our observation of decreased expression of IRF7 in the prefrontal
cortex of MDDs with negative toxicological evidence for antidepressant treatment 
at the time of death. These findings point to IRF7 as a gene of interest in
studies investigating genomic factors associated with antidepressant response.

PMCID: PMC3309465
PMID: 22832429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 25;286(8):6521-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.172288. Epub 2010 
Dec 23.

Fas-associated death domain (FADD) and the E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase TRIM21
interact to negatively regulate virus-induced interferon production.

Young JA(1), Sermwittayawong D, Kim HJ, Nandu S, An N, Erdjument-Bromage H,
Tempst P, Coscoy L, Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Laboratory and Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA.

The production of cytokines such as type I interferon (IFN) is an essential
component of innate immunity. Insufficient amounts of cytokines lead to host
sensitivity to infection, whereas abundant cytokine production can lead to
inflammation. A tight regulation of cytokine production is, thus, essential for
homeostasis of the immune system. IFN-a production during RNA virus infection is 
mediated by the master transcription factor IRF7, which is activated upon
ubiquitination by TRAF6 and phosphorylation by IKKe and TBK1 kinases. We found
that Fas-associated death domain (FADD), first described as an apoptotic protein,
is involved in regulating IFN-a production through a novel interaction with
TRIM21. TRIM21 is a member of a large family of proteins that can impart
ubiquitin modification onto its cellular targets. The interaction between FADD
and TRIM21 enhances TRIM21 ubiquitin ligase activity, and together they
cooperatively repress IFN-a activation in Sendai virus-infected cells. FADD and
TRIM21 can directly ubiquitinate IRF7, affect its phosphorylation status, and
interfere with the ubiquitin ligase activity of TRAF6. Conversely, a reduction of
FADD and TRIM21 levels leads to higher IFN-a induction, IRF7 phosphorylation, and
lower titers of RNA virus of infected cells. We conclude that FADD and TRIM21
together negatively regulate the late IFN-a pathway in response to viral
infection.

PMCID: PMC3057824
PMID: 21183682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Virol. 2011 Mar;85(5):1970-9. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01801-10. Epub 2010 Dec 22.

Diversity of interferon antagonist activities mediated by NSP1 proteins of
different rotavirus strains.

Arnold MM(1), Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-8026, USA.

Studies involving limited numbers of rotavirus (RV) strains have shown that the
viral gene 5 product, NSP1, can antagonize beta interferon (IFN-ß) expression by 
inducing the degradation of IFN-regulatory factors (IRFs) (IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7) 
or a component of the E3 ubiquitin ligase complex responsible for activating
NF-<U+03BA>B (ß-transducin repeat-containing protein [ß-TrCP]). To gain a broader
perspective of NSP1 activities, we examined various RV strains for the ability to
inhibit IFN-ß expression in human cells. We found that all strains encoding
wild-type NSP1 impeded IFN-ß expression but not always through IRF3 degradation. 
To identify other degradation targets involved in suppressing IFN-ß expression,
we used transient expression vectors to test the abilities of a diverse
collection of NSP1 proteins to target IRF3, IRF5, IRF7, and ß-TrCP for
degradation. The results indicated that human RVs rely predominantly on the
NSP1-induced degradation of IRF5 and IRF7 to suppress IFN signaling, whereas NSP1
proteins of animal RVs tended to target IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7, allowing the animal
viruses a broader attack on the IFN-ß signaling pathway. The results also
suggested that the NSP1-induced degradation of ß-TrCP is an uncommon mechanism of
subverting IFN-ß signaling but is one that can be shared with NSP1 proteins that 
induce IRF degradation. Our analysis reveals that the activities of NSP1 proteins
are diverse, with no obvious correlations between degradations of pairs of target
proteins. Thus, RVs have evolved functionally distinct approaches for subverting 
the host antiviral response, a property consistent with the immense sequence
variation noted for NSP1 proteins.

PMCID: PMC3067804
PMID: 21177809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Hum Immunol. 2011 Mar;72(3):249-55. doi: 10.1016/j.humimm.2010.12.011. Epub 2010 
Dec 15.

Association of genetic variations in the STAT4 and IRF7/KIAA1542 regions with
systemic lupus erythematosus in a Northern Han Chinese population.

Li P(1), Cao C, Luan H, Li C, Hu C, Zhang S, Zeng X, Zhang F, Zeng C, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, Peking Union Medical
College Hospital, Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100730, China.

Erratum in
    Hum Immunol. 2013 Sep;74(9):1237.

Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a prototypic autoimmune disease with
complex genetic inheritance. Genome-wide association studies have identified SLE 
susceptibility variations at the IRF7/KIAA1542 locus and with STAT4 gene in
European populations. We decided to investigate the association of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IRF7/KIAA1542 region (rs4963128,
rs2246614, and rs702966) and in STAT4 (rs7574865 and rs7582694) with SLE disease 
in a Northern Han Chinese population of 748 patients and 750 healthy controls.
Our study indicated a strong association between rs7574865 (odds ratio = 0.68;
95% confidence interval 0.59-0.79; p = 1.57 × 10(-6)) and SLE and between
rs7574865 and the production of anti-Sm antibodies. Additionally, rs4963128 and
rs2246614 were correlated with a variety of clinical subphenotypes, such as lupus
nephritis, arthritis, and the production of anti-SSA/B autoantibodies, despite a 
lack of significant association between these two SNPs and SLE disease
susceptibility in general.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Histocompatibility and Immunogenetics.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21167895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Immunity. 2010 Dec 14;33(6):863-77. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.11.027.

The ubiquitin E3 ligase RAUL negatively regulates type i interferon through
ubiquitination of the transcription factors IRF7 and IRF3.

Yu Y(1), Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Oncology Program, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1650 Orleans Street, CRB1 3M09, Baltimore,
MD 21231, USA. yyanxin1@jhmi.edu

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Dec 14;33(6):833-5.

In the course of combating infectious agents, type I interferon (IFN) needs a
timely downregulation mechanism to avoid detrimental overreaction. Here we showed
a mechanism for restraining type I IFN responses, which relied on a HECT domain
ubiquitin (Ub) E3 ligase, RAUL. RAUL limited type I IFN production by directly
catalyzing lysine 48-linked polyubiquitination of both interferon regulatory
factor 7 (IRF7) and IRF3 followed by proteasome-dependent degradation.
Suppression of RAUL by dominant-negative RAUL or siRNA augmented both basal and
virus-induced production of type I IFN, which resulted in reduced viral
replication. The Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpes virus immediate-early lytic
cycle trigger protein RTA recruited this mechanism to augment its countermeasures
against the host antiviral response. These results unveil a previously
unrecognized "brake mechanism" for type I IFN that maintains proper low amounts
of type I IFN under physiological conditions and restrains its magnitude when the
antiviral response intensifies.

PMCID: PMC3012379
PMID: 21167755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Infect Immun. 2011 Mar;79(3):1057-66. doi: 10.1128/IAI.00633-10. Epub 2010 Dec
13.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 contributes to the control of Leishmania donovani 
in the mouse liver.

Beattie L(1), Phillips R, Brown N, Owens BM, Chauhan N, Dalton JE, Kaye PM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Infection, Hull York Medical School and Department
of Biology, University of York, Wentworth Way, York YO10 5YW, United Kingdom.

Optimal hepatic resistance to Leishmania donovani in mice requires the
coordinated effort of a variety of leukocyte populations that together induce
activation of local macrophages to a leishmanicidal state. Although nitric oxide 
and reactive oxygen intermediates are potent leishmanicidal effector molecules
operating in the acquired phase of immunity, there have long been suggestions
that other mechanisms of leishmanicidal activity exist. We recently discovered
that Irf-7 regulates a novel innate leishmanicidal response in resident splenic
macrophages that line the marginal zone. Here, we tested whether this mechanism
also operates in Kupffer cells, the resident macrophage population of the liver
and the major target for hepatic infection by L. donovani. Comparing the Kupffer 
cell responses in situ in B6 and B6.Irf-7(-/-) mice, we found no evidence that
Irf-7 affected amastigote uptake or early survival. However, we did find that
Irf-7-deficient mice had impaired acquired resistance to hepatic L. donovani
infection. This phenotype was attributable to a reduction in the capacity of
hepatic CD4(+) T cells, NK cells, and NKT cells to produce gamma interferon
(IFN-<U+03B3>) and also to defective induction of NOS2 in infected Kupffer cells. Our
data therefore add interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7) to the growing list of 
interferon regulatory factors that have effects on downstream events in the
acquired cellular immune response to nonviral pathogens.

PMCID: PMC3067515
PMID: 21149596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 15;186(2):1001-10. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002240. Epub 2010
Dec 8.

Negative regulation of IRF7 activation by activating transcription factor 4
suggests a cross-regulation between the IFN responses and the cellular integrated
stress responses.

Liang Q(1), Deng H, Sun CW, Townes TM, Zhu F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
32306, USA.

Cells react to viral infection by exhibiting IFN-based innate immune responses
and integrated stress responses, but little is known about the interrelationships
between the two. In this study, we report a linkage between these two
host-protective cellular mechanisms. We found that IFN regulatory factor (IRF)7, 
the master regulator of type I IFN gene expression, interacts with activating
transcription factor (ATF)4, a key component of the integrated stress responses
whose translation is induced by viral infection and various stresses. We have
demonstrated that IRF7 upregulates ATF4 activity and expression, whereas ATF4 in 
return inhibits IRF7 activation, suggesting a cross-regulation between the IFN
response and the cellular integrated stress response that controls host innate
immune defense against viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3057134
PMID: 21148039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 11;286(6):4517-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.159590. Epub 2010 
Dec 3.

A novel Toll-like receptor that recognizes vesicular stomatitis virus.

Shi Z(1), Cai Z, Sanchez A, Zhang T, Wen S, Wang J, Yang J, Fu S, Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious and Inflammatory Diseases at Institute of Biosciences
and Technology, Texas A&M University Health Science Center, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are the key molecular sensors used by the mammalian
innate immune system to detect various types of pathogens. Tlr13 is a novel and
uncharacterized member of the mammalian TLR family. Here we report the cloning
and characterization of tlr13. Tlr13 is predominantly expressed in the spleen,
particularly in dendritic cells and macrophages. Tlr13 appears to activate a
MyD88- and TAK1-dependent TLR signaling pathway, inducing the activation of
NF-<U+03BA>B. This receptor can also activate type 1 interferon through IRF7.
Furthermore, Tlr13 seems to be another intracellular TLR. Remarkably, cells
expressing tlr13 fail to respond to known TLR ligands but instead respond
specifically to vesicular stomatitis virus. Cells with the knockdown of tlr13 are
highly susceptible to vesicular stomatitis virus infection. Thus, these results
provide an important insight into the potential role of the novel Toll-like
receptor tlr13 in the recognition of viral infection.

PMCID: PMC3039399
PMID: 21131352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Immunol. 2011 Jan 1;186(1):164-73. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0904170. Epub 2010 Nov
24.

H5N1 virus activates signaling pathways in human endothelial cells resulting in a
specific imbalanced inflammatory response.

Viemann D(1), Schmolke M, Lueken A, Boergeling Y, Friesenhagen J, Wittkowski H,
Ludwig S, Roth J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Muenster, Muenster, Germany.
viemannd@uni-muenster.de

H5N1 influenza virus infections in humans cause a characteristic systemic
inflammatory response syndrome; however, the molecular mechanisms are largely
unknown. Endothelial cells (ECs) play a pivotal role in hyperdynamic septic
diseases. To unravel specific signaling networks activated by H5N1 we used a
genome-wide comparative systems biology approach analyzing gene expression in
human ECs infected with three different human and avian influenza strains of high
and low pathogenicity. Blocking of specific signaling pathways revealed that H5N1
induces an exceptionally NF-<U+03BA>B-dependent gene response in human endothelia.
Additionally, the IFN-driven antiviral program in ECs is shown to be dependent on
IFN regulatory factor 3 but significantly impaired upon H5N1 infection compared
with low pathogenic influenza virus. As additional modulators of this
H5N1-specific imbalanced gene response pattern, we identified HMGA1 as a novel
transcription factor specifically responsible for the overwhelming
proinflammatory but not antiviral response, whereas NFATC4 was found to regulate 
transcription of specifically H5N1-induced genes. We describe for the first time,
to our knowledge, defined signaling patterns specifically activated by H5N1,
which, in contrast to low pathogenic influenza viruses, are responsible for an
imbalance of an overwhelming proinflammatory and impaired antiviral gene program.

PMID: 21106851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Virol. 2011 Jan;85(2):842-52. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01427-10. Epub 2010 Nov 17.

Genetic dissection of interferon-antagonistic functions of rabies virus
phosphoprotein: inhibition of interferon regulatory factor 3 activation is
important for pathogenicity.

Rieder M(1), Brzózka K, Pfaller CK, Cox JH, Stitz L, Conzelmann KK.

Author information: 
(1)Max von Pettenkofer Institute & Gene Center, Ludwig Maximilians University,
D-81377 München, Germany.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2012 Apr;86(8):4720.

The rabies virus (RV) phosphoprotein (P) is a type I interferon (IFN) antagonist 
preventing both transcriptional induction of IFN and IFN-mediated JAK/STAT
signaling. In addition, P is an essential cofactor of the viral polymerase and is
required for encapsidation of viral RNA into nucleoprotein during replication. By
site-directed mutagenesis, we have identified a domain of P required for
efficient inhibition of IFN induction. Phosphoproteins lacking amino acids (aa)
176 to 181, 182 to 186, or 176 to 186 were severely compromised in counteracting 
phosphorylation of IRF3 and IRF7 by TBK1 or IKKi while retaining the full
capacity of preventing nuclear import of activated STATs and of supporting virus 
transcription and replication. Recombinant RV carrying the mutated
phosphoproteins (the SAD <U+0394>Ind1, SAD <U+0394>Ind2, and SAD <U+0394>Ind1/2 viruses) activated
IRF3 and beta IFN (IFN-ß) transcription in infected cells but still blocked
STAT-mediated expression of IFN-stimulated genes. Due to a somewhat higher
transcription rate, the SAD <U+0394>Ind1 virus activated IRF3 more efficiently than the 
SAD <U+0394>Ind2 virus. After intracerebral injection into mouse brains at high doses,
the SAD <U+0394>Ind1 virus was completely apathogenic for wild-type (wt) mice, while the
SAD <U+0394>Ind2 virus was partially attenuated and caused a slower progression of
lethal rabies than wt RV. Neurovirulence of IFN-resistant RV thus correlates with
the capacity of the virus to prevent activation of IRF3 and IRF7.

PMCID: PMC3020028
PMID: 21084487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Ann Neurol. 2010 Dec;68(6):899-906. doi: 10.1002/ana.22136.

Interferon-ß inhibits toll-like receptor 9 processing in multiple sclerosis.

Balashov KE(1), Aung LL, Vaknin-Dembinsky A, Dhib-Jalbut S, Weiner HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Medicine and Dentistry, New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.
kbalashov@yahoo.com

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2011 Apr;69(4):740-1; author reply 741.

OBJECTIVE: Viral infections have been implicated in the pathogenesis of multiple 
sclerosis (MS). Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) are present in peripheral
blood, cerebrospinal fluid, and brain lesions of MS patients. pDCs sense viral
DNA via Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9), which has to be cleaved from the N-terminal 
to become functional (TLR9 processing). pDCs activated with TLR9 agonists promote
T-helper type 1 (Th1)/T-helper type 17 (Th17) responses. In the animal model of
MS, TLR9 agonists can induce disease. We hypothesized that pDCs are inhibited by 
disease-modifying therapy such as interferon (IFN)-ß, consequently decreasing the
frequency of MS attacks.
METHODS: We separated pDCs from healthy subjects and patients diagnosed with
relapsing-remitting MS and clinically isolated syndrome. Cytokine secretion by
pDCs activated with TLR9 agonists was measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay and multianalyte profiling. TLR9 gene and protein expression was studied by
DNA microarrays and western blot.
RESULTS: In untreated patients, pDCs activated with TLR9 agonists produced
increased levels of IFN-a, a Th1-promoting cytokine, as compared to healthy
subjects. In IFN-ß-treated patients, activated pDCs had decreased ability to
produce both IFN-a and the proinflammatory cytokines interleukin (IL)-6 and tumor
necrosis factor a as compared to untreated patients. pDCs separated from
IFN-ß-treated patients had significantly reduced levels of the processed TLR9
protein but normal levels of the full-length TLR9 protein and TLR9 gene
expression as compared to untreated patients.
INTERPRETATION: This finding represents a novel immunomodulatory mechanism of
IFN-ß: inhibition of TLR9 processing. This results in decreased activation of
pDCs by viral pathogens and, thus, may affect the frequency of MS exacerbations.

PMCID: PMC3058378
PMID: 21061396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Exp Med. 2010 Nov 22;207(12):2703-17. doi: 10.1084/jem.20092720. Epub 2010 Oct 
25.

Mouse CD8alpha+ DCs and human BDCA3+ DCs are major producers of IFN-lambda in
response to poly IC.

Lauterbach H(1), Bathke B, Gilles S, Traidl-Hoffmann C, Luber CA, Fejer G,
Freudenberg MA, Davey GM, Vremec D, Kallies A, Wu L, Shortman K, Chaplin P, Suter
M, O'Keeffe M, Hochrein H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research Immunology, Bavarian Nordic GmbH, 82152 Martinsried,
Germany.

Comment in
    Expert Rev Vaccines. 2011 Feb;10(2):159-61.

Polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (poly IC), a double-stranded RNA, is an effective
adjuvant in vivo. IFN-<U+03BB>s (also termed IL-28/29) are potent immunomodulatory and
antiviral cytokines. We demonstrate that poly IC injection in vivo induces large 
amounts of IFN-<U+03BB>, which depended on hematopoietic cells and the presence of TLR3 
(Toll-like receptor 3), IRF3 (IFN regulatory factor 3), IRF7, IFN-I receptor,
Fms-related tyrosine kinase 3 ligand (FL), and IRF8 but not on MyD88 (myeloid
differentiation factor 88), Rig-like helicases, or lymphocytes. Upon poly IC
injection in vivo, the IFN-<U+03BB> production by splenocytes segregated with cells
phenotypically resembling CD8a(+) conventional dendritic cells (DCs [cDCs]). In
vitro experiments revealed that CD8a(+) cDCs were the major producers of IFN-<U+03BB> in
response to poly IC, whereas both CD8a(+) cDCs and plasmacytoid DCs produced
large amounts of IFN-<U+03BB> in response to HSV-1 or parapoxvirus. The nature of the
stimulus and the cytokine milieu determined whether CD8a(+) cDCs produced IFN-<U+03BB>
or IL-12p70. Human DCs expressing BDCA3 (CD141), which is considered to be the
human counterpart of murine CD8a(+) DCs, also produced large amounts of IFN-<U+03BB>
upon poly IC stimulation. Thus, IFN-<U+03BB> production in response to poly IC is a
novel function of mouse CD8a(+) cDCs and their human equivalents.

PMCID: PMC2989774
PMID: 20975040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Nov;40(11):3150-60. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040547. Epub 2010 Oct
19.

TLR3-mediated IFN-ß gene induction is negatively regulated by the TLR adaptor
MyD88 adaptor-like.

Siednienko J(1), Halle A, Nagpal K, Golenbock DT, Miggin SM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Department of Biology, National University of Ireland
Maynooth, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Kildare, Ireland.

There is limited insight into the mechanisms involved in the counterregulation of
TLR. Given the important role of TLR3/TIR domain-containing adaptor-inducing
IFN-ß (TRIF)-dependent signalling in innate immunity, novel insights into its
modulation is of significance in the context of many physiological and
pathological processes. Herein, we sought to perform analysis to definitively
assign a mechanistic role for MyD88 adaptor-like (Mal), an activator of TLR2/4
signalling, in the negative regulation of TLR3/TRIF signalling. Biochemical and
functional analysis demonstrates that Mal negatively regulates TLR3, but not
TLR4, mediated IFN-ß production. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate
that Mal associates with IRF7 (IRF, IFN regulatory factor), not IRF3, and Mal
specifically blocks IRF7 activation. In doing so, Mal impedes TLR3 ligand-induced
IFN-ß induction. Interestingly, Mal does not affect the induction of IL-6 and
TNF-a upon TLR3 ligand engagement. Together, these data show that the TLR adaptor
Mal interacts with IRF7 and, in doing so, impairs IFN-ß induction through the
positive regulatory domains I-III enhancer element of the IFN-ß gene following
poly(I:C) stimulation. Our findings offer a new mechanistic insight into
TLR3/TRIF signalling through a hitherto unknown mechanism whereby Mal inhibits
poly(I:C)-induced IRF7 activation and concomitant IFN-ß production. Thus, Mal is 
essential in restricting TLR3 signalling thereby protecting the host from
unwanted immunopathologies associated with excessive IFN-ß production.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 20957750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Virol. 2010 Dec;84(24):12982-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01224-10. Epub 2010 Oct 13.

The early whole-blood transcriptional signature of dengue virus and features
associated with progression to dengue shock syndrome in Vietnamese children and
young adults.

Hoang LT(1), Lynn DJ, Henn M, Birren BW, Lennon NJ, Le PT, Duong KT, Nguyen TT,
Mai LN, Farrar JJ, Hibberd ML, Simmons CP.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, 190 
Ben Ham Tu, District 5, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.

Dengue is a pantropic public health problem. In children, dengue shock syndrome
(DSS) is the most common life-threatening complication. The ability to predict
which patients may develop DSS may improve triage and treatment. To this end, we 
conducted a nested case-control comparison of the early host transcriptional
features in 24 DSS patients and 56 sex-, age-, and virus serotype-matched
uncomplicated (UC) dengue patients. In the first instance, we defined the "early 
dengue" profile. The transcriptional signature in acute rather than convalescent 
samples (=72 h post-illness onset) was defined by an overabundance of
interferon-inducible transcripts (31% of the 551 overabundant transcripts) and
canonical gene ontology terms that included the following: response to virus,
immune response, innate immune response, and inflammatory response. Pathway and
network analyses identified STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, IRF7, IRF9, IRF1, CEBPB, and SP1
as key transcriptional factors mediating the early response. Strikingly, the only
difference in the transcriptional signatures of early DSS and UC dengue cases was
the greater abundance of several neutrophil-associated transcripts in patients
who progressed to DSS, a finding supported by higher plasma concentrations of
several canonical proteins associated with neutrophil degranulation
(bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein [BPI], elastase 2 [ELA2], and
defensin 1 alpha [DEF1A]). Elevated levels of neutrophil-associated transcripts
were independent of the neutrophil count and also of the genotype of the
infecting virus, as genome-length sequences of dengue virus serotype 1 (DENV-1)
(n = 15) and DENV-2 (n = 3) sampled from DSS patients were phylogenetically
indistinguishable from those sampled from uncomplicated dengue patients (32
DENV-1 and 9 DENV-2 sequences). Collectively, these data suggest a hitherto
unrecognized association between neutrophil activation, pathogenesis, and the
development of DSS and point to future strategies for guiding prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3004338
PMID: 20943967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 31;285(53):42013-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.165936. Epub
2010 Oct 13.

Transcription factor redundancy ensures induction of the antiviral state.

Schmid S(1), Mordstein M, Kochs G, García-Sastre A, Tenoever BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

The transcriptional response to virus infection is thought to be predominantly
induced by interferon (IFN) signaling. Here we demonstrate that, in the absence
of IFN signaling, an IFN-like transcriptome is still maintained. This
transcriptional activity is mediated from IFN-stimulated response elements
(ISREs) that bind to both the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) as well as to 
IFN response factor 7 (IRF7). Through a combination of both in vitro biochemistry
and in vivo transcriptional profiling, we have dissected what constitutes
IRF-specific, ISGF3-specific, or universal ISREs. Taken together, the data
presented here suggest that IRF7 can induce an IFN-like transcriptome in the
absence of type-I or -III signaling and therefore provides a level of redundancy 
to cells to ensure the induction of the antiviral state.

PMCID: PMC3009927
PMID: 20943654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Science. 2010 Sep 17;329(5998):1530-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1187029.

Bifurcation of Toll-like receptor 9 signaling by adaptor protein 3.

Sasai M(1), Linehan MM, Iwasaki A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06520, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2010 Nov;10(11):746.

Endosomal Toll-like receptors (TLRs) 7 and 9 recognize viral pathogens and induce
signals leading to the activation of nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B)-dependent
proinflammatory cytokines and interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)-dependent
type I interferons (IFNs). Recognition of viral nucleic acids by TLR9 requires
its cleavage in the endolysosomal compartment. Here, we show that TLR9 signals
leading to the activation of type I IFN, but not proinflammatory cytokine genes, 
require TLR9 trafficking from endosomes to a specialized lysosome-related
organelle. Furthermore, we identify adapter protein-3 as the protein complex
responsible for the trafficking of TLR9 to this subcellular compartment. Our
results reveal an intracellular mechanism for bifurcation of TLR9 signals by
selective receptor trafficking within the endosomal system.

PMCID: PMC3063333
PMID: 20847273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Gen Virol. 2011 Jan;92(Pt 1):181-7. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.021816-0. Epub 2010 Sep 
15.

Lysine residues of interferon regulatory factor 7 affect the replication and
transcription activator-mediated lytic replication of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus/human herpesvirus 8.

Zhang T(1), Wang Y, Zhang L, Liu B, Xie J, Wood C, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)TEDA School of Biological Sciences and Biotechnology, Nankai University, 23
Hongda Street, TEDA, Tianjin 300457, PR China.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) infection goes through latent and 
lytic phases, which are controlled by the viral replication and transcription
activator (RTA). Upon KSHV infection, the host responds by suppressing
RTA-activated lytic gene expression through interferon regulatory factor 7
(IRF-7), a key regulator of host innate immune response. Lysine residues are
potential sites for post-translational modification of IRF-7, and were suggested 
to be critical for its activity. In this study, we analysed the 15 lysine
residues for their effects on IRF-7 function by site-directed mutagenesis. We
found that some mutations affect the ability of IRF-7 to activate interferon
(IFN)-a1 and IFN-ß promoters, to suppress RTA-mediated lytic gene expression and 
to repress KSHV reactivation and lytic replication. However, other mutations
affect only a subset of these four functions. These findings demonstrate that the
lysine residues of IRF-7 play important roles in mediating IFN synthesis and
modulating viral lytic replication.

PMCID: PMC3052531
PMID: 20844090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Nature. 2010 Sep 23;467(7314):460-4. doi: 10.1038/nature09386. Epub 2010 Sep 8.

A trans-acting locus regulates an anti-viral expression network and type 1
diabetes risk.

Heinig M(1), Petretto E, Wallace C, Bottolo L, Rotival M, Lu H, Li Y, Sarwar R,
Langley SR, Bauerfeind A, Hummel O, Lee YA, Paskas S, Rintisch C, Saar K, Cooper 
J, Buchan R, Gray EE, Cyster JG; Cardiogenics Consortium, Erdmann J, Hengstenberg
C, Maouche S, Ouwehand WH, Rice CM, Samani NJ, Schunkert H, Goodall AH, Schulz H,
Roider HG, Vingron M, Blankenberg S, Münzel T, Zeller T, Szymczak S, Ziegler A,
Tiret L, Smyth DJ, Pravenec M, Aitman TJ, Cambien F, Clayton D, Todd JA, Hubner
N, Cook SA.

Collaborators: Braund P, Gracey J, Krishnan U, Moore JS, Nelson CP, Pollard H,
Attwood T, Crisp-Hihn A, Foad N, Jolley J, Lloyd-Jones H, Muir D, Murray E,
O'Leary K, Rankin A, Sambrook J, Godfroy T, Brocheton J, Proust C, Schmitz G,
Heimerl S, Lugauer I, Belz S, Gulde S, Linsel-Nitschke P, Sager H, Schroeder L,
Lundmark P, Syvannen AC, Neudert J, Scholz M, Deloukas P, Gray E, Gwilliams R,
Niblett D.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany.

Combined analyses of gene networks and DNA sequence variation can provide new
insights into the aetiology of common diseases that may not be apparent from
genome-wide association studies alone. Recent advances in rat genomics are
facilitating systems-genetics approaches. Here we report the use of integrated
genome-wide approaches across seven rat tissues to identify gene networks and the
loci underlying their regulation. We defined an interferon regulatory factor 7
(IRF7)-driven inflammatory network (IDIN) enriched for viral response genes,
which represents a molecular biomarker for macrophages and which was regulated in
multiple tissues by a locus on rat chromosome 15q25. We show that Epstein-Barr
virus induced gene 2 (Ebi2, also known as Gpr183), which lies at this locus and
controls B lymphocyte migration, is expressed in macrophages and regulates the
IDIN. The human orthologous locus on chromosome 13q32 controlled the human
equivalent of the IDIN, which was conserved in monocytes. IDIN genes were more
likely to associate with susceptibility to type 1 diabetes (T1D)-a
macrophage-associated autoimmune disease-than randomly selected immune response
genes (P = 8.85<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-6)). The human locus controlling the IDIN was associated
with the risk of T1D at single nucleotide polymorphism rs9585056 (P =
7.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-10); odds ratio, 1.15), which was one of five single nucleotide
polymorphisms in this region associated with EBI2 (GPR183) expression. These data
implicate IRF7 network genes and their regulatory locus in the pathogenesis of
T1D.

PMCID: PMC3657719
PMID: 20827270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Gastroenterology. 2011 Feb;140(2):697-708.e4. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.08.020. 
Epub 2010 Aug 19.

Type I interferons protect from Toll-like receptor 9-associated liver injury and 
regulate IL-1 receptor antagonist in mice.

Petrasek J(1), Dolganiuc A, Csak T, Kurt-Jones EA, Szabo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts 01605, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Liver inflammation and injury are mediated by the innate
immune response, which is regulated by Toll-like receptors (TLR). Activation of
TLR9 induces type I interferons (IFNs) via the interferon regulatory factor
(IRF)-7. We investigated the roles of type I IFNs in TLR9-associated liver
injury.
METHODS: Wild-type (WT), IRF7-deficient, and IFN-a/ß receptor 1
(IFNAR1)-deficient mice were stimulated with TLR9 or TLR2 ligands. Findings from 
mice were verified in cultured hepatocytes and liver mononuclear cells (LMNCs) as
well as in vivo experiments using recombinant type I IFN and interleukin-1
receptor antagonist (IL-1ra).
RESULTS: Type I IFNs were up-regulated during TLR9-associated liver injury in WT 
mice. IRF7- and IFNAR1-deficient mice, which have disruptions in type I IFN
production or signaling, respectively, had increased liver damage and
inflammation, decreased recruitment of dendritic cells, and increased production 
of tumor necrosis factor a by LMNCs. These findings indicate that type I IFNs
have anti-inflammatory activities in liver. IL-1ra, which is produced by LMNCs
and hepatocytes, is an IFN-regulated antagonist of the proinflammatory cytokine
IL-1ß; IRF7- and IFNAR1-deficient mice had decreased levels of IL-1ra compared
with WT mice. IL-1ra protected cultured hepatocytes from IL-1ß-mediated
sensitization to cytotoxicity from tumor necrosis factor a. In vivo exposure to
type I IFN, which induced IL-1ra, or administration of IL-1ra reduced
TLR9-associated liver injury; the protective effect of type I IFNs therefore
appears to be mediated by IFN-dependent induction of IL-1ra.
CONCLUSIONS: Type I IFNs have anti-inflammatory effects mediated by endogenous
IL-1ra, which regulates the extent of TLR9-induced liver damage. Type I IFN
signaling is therefore required for protection from immune-mediated liver injury.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3031737
PMID: 20727895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 24;107(34):15181-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1006539107. Epub 2010 Aug 9.

Aspartate-glutamate-alanine-histidine box motif (DEAH)/RNA helicase A helicases
sense microbial DNA in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Kim T(1), Pazhoor S, Bao M, Zhang Z, Hanabuchi S, Facchinetti V, Bover L, Plumas 
J, Chaperot L, Qin J, Liu YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Cancer Immunology Research, University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) senses microbial DNA and triggers type I IFN
responses in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). Previous studies suggest the
presence of myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88)-dependent
DNA sensors other than TLR9 in pDCs. Using MS, we investigated C-phosphate-G
(CpG)-binding proteins from human pDCs, pDC-cell lines, and interferon regulatory
factor 7 (IRF7)-expressing B-cell lines. CpG-A selectively bound the
aspartate-glutamate-any amino acid-aspartate/histidine (DExD/H)-box helicase 36
(DHX36), whereas CpG-B selectively bound DExD/H-box helicase 9 (DHX9). Although
the aspartate-glutamate-alanine-histidine box motif (DEAH) domain of DHX36 was
essential for CpG-A binding, the domain of unknown function 1605 (DUF1605 domain)
of DHX9 was required for CpG-B binding. DHX36 is associated with IFN-alpha
production and IRF7 nuclear translocation in response to CpG-A, but DHX9 is
important for TNF-alpha and IL-6 production and NF-kappaB activation in response 
to CpG-B. Knocking down DHX9 or DHX36 significantly reduced the cytokine
responses of pDCs to a DNA virus but had no effect on the cytokine responses to
an RNA virus. We further showed that both DHX9 and DHX36 are localized within the
cytosol and are directly bound to the Toll-interleukin receptor domain of MyD88
via their helicase-associated domain 2 and DUF domains. This study demonstrates
that DHX9/DHX36 represent the MyD88-dependent DNA sensors in the cytosol of pDCs 
and suggests a much broader role for DHX helicases in viral sensing.

PMCID: PMC2930588
PMID: 20696886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 30;5(7):e11908. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011908.

Epstein-Barr virus interferes with the amplification of IFNalpha secretion by
activating suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 in primary human monocytes.

Michaud F(1), Coulombe F, Gaudreault E, Paquet-Bouchard C, Rola-Pleszczynski M,
Gosselin J.

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunology Laboratory, CHUQ Research Center (CHUL) and Department of
Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Université Laval, Quebec, Quebec,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Epstein-Barr virus is recognized to cause lymphoproliferative
disorders and is also associated with cancer. Evidence suggests that monocytes
are likely to be involved in EBV pathogenesis, especially due to a number of
cellular functions altered in EBV-infected monocytes, a process that may affect
efficient host defense. Because type I interferons (IFNs) are crucial mediators
of host defense against viruses, we investigated the effect of EBV infection on
the IFNalpha pathway in primary human monocytes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Infection of monocytes with EBV induced IFNalpha 
secretion but inhibited the positive feedback loop for the amplification of
IFNalpha. We showed that EBV infection induced the expression of suppressor of
cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) and, to a lesser extent, SOCS1, two proteins known
to interfere with the amplification of IFNalpha secretion mediated by the
JAK/STAT signal transduction pathway. EBV infection correlated with a blockage in
the activation of JAK/STAT pathway members and affected the level of
phosphorylated IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7). Depletion of SOCS3, but not SOCS1,
by small interfering RNA (siRNA) abrogated the inhibitory effect of EBV on
JAK/STAT pathway activation and significantly restored IFNalpha secretion.
Finally, transfection of monocytes with the viral protein Zta caused the
upregulation of SOCS3, an event that could not be recapitulated with mutated Zta.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We propose that EBV protein Zta activates SOCS3 protein
as an immune escape mechanism that both suppresses optimal IFNalpha secretion by 
human monocytes and favors a state of type I IFN irresponsiveness in these cells.
This immunomodulatory effect is important to better understand the aspects of the
immune response to EBV.

PMCID: PMC2912847
PMID: 20689596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Oct;126(4):836-844.e13. doi:
10.1016/j.jaci.2010.06.009. Epub 2010 Jul 31.

Interferon response factor 3 is essential for house dust mite-induced airway
allergy.

Marichal T(1), Bedoret D, Mesnil C, Pichavant M, Goriely S, Trottein F, Cataldo
D, Goldman M, Lekeux P, Bureau F, Desmet CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, GIGA-Research and Faculty of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Pattern-recognition receptors (PRRs) are critically involved in the
pathophysiology of airway allergy, yet most of the signaling pathways downstream 
of PRRs implicated in allergic airway sensitization remain unknown.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to study the effects of genetic depletion of interferon
response factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7, important transcription factors downstream of
various PRRs, in a murine model of house dust mite (HDM)-induced allergic asthma.
METHODS: We compared HDM-induced allergic immune responses in IRF3-deficient
(IRF3(-/-)), IRF7(-/-), and wild-type mice.
RESULTS: Parameters of airway allergy caused by HDM exposure were strongly
attenuated in IRF3(-/-), but not IRF7(-/-), mice compared with those in wild-type
mice. Indeed, in HDM-exposed IRF3(-/-) mice HDM-specific T(H)2 cell responses did
not develop. This correlated with impaired maturation and migration of IRF3(-/-) 
lung dendritic cells (DCs) on HDM treatment. Furthermore, adoptive transfer of
HDM-loaded DCs indicated that IRF3(-/-) DCs had an intrinsic defect rendering
them unable to migrate and to prime HDM-specific T(H)2 responses. Intriguingly,
we also show that DC function and allergic airway sensitization in response to
HDM were independent of signaling by type I interferons, the main target genes of
IRF3.
CONCLUSION: Through its role in DC function, IRF3, mainly known as a central
activator of antiviral immunity, is essential for the development of T(H)2-type
responses to airway allergens.

Copyright © 2010 American Academy of Allergy, Asthma & Immunology. Published by
Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20673978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 26;5(7):e11776. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011776.

Self protection from anti-viral responses--Ro52 promotes degradation of the
transcription factor IRF7 downstream of the viral Toll-Like receptors.

Higgs R(1), Lazzari E, Wynne C, Ní Gabhann J, Espinosa A, Wahren-Herlenius M,
Jefferies CA.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Therapeutics and RSCI Research Institute, Royal College
of Surgeons in Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

Ro52 is a member of the TRIM family of single-protein E3 ligases and is also a
target for autoantibody production in systemic lupus erythematosus and Sjögren's 
syndrome. We previously demonstrated a novel function of Ro52 in the
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of IRF3 following TLR3/4 stimulation. 
We now present evidence that Ro52 has a similar role in regulating the stability 
and activity of IRF7. Endogenous immunoprecipitation of Ro52-bound proteins
revealed that IRF7 associates with Ro52, an effect which increases following TLR7
and TLR9 stimulation, suggesting that Ro52 interacts with IRF7 post-pathogen
recognition. Furthermore, we show that Ro52 ubiquitinates IRF7 in a
dose-dependent manner, resulting in a decrease in total IRF7 expression and a
subsequent decrease in IFN-alpha production. IRF7 stability was increased in bone
marrow-derived macrophages from Ro52-deficient mice stimulated with imiquimod or 
CpG-B, consistent with a role for Ro52 in the negative regulation of IRF7
signalling. Taken together, these results suggest that Ro52-mediated
ubiquitination promotes the degradation of IRF7 following TLR7 and TLR9
stimulation. As Ro52 is known to be IFN-inducible, this system constitutes a
negative-feedback loop that acts to protect the host from the prolonged
activation of the immune response.

PMCID: PMC2909902
PMID: 20668674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Dev Comp Immunol. 2010 Dec;34(12):1263-73. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2010.07.003. Epub
2010 Jul 23.

Characteristics of the interferon regulatory factor pairs zfIRF5/7 and their
stimulation expression by ISKNV Infection in zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Xiang Z(1), Dong C, Qi L, Chen W, Huang L, Li Z, Xia Q, Liu D, Huang M, Weng S,
He J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Biocontrol, School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-sen
University, 135 Xingang Road West, Guangzhou 510275, PR China.

The interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family plays critical roles in a host's
virus infection responses. In this study, two IRF family members, zfIRF5 and
zfIRF7, are identified in zebrafish. The zfIRF5 protein encodes 297 amino acids
without the carboxyl IRF3 domain. We suggest that zfIRF5 is a new kind of
splicing variant, following the nine other kinds of IRF5 splicing variants found 
in mammals. The zfIRF7 protein is identified as a member of the IRF7 family,
compared to the human IRF7 protein, the amino acid sequence of zfIRF7 only with
29% identity and devoid a virus activated domain (VAD). There zfIRF5/7 proteins
are expressed in all 11 selective zebrafish tissues within 6-120h of embryonic
development. Laser confocal microscopy shows that the full length the proteins
are separately located in the cytoplasm. Mutation experiments show that the
nuclear localization signals (NLS) of zfIRF7 and zfIRF-5 are at the N-terminal
and C-terminals, respectively. In the assays, zfIRF7 expression increases during 
infectious spleen and kidney necrosis virus (ISKNV) infection and by poly(I:C)
and LPS injections, both of which activate the transcriptional activity of
L8G5-luc plasmids. The over-expression of zfIRF5/7 activates the
interferon-stimulated response elements (ISRE) signal pathway. In addition,
zfIRF7 can activate IFN-ß, zfIRF5/7. Co-immunoprecipitation assays and laser
co-confocal microscopy show that the two proteins could interact, and zfIRF7 may 
stimulate zfIRF5 to move into the nucleus. The co-expression of zfIRF5/IRF7
suppresses the transcriptional activities of IFN-ß in HEK293T cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20637800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Virol. 2010 Sep;84(18):9452-62. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00155-10. Epub 2010 Jun 30.

Induction and inhibition of type I interferon responses by distinct components of
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus.

Zhou S(1), Cerny AM, Zacharia A, Fitzgerald KA, Kurt-Jones EA, Finberg RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, USA.

Type I interferons (IFNs) play a critical role in the host defense against
viruses. Lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) infection induces robust type 
I IFN production in its natural host, the mouse. However, the mechanisms
underlying the induction of type I IFNs in response to LCMV infection have not
yet been clearly defined. In the present study, we demonstrate that IRF7 is
required for both the early phase (day 1 postinfection) and the late phase (day 2
postinfection) of the type I IFN response to LCMV, and melanoma
differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5)/mitochondrial antiviral signaling
protein (MAVS) signaling is crucial for the late phase of the type I IFN response
to LCMV. We further demonstrate that LCMV genomic RNA itself (without other LCMV 
components) is able to induce type I IFN responses in various cell types by
activation of the RNA helicases retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) and MDA5. 
We also show that expression of the LCMV nucleoprotein (NP) inhibits the type I
IFN response induced by LCMV RNA and other RIG-I/MDA5 ligands. These virus-host
interactions may play important roles in the pathogeneses of LCMV and other human
arenavirus diseases.

PMCID: PMC2937596
PMID: 20592086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 15;185(2):1258-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901753. Epub 2010
Jun 18.

Injury-induced type I IFN signaling regulates inflammatory responses in the
central nervous system.

Khorooshi R(1), Owens T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark.

Innate glial response is critical for the induction of inflammatory mediators and
recruitment of leukocytes to sites of the injury in the CNS. We have examined the
involvement of type I IFN signaling in the mouse hippocampus following sterile
injury (transection of entorhinal afferents). Type I IFNs signal through a
receptor (IFNAR), which involves activation of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)9,
leading to the induction of IFN-stimulated genes including IRF7, that in turn
enhances the induction of type I IFN. Axonal transection induced upregulation of 
IRF7 and IRF9 in hippocampus. Induction of IRF7 and IRF9 mRNAs was IFNAR
dependent. Double-labeling immunofluorescence showed that IRF7 selectively was
induced in Mac-1/CD11b(+) macrophages/microglia in hippocampus after axonal
transection. IRF7 mRNA was also detected in microglia sorted by flow cytometry.
Lack of type I IFN signaling resulted in increased leukocyte infiltration into
the lesion-reactive hippocampus. Axonal lesion-induced CXCL10 gene expression was
abrogated, whereas matrix metalloproteinase 9 mRNA was elevated in
IFNAR-deficient mice. Our findings point to a role for type I IFN signaling in
regulation of CNS response to sterile injury.

PMID: 20562259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Endocrinology. 2010 Aug;151(8):3847-62. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0375. Epub 2010 Jun 
9.

Estradiol replacement alters expression of genes related to neurotransmission and
immune surveillance in the frontal cortex of middle-aged, ovariectomized rats.

Sárvári M(1), Kalló I, Hrabovszky E, Solymosi N, Tóth K, Likó I, Molnár B,
Tihanyi K, Liposits Z.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Endocrine Neurobiology, Institute of Experimental Medicine,
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary.

Estradiol (E2) modulates a wide range of functions of the frontal cerebral
cortex. From the onset of menopause, declining levels of E2 can cause cognitive
disturbances and changes in behavior that can be counterbalanced by hormone
replacement. To study the effect of E2 replacement on the cortical transcriptome 
in a rodent model with low serum E2 level, we treated middle-aged, ovariectomized
rats with E2 or vehicle using osmotic minipumps for 4 wk. Six animals for each
group were selected, and samples of their frontal cortex were subjected to
expression profiling using oligonucleotide microarrays. The explored E2-regulated
genes were related to neurotransmission (Adora2a, Cartpt, Drd1a, Drd2, Gjb2, Nts,
and Tac1), immunity (C3, C4b, Cd74, Fcgr2b, Mpeg1, and RT1-Aw2), signal
transduction (Igf2, Igfbp2, Igfbp6, Rgs9, and Sncg), transport (Abca1, Hba-a2,
Slc13a3, and Slc22a8), extracellular matrix (Col1a2, Col3a1, Fmod, and Lum), and 
transcription (Irf7 and Nupr1). Seventy-four percent of the transcriptional
changes identified by microarray were confirmed by quantitative real-time PCR.
The genes identified by expression profiling indicated that chronic E2
replacement significantly altered the transcriptome of the frontal cortex. The
genomic effects of E2 influenced dopaminergic and peptidergic neurotransmission, 
immune surveillance, adenosine and insulin-like growth factor signaling and
transport processes, among other functions. Identification of these novel
E2-regulated mechanisms highlights the wide range of genomic responses of the
aging female frontal cerebral cortex subjected to hormone replacement. Some of
the genomic effects identified in this study may underlie the beneficial effects 
of E2 on cognition, behavior, and neuroprotection.

PMID: 20534718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 1;107(22):10172-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0914561107. Epub 2010 May 24.

Gold nanorod delivery of an ssRNA immune activator inhibits pandemic H1N1
influenza viral replication.

Chakravarthy KV(1), Bonoiu AC, Davis WG, Ranjan P, Ding H, Hu R, Bowzard JB,
Bergey EJ, Katz JM, Knight PR, Sambhara S, Prasad PN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Microbiology and Immunology, State University
of New York, Buffalo, NY 14214, USA.

The emergence of the pandemic 2009 H1N1 influenza virus has become a world-wide
health concern. As drug resistance appears, a new generation of therapeutic
strategies will be required. Here, we introduce a nanotechnology approach for the
therapy of pan-demic and seasonal influenza virus infections. This approach uses 
gold nanorods (GNRs) to deliver an innate immune activator, pro-ducing a
localized therapeutic response. We demonstrated the utility of a biocompatible
gold nanorod, GNR-5'PPP-ssRNA nanoplex, as an antiviral strategy against type A
influenza virus. In human respiratory bronchial epithelial cells, this nanoplex
activated the retinoic acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) pathogen recognition
pathway, resulting in increased expression of IFN-beta and other IFN-stimulated
genes (ISGs) (e.g., PKR, MDA5, IRF1, IRF7, and MX1). This increase in type I IFN 
and ISGs resulted in a decrease in the replication of H1N1 influenza viruses.
These findings suggest that further evaluation of biocompatible nanoplexes as
unique antivirals for treatment of seasonal and pandemic influenza viruses is
warranted.

PMCID: PMC2890428
PMID: 20498074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Immunol. 2010 Jul;47(11-12):2005-14. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.04.015. Epub 
2010 May 21.

Regulation and function of interferon regulatory factors of Atlantic salmon.

Bergan V(1), Kileng Ø, Sun B, Robertsen B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Tromsø, Faculty of Biosciences, Fisheries and Economics,
Norwegian College of Fishery Science, Breivika, N-9037 Tromsø, Norway.

Transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family are major 
regulators of the early immune responses against viral infections. In particular,
IRF1, IRF2, IRF3 and IRF7 of mammals are known to regulate the expression of type
I interferons (IFNs), which constitute the obligate cytokines for antiviral
defense. We therefore cloned the coding sequence of Atlantic salmon (As) IRF1,
IRF2, IRF3 and IRF7B. Expression profiles were studied in Atlantic salmon TO
cells after poly I:C (dsRNA) transfection, treatment with recombinant salmon
IFNa1 and infection with infectious salmon anemia virus (ISAV). The main findings
were that AsIRF1 was earliest up-regulated by all stimuli, while AsIRF3 and
AsIRF7 had a similar activation profile induced at a slightly later time point.
The ability to induce the Atlantic salmon IFNa1 promoter was measured in a
luciferase reporter assay. The results showed that AsIRF1, AsIRF3 and AsIRF7B
were able to induce the promoter in a dose-dependent manner. AsIRF2 repressed the
promoter, while AsIRF7A and a splicing variant (AsIRF3D) lacking the interaction 
domain had almost no effect. Combination of AsIRF1 and AsIRF3 had a synergistic
stimulatory effect on the promoter compared to each of the two IRFs alone.
Overall, our findings suggest that AsIRF3 is the main regulator of salmon IFNa1
production along with AsIRF1, which is less potent. This confirms a similar role 
for salmon IRF3 as mammalian IRF3 to be one of the main IRFs eliciting salmon
IFNa1 production. Surprisingly, AsIRF7A and AsIRF7B seemed to have a lesser role 
in salmon IFNa1 induction, which may indicate that these factors have a larger
role in activating other IFN genes or interferon stimulatory genes of Atlantic
salmon.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20494444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. PLoS One. 2010 May 11;5(5):e10573. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010573.

Antagonism of host antiviral responses by Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
tegument protein ORF45.

Zhu FX(1), Sathish N, Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Florida State University, Tallahassee,
Florida, United States of America.

Virus infection of a cell generally evokes an immune response by the host to
defeat the intruder in its effort. Many viruses have developed an array of
strategies to evade or antagonize host antiviral responses. Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) is demonstrated in this report to be able
to prevent activation of host antiviral defense mechanisms upon infection. Cells 
infected with wild-type KSHV were permissive for superinfection with vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV), suggesting that KSHV virions fail to induce host
antiviral responses. We previously showed that ORF45, a KSHV immediate-early
protein as well as a tegument protein of virions, interacts with IRF-7 and
inhibits virus-mediated type I interferon induction by blocking IRF-7
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation (Zhu et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA. 99:5573-5578, 2002). Here, using an ORF45-null recombinant virus, we
demonstrate a profound role of ORF45 in inhibiting host antiviral responses.
Infection of cells with an ORF45-null mutant recombinant KSHV (BAC-stop45)
triggered an immune response that resisted VSV super-infection, concomitantly
associated with appreciable increases in transcription of type I IFN and
downstream anti-viral effector genes. Gain-of-function analysis showed that
ectopic expression of ORF45 in human fibroblast cells by a lentivirus vector
decreased the antiviral responses of the cells. shRNA-mediated silencing of
IRF-7, that predominantly regulates both the early and late phase induction of
type I IFNs, clearly indicated its critical contribution to the innate antiviral 
responses generated against incoming KSHV particles. Thus ORF45 through its
targeting of the crucial IRF-7 regulated type I IFN antiviral responses
significantly contributes to the KSHV survival immediately following a primary
infection allowing for progression onto subsequent stages in its life-cycle.

PMCID: PMC2868026
PMID: 20485504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Immunol. 2010 Jun 15;184(12):7162-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903944. Epub 2010
May 17.

Synoviocyte innate immune responses: II. Pivotal role of IFN regulatory factor 3.

Sweeney SE(1), Kimbler TB, Firestein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy, and Immunology, University of California
San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. ssweeney@ucsd.edu

Innate immune responses contribute to synovial inflammation in rheumatoid
arthritis. The present study was designed to investigate the contribution of IFN 
regulatory factor (IRF)3 and IRF7 to type I IFN-regulated gene expression in
synoviocytes. Fibroblast-like synoviocytes were stimulated with
polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid (poly [I-C]) after transfection with IRF3 or IRF7
small interfering RNA to knockdown transcription factor expression. Western
blots, luciferase assay after transfection with reporter constructs, quantitative
PCR, and AP-1 DNA binding ELISA were performed to evaluate the role of IRF3 and
IRF7 in poly (I-C)-induced signaling and synoviocyte gene expression. IRF3
regulates IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) promoter activity as well as
IFN-beta, IRF5, IRF7, RANTES, IFN-inducible protein-10, MCP-1, and MIP1alpha gene
expression in response to poly (I-C). IRF7 knockdown modestly decreased a subset 
of genes and ISRE activity, although the results were not statistically
significant. Surprisingly, IRF3 knockdown almost completely blocked expression of
additional genes in which the ISRE is not traditionally considered a dominant
promoter site in fibroblast-like synoviocytes, including matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)3, MMP9, IL-6, and IL-8. Transcription factor activation studies
demonstrated a role for IRF3 in regulation of c-Jun phosphorylation and AP-1
binding. IRF3 rather than IRF7 regulates poly (I-C)-induced type I IFN responses 
in human synoviocytes by increasing ISRE promoter activity. IRF3 also partially
regulates expression of other cytokines and MMP through activation of c-Jun and
the AP-1 promoter site. Targeting synoviocyte IRF3 represents a potential
approach to suppress diverse mediators while limiting suppression of
IRF7-mediated immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2913682
PMID: 20483755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Arthritis Res Ther. 2010;12(3):R87. doi: 10.1186/ar3014. Epub 2010 May 14.

Inhibitor of IkappaB kinase activity, BAY 11-7082, interferes with interferon
regulatory factor 7 nuclear translocation and type I interferon production by
plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Miyamoto R(1), Ito T, Nomura S, Amakawa R, Amuro H, Katashiba Y, Ogata M,
Murakami N, Shimamoto K, Yamazaki C, Hoshino K, Kaisho T, Fukuhara S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kansai Medical University, 10-15,
Fumizono, Moriguchi, Osaka, 570-8506, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) play not only a central role in
the antiviral immune response in innate host defense, but also a pathogenic role 
in the development of the autoimmune process by their ability to produce robust
amounts of type I interferons (IFNs), through sensing nucleic acids by toll-like 
receptor (TLR) 7 and 9. Thus, control of dysregulated pDC activation and type I
IFN production provide an alternative treatment strategy for autoimmune diseases 
in which type I IFNs are elevated, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE).
Here we focused on IkappaB kinase inhibitor BAY 11-7082 (BAY11) and investigated 
its immunomodulatory effects in targeting the IFN response on pDCs.
METHODS: We isolated human blood pDCs by flow cytometry and examined the function
of BAY11 on pDCs in response to TLR ligands, with regards to pDC activation, such
as IFN-alpha production and nuclear translocation of interferon regulatory factor
7 (IRF7) in vitro. Additionally, we cultured healthy peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) with serum from SLE patients in the presence or absence of BAY11,
and then examined the inhibitory function of BAY11 on SLE serum-induced IFN-alpha
production. We also examined its inhibitory effect in vivo using mice pretreated 
with BAY11 intraperitonealy, followed by intravenous injection of TLR7 ligand
poly U.
RESULTS: Here we identified that BAY11 has the ability to inhibit nuclear
translocation of IRF7 and IFN-alpha production in human pDCs. BAY11, although
showing the ability to also interfere with tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha
production, more strongly inhibited IFN-alpha production than TNF-alpha
production by pDCs, in response to TLR ligands. We also found that BAY11
inhibited both in vitro IFN-alpha production by human PBMCs induced by the SLE
serum and the in vivo serum IFN-alpha level induced by injecting mice with poly
U.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that BAY11 has the therapeutic potential to
attenuate the IFN environment by regulating pDC function and provide a novel
foundation for the development of an effective immunotherapeutic strategy against
autoimmune disorders such as SLE.

PMCID: PMC2911871
PMID: 20470398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 20;5(4):e10250. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010250.

Murine toll-like receptor 2 activation induces type I interferon responses from
endolysosomal compartments.

Dietrich N(1), Lienenklaus S, Weiss S, Gekara NO.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Immunology, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are among the first-line sentinels for
immune detection and responsiveness to pathogens. The TLR2 subfamily of TLRs
(TLR1, TLR2, TLR6) form heterodimers with each other and are thus able to
recognize a broad range of components from several microbes such as yeast,
Gram-positive bacteria and protozoa. Until now, TLR2 activation by bacterial
ligands has long been associated with pro-inflammatory cytokines but not type I
interferon responses.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using a variety of transgenic mice, here we
provide in vivo and in vitro data showing that TLR2 activation does in fact
induce interferon-beta and that this occurs via MyD88-IRF1 and -IRF7 pathways.
Interestingly, by microscopy we demonstrate that although a cell surface
receptor, TLR2 dependent induction of type I interferons occurs in endolysosomal 
compartments where it is translocated to upon ligand engagement. Furthermore, we 
could show that blocking receptor internalization or endolysosomal acidification 
inhibits the ability of TLR2 to trigger the induction type I interferon but not
pro-inflammatory responses.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: The results indicate that TLR2 activation induces
pro-inflammatory and type I interferon responses from distinct subcellular sites:
the plasma membrane and endolysosomal compartments respectively. Apart from
identifying and characterizing a novel pathway for induction of type I
interferons, the present study offers new insights into how TLR signaling
discriminates and regulates the nature of responses to be elicited against
extracellular and endocytosed microbes. These findings may also have clinical
implication. Excessive production of pro-inflammatory cytokines and type I IFNs
following activation of TLRs is a central pathologic event in several
hyper-inflammatory conditions. The discovery that the induction of
pro-inflammatory and type I IFN responses can be uncoupled through
pharmacological manipulation of endolysosomal acidification suggests new avenues 
for potential therapeutic intervention against inflammations and sepsis.

PMCID: PMC2857745
PMID: 20422028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2010 Aug 1;182(3):332-40. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200911-1673OC. Epub 2010 Apr 15.

Increased cytokine response of rhinovirus-infected airway epithelial cells in
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

Schneider D(1), Ganesan S, Comstock AT, Meldrum CA, Mahidhara R, Goldsmith AM,
Curtis JL, Martinez FJ, Hershenson MB, Sajjan U.

Author information: 
(1)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-5688, USA.

RATIONALE: Airway inflammation is a central feature of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). COPD exacerbations are often triggered by rhinovirus
(RV) infection.
OBJECTIVES: We hypothesized that airway epithelial cells from patients with COPD 
maintain a proinflammatory phenotype compared with control subjects, leading to
greater RV responses.
METHODS: Cells were isolated from tracheobronchial tissues of 12 patients with
COPD and 10 transplant donors. Eight patients with COPD had severe emphysema,
three had mild to moderate emphysema, and one had no emphysema. All had moderate 
to severe airflow obstruction, and six met criteria for chronic bronchitis or had
at least one exacerbation the previous year. Cells were grown at air-liquid
interface and infected with RV serotype 39. Cytokine and IFN expression was
measured by ELISA. Selected genes involved in inflammation, oxidative stress, and
proteolysis were assessed by focused gene array and real-time polymerase chain
reaction.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Compared with control subjects, cells from
patients with COPD demonstrated increased mRNA expression of genes involved in
oxidative stress and the response to viral infection, including NOX1, DUOXA2,
MMP12, ICAM1, DDX58/RIG-I, STAT1, and STAT2. COPD cells showed elevated baseline 
and RV-stimulated protein levels of IL-6, IL-8/CXCL8, and growth-related
oncogene-alpha/CXCL1. COPD cells demonstrated increased viral titer and copy
number after RV infection, despite increased IL-29/IFN-lambda1,
IL-28A/IFN-lambda2, and IFN-inducible protein-10/CXCL10 protein levels. Finally, 
RV-infected COPD cultures showed increased mRNA expression of IL28A/IFNlambda2,
IL29/IFNlambda1, IFIH1/MDA5, DDX58/RIG-I, DUOX1, DUOX2, IRF7, STAT1, and STAT2.
CONCLUSIONS: Airway epithelial cells from patients with COPD show higher baseline
levels of cytokine expression and increased susceptibility to RV infection,
despite an increased IFN response.

PMCID: PMC2921598
PMID: 20395558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Virol. 2010 Jun;84(12):6130-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00364-10. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

The A20 deubiquitinase activity negatively regulates LMP1 activation of IRF7.

Ning S(1), Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, Miller School of
Medicine, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, FL
33136, USA. sning@med.miami.edu

A20 possesses both deubiquitinase (DUB) and ubiquitin E3 ligase activities that
are required for termination of Toll-like receptor (TLR) signaling leading to
NF-kappaB activation and for blockage of tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-induced
cytotoxicity and apoptosis. A20 is induced by the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
oncoprotein LMP1. However, its dual ubiquitin-editing activities have not been
investigated in the context of either EBV infection or IRF7 responses. Both A20
and IRF7 have oncogenic properties. We have recently shown that LMP1 activates
IRF7 through K63-linked ubiquitination which requires RIP1 and TRAF6, but how
this ubiquitination event is regulated has not been studied. Here, we show that
A20 negatively regulates IRF7 transcriptional activity induced by LMP1. Deletion 
or mutation of A20 C-terminal zinc finger motifs had no effect on the inhibition 
of IRF7 activity, whereas DUB-deficient truncation or point mutation ablated the 
ability of A20 to inhibit IRF7. Correspondingly, the A20 N-terminal DUB domain,
but not the C-terminal E3 ligase domain, interacts physically with IRF7.
Transient expression of A20 reduced K63-linked ubiquitination of IRF7 in vivo,
but an in vitro deubiquitination assay with purified constituents shows that IRF7
did not act as a substrate for A20 DUB activity. Moreover, A20 interacts with
IRF7 endogenously in latently EBV-infected type 3 Raji cells, in which expression
of both A20 and IRF7 is constitutively induced by the considerable level of
endogenous LMP1. Knockdown of endogenous A20 in Raji cells by expression of A20
short hairpin RNA (shRNA) vectors increases endogenous IRF7 activity and
ubiquitination, as well as the protein level of LMP1, a target of IRF7. Thus, A20
negatively regulates LMP1-stimulated IRF7 ubiquitination and activity in EBV
latency, and its DUB activity is indispensable for this function. Finally, we
discussed the regulation and function of IRFs in EBV latency.

PMCID: PMC2876664
PMID: 20392859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Clin Invest. 2010 May;120(5):1645-62. doi: 10.1172/JCI39481. Epub 2010 Apr 12.

NOD1 contributes to mouse host defense against Helicobacter pylori via induction 
of type I IFN and activation of the ISGF3 signaling pathway.

Watanabe T(1), Asano N, Fichtner-Feigl S, Gorelick PL, Tsuji Y, Matsumoto Y,
Chiba T, Fuss IJ, Kitani A, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
tmhrwtnb@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 1 (NOD1) is an intracellular epithelial
cell protein known to play a role in host defense at mucosal surfaces. Here we
show that a ligand specific for NOD1, a peptide derived from peptidoglycan,
initiates an unexpected signaling pathway in human epithelial cell lines that
results in the production of type I IFN. Detailed analysis revealed the
components of the signaling pathway. NOD1 binding to its ligand triggered
activation of the serine-threonine kinase RICK, which was then able to bind TNF
receptor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3). This in turn led to activation of
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and IkappaB kinase epsilon (IKKepsilon) and the
subsequent activation of IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7). IRF7 induced IFN-beta
production, which led to activation of a heterotrimeric transcription factor
complex known as IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) and the subsequent
production of CXCL10 and additional type I IFN. In vivo studies showed that mice 
lacking the receptor for IFN-beta or subjected to gene silencing of the ISGF3
component Stat1 exhibited decreased CXCL10 responses and increased susceptibility
to Helicobacter pylori infection, phenotypes observed in NOD1-deficient mice.
These studies thus establish that NOD1 can activate the ISGF3 signaling pathway
that is usually associated with protection against viral infection to provide
mice with robust type I IFN-mediated protection from H. pylori and possibly other
mucosal infections.

PMCID: PMC2860924
PMID: 20389019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Virology. 2010 Jun 20;402(1):121-8. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2010.03.014. Epub 2010
Apr 8.

Epstein-Barr virus BRLF1 inhibits transcription of IRF3 and IRF7 and suppresses
induction of interferon-beta.

Bentz GL(1), Liu R, Hahn AM, Shackelford J, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

Activation of interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 3 and 7 is essential for the
induction of Type I interferons (IFN) and innate antiviral responses, and
herpesviruses have evolved mechanisms to evade such responses. We previously
reported that Epstein-Barr virus BZLF1, an immediate-early (IE) protein, inhibits
the function of IRF7, but the role of BRLF1, the other IE transactivator, in IRF 
regulation has not been examined. We now show that BRLF1 expression decreased
induction of IFN-beta, and reduced expression of IRF3 and IRF7; effects were
dependent on N- and C-terminal regions of BRLF1 and its nuclear localization
signal. Endogenous IRF3 and IRF7 RNA and protein levels were also decreased
during cytolytic EBV infection. Finally, production of IFN-beta was decreased
during lytic EBV infection and was associated with increased susceptibility to
superinfection with Sendai virus. These data suggest a new role for BRLF1 with
the ability to evade host innate immune responses.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2871977
PMID: 20381110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Dev Comp Immunol. 2010 Aug;34(8):855-65. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2010.03.004. Epub
2010 Apr 8.

Phylogenetic and expression analysis of lamprey toll-like receptors.

Kasamatsu J(1), Oshiumi H, Matsumoto M, Kasahara M, Seya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Hokkaido University, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have been identified as pivotal sensors recognizing
microbial pattern molecules in vertebrates. Whole genome analysis of the teleost 
Takifugu rubripes supports the existence of a fundamental family of TLR genes in 
fish. However, the role of the innate immune system in the context of raising
acquired immunity in jawless fish remains unclear. In this study, we annotated 16
lamprey TLR genes predicted from the latest genome assembly of lamprey on the
basis of homology, and identified their cDNAs from Japanese lamprey, Lethenteron 
japonicum. Phylogenetic analyses indicated that the repertoire of lamprey TLRs
consisted of both fish (F)- and mammalian (M)-type TLRs, and it was also
demonstrated that lamprey TLRs are constitutively expressed in various organs.
Our results suggest that lampreys protect against microorganisms using the innate
system consisting of a similar set of M- and F-type TLRs, despite possessing a
unique acquired immune system. In addition, type I interferon (IFN),
interferonregulatory factor (IRF)-3, and IRF7 were not identified in the lamprey 
genome although TLR adaptor and signal transduction genes were highly conserved
upstream of (IRF)-3/7 and type I IFN in most vertebrates. This is the first
report to describe the TLR repertoire and IFN system in one of the most primitive
vertebrates, the lamprey.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20363250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. PLoS Pathog. 2010 Mar 12;6(3):e1000813. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000813.

Innate killing of Leishmania donovani by macrophages of the splenic marginal zone
requires IRF-7.

Phillips R(1), Svensson M, Aziz N, Maroof A, Brown N, Beattie L, Signoret N, Kaye
PM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Infection, Hull York Medical School and Department
of Biology, University of York, York, United Kingdom.

Highly phagocytic macrophages line the marginal zone (MZ) of the spleen and the
lymph node subcapsular sinus. Although these macrophages have been attributed
with a variety of functions, including the uptake and clearance of blood and
lymph-borne pathogens, little is known about the effector mechanisms they employ 
after pathogen uptake. Here, we have combined gene expression profiling and RNAi 
using a stromal macrophage cell line with in situ analysis of the leishmanicidal 
activity of marginal zone macrophages (MZM) and marginal metallophilic
macrophages (MMM) in wild type and gene targeted mice. Our data demonstrate a
critical role for interferon regulatory factor-7 (IRF-7) in regulating the
killing of intracellular Leishmania donovani by these specialised splenic
macrophage sub-populations. This study, therefore, identifies a new role for
IRF-7 as a regulator of innate microbicidal activity against this, and perhaps
other, non-viral intracellular pathogens. This study also highlights the
importance of selecting appropriate macrophage populations when studying pathogen
interactions with this functionally diverse lineage of cells.

PMCID: PMC2837405
PMID: 20300600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Immunome Res. 2010 Mar 18;6:2. doi: 10.1186/1745-7580-6-2.

Coregulation mapping based on individual phenotypic variation in response to
virus infection.

Nudelman G(1), Ge Y, Hu J, Kumar M, Seto J, Duke JL, Kleinstein SH, Hayot F,
Sealfon SC, Wetmur JG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Systems Biology and Department of Neurology, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

BACKGROUND: Gene coregulation across a population is an important aspect of the
considerable variability of the human immune response to virus infection.
Methodology to investigate it must rely on a number of ingredients ranging from
gene clustering to transcription factor enrichment analysis.
RESULTS: We have developed a methodology to investigate the gene to gene
correlations for the expression of 34 genes linked to the immune response of
Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) infected conventional dendritic cells (DCs) from
145 human donors. The levels of gene expression showed a large variation across
individuals. We generated a map of gene co-expression using pairwise correlation 
and multidimensional scaling (MDS). The analysis of these data showed that among 
the 13 genes left after filtering for statistically significant variations, two
clusters are formed. We investigated to what extent the observed correlation
patterns can be explained by the sharing of transcription factors (TFs)
controlling these genes. Our analysis showed that there was a significant
positive correlation between MDS distances and TF sharing across all pairs of
genes. We applied enrichment analysis to the TFs having binding sites in the
promoter regions of those genes. This analysis, after Gene Ontology filtering,
indicated the existence of two clusters of genes (CCL5, IFNA1, IFNA2, IFNB1) and 
(IKBKE, IL6, IRF7, MX1) that were transcriptionally co-regulated. In order to
facilitate the use of our methodology by other researchers, we have also
developed an interactive coregulation explorer web-based tool called CorEx. It
permits the study of MDS and hierarchical clustering of data combined with TF
enrichment analysis. We also offer web services that provide programmatic access 
to MDS, hierarchical clustering and TF enrichment analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: MDS mapping based on correlation in conjunction with TF enrichment
analysis represents a useful computational method to generate predictions
underlying gene coregulation across a population.

PMCID: PMC3161383
PMID: 20298589  [PubMed]


462. J Exp Med. 2010 Apr 12;207(4):721-30. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091776. Epub 2010 Mar
15.

Selective control of type I IFN induction by the Rac activator DOCK2 during
TLR-mediated plasmacytoid dendritic cell activation.

Gotoh K(1), Tanaka Y, Nishikimi A, Nakamura R, Yamada H, Maeda N, Ishikawa T,
Hoshino K, Uruno T, Cao Q, Higashi S, Kawaguchi Y, Enjoji M, Takayanagi R, Kaisho
T, Yoshikai Y, Fukui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunogenetics, Department of Immunobiology and Neuroscience,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) play a key role in antiviral immunity, but
also contribute to the pathogenesis of certain autoimmune diseases, by producing 
large amounts of type I IFNs. Although activation of pDCs is triggered by
engagement of nucleotide-sensing toll-like receptors (TLR) 7 and 9, type I IFN
induction additionally requires IkappaB kinase (IKK) alpha-dependent activation
of IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 7. However, the signaling pathway mediating
IKK-alpha activation is poorly defined. We show that DOCK2, an atypical Rac
activator, is essential for TLR7- and TLR9-mediated IFN-alpha induction in pDCs. 
We found that the exposure of pDCs to nucleic acid ligands induces Rac activation
through a TLR-independent and DOCK2-dependent mechanism. Although this Rac
activation was dispensable for induction of inflammatory cytokines,
phosphorylation of IKK-alpha and nuclear translocation of IRF-7 were impaired in 
Dock2-deficient pDCs, resulting in selective loss of IFN-alpha induction. Similar
results were obtained when a dominant-negative Rac mutant was expressed in
wild-type pDCs. Thus, the DOCK2-Rac signaling pathway acts in parallel with TLR
engagement to control IKK-alpha activation for type I IFN induction. Owing to its
hematopoietic cell-specific expression, DOCK2 may serve as a therapeutic target
for type I IFN-related autoimmune diseases.

PMCID: PMC2856018
PMID: 20231379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 11;5(2):e9172. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009172.

TRAF5 is a downstream target of MAVS in antiviral innate immune signaling.

Tang ED(1), Wang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signalling, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine,
University of California Los Angeles School of Dentistry, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America.

The recognition of nucleic acids by the innate immune system during viral
infection results in the production of type I interferons and the activation of
antiviral immune responses. The RNA helicases RIG-I and MDA-5 recognize distinct 
types of cytosolic RNA species and signal through the mitochondrial protein MAVS 
to stimulate the phosphorylation and activation of the transcription factors IRF3
and IRF7, thereby inducing type I interferon expression. Alternatively, the
activation of NF-kappaB leads to proinflammatory cytokine production. The
function of MAVS is dependent on both its C-terminal transmembrane (TM) domain
and N-terminal caspase recruitment domain (CARD). The TM domain mediates MAVS
dimerization in response to viral RNA, allowing the CARD to bind to and activate 
the downstream effector TRAF3. Notably, dimerization of the MAVS CARD alone is
sufficient to activate IRF3, IRF7, and NF-kappaB. However, TRAF3-deficient cells 
display only a partial reduction in interferon production in response to RNA
virus infection and are not defective in NF-kappaB activation. Here we find that 
the related ubiquitin ligase TRAF5 is a downstream target of MAVS that mediates
both IRF3 and NF-kappaB activation. The TM domain of MAVS allows it to dimerize
and thereby associate with TRAF5 and induce its ubiquitination in a
CARD-dependent manner. Also, NEMO is recruited to the dimerized MAVS CARD domain 
in a TRAF3 and TRAF5-dependent manner. Thus, our findings reveal a possible
function for TRAF5 in mediating the activation of IRF3 and NF-kappaB downstream
of MAVS through the recruitment of NEMO. TRAF5 may be a key molecule in the
innate response against viral infection.

PMCID: PMC2820086
PMID: 20161788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Immunol. 2010 Mar 15;184(6):3072-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902947. Epub 2010
Feb 12.

Essential role of mitochondrial antiviral signaling, IFN regulatory factor
(IRF)3, and IRF7 in Chlamydophila pneumoniae-mediated IFN-beta response and
control of bacterial replication in human endothelial cells.

Buss C(1), Opitz B, Hocke AC, Lippmann J, van Laak V, Hippenstiel S, Krüll M,
Suttorp N, Eitel J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Internal
Medicine, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Chlamydophila pneumoniae infection of the vascular wall as well as activation of 
the transcription factor IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3 have been linked to
development of chronic vascular lesions and atherosclerosis. The innate immune
system detects invading pathogens by use of pattern recognition receptors, some
of which are able to stimulate IRF3/7 activation and subsequent type I IFN
production (e. g., IFN-beta). In this study, we show that infection of human
endothelial cells with C. pneumoniae-induced production of IFN-beta, a cytokine
that so far has been mainly associated with antiviral immunity. Moreover, C.
pneumoniae infection led to IRF3 and IRF7 nuclear translocation in HUVECs and RNA
interference experiments showed that IRF3 and IRF7 as well as the mitochondrial
antiviral signaling (MAVS) were essential for IFN-beta induction. Finally, C.
pneumoniae replication was enhanced in endothelial cells in which IRF3, IRF7, or 
MAVS expression was inhibited by small interfering RNA and attenuated by IFN-beta
treatment. In conclusion, C. pneumoniae infection of endothelial cells activates 
an MAVS-, IRF3-, and IRF7-dependent signaling, which controls bacterial growth
and might modulate development of vascular lesions.

PMID: 20154210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Feb;62(2):553-61. doi: 10.1002/art.27182.

Genetic variation at the IRF7/PHRF1 locus is associated with autoantibody profile
and serum interferon-alpha activity in lupus patients.

Salloum R(1), Franek BS, Kariuki SN, Rhee L, Mikolaitis RA, Jolly M, Utset TO,
Niewold TB.

Author information: 
(1)University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) is a heritable risk factor for systemic
lupus erythematosus (SLE). Genetic variation near IRF7 is implicated in SLE
susceptibility. SLE-associated autoantibodies can stimulate IFNalpha production
through the Toll-like receptor/IRF7 pathway. This study was undertaken to
determine whether variants of IRF7 act as risk factors for SLE by increasing
IFNalpha production and whether autoantibodies are important to this phenomenon.
METHODS: We studied 492 patients with SLE (236 African American, 162 European
American, and 94 Hispanic American subjects). Serum levels of IFNalpha were
measured using a reporter cell assay, and single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
in the IRF7/PHRF1 locus were genotyped.
RESULTS: In a joint analysis of European American and Hispanic American subjects,
the rs702966 C allele was associated with the presence of anti-double-stranded
DNA (anti-dsDNA) antibodies (odds ratio [OR] 1.83, P = 0.0069). The rs702966 CC
genotype was only associated with higher serum levels of IFNalpha in European
American and Hispanic American patients with anti-dsDNA antibodies (joint
analysis P = 4.1 x 10(-5) in anti-dsDNA-positive patients and P = 0.99 in
anti-dsDNA-negative patients). In African American subjects, anti-Sm antibodies
were associated with the rs4963128 SNP near IRF7 (OR 1.95, P = 0.0017). The
rs4963128 CT and TT genotypes were associated with higher serum levels of
IFNalpha only in African American patients with anti-Sm antibodies (P = 0.0012). 
In African American patients lacking anti-Sm antibodies, an effect of
anti-dsDNA-rs702966 C allele interaction on serum levels of IFNalpha was
observed, similar to the other patient groups (overall joint analysis P = 1.0 x
10(-6)). In European American and Hispanic American patients, the IRF5 SLE risk
haplotype showed an additive effect with the rs702966 C allele on IFNalpha level 
in anti-dsDNA-positive patients.
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that IRF7/PHRF1 variants in combination with
SLE-associated autoantibodies result in higher serum levels of IFNalpha,
providing a biologic relevance for this locus at the protein level in human SLE
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2832192
PMID: 20112359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Apr;223(1):158-67. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22022.

The activation of liver X receptors inhibits toll-like receptor-9-induced foam
cell formation.

Sorrentino R(1), Morello S, Chen S, Bonavita E, Pinto A.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutical Science Department, University of Salerno, 84084 Fisciano,
Salerno, Italy. rosalinda.sorrentino@googlemail.com

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are related to foam cell formation (FCF), key event in
the establishment/progression of atherosclerosis. The activation of TLR2 and TLR4
can increase FCF. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of TLR9 in FCF. 
Murine macrophages were treated with CpG-ODN, TLR9 agonist, and oxidized
particles of LDL (Paz-PC) and FCF was analyzed by means of Oil Red O staining.
The administration of CpG-ODN plus Paz-PC onto macrophages increased the amount
of lipid droplets, correlated to increased levels of tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-alpha, IFNbeta, and IP-10. The underlying mechanism by which TLR9 ligation 
influenced Paz-PC in the FCF was NF-kappaB- and IRF7-dependent, as observed by
higher levels of phosphorylated IkappaBalpha, increased nuclear translocation of 
the p65 subunit, lower levels of the total IKKalpha protein and higher release of
interferon-dependent cytokines, such as IP-10. Liver X receptors (LXRs) regulate 
lipid cellular transport and negatively modulate TLR-dependent signaling
pathways. Indeed, the addition of GW3965, synthetic LXRs agonist, significantly
reduced FCF after CpG-ODN plus Paz-PC stimulation. In this condition, we observed
decreased levels of the nuclear translocation of the p65 subunit, related to the 
higher presence of LXRalpha into the nucleus. TNF-alpha, IP-10, and IFNbeta
levels were reduced by the administration of GW3965 following CpG-ODN and Paz-PC 
treatment. In conclusion, the activation of TLR9 facilitates the formation of
foam cells in an NF-kappaB- and IRF7-dependent manner, countered by the
activation of LXRs. This study further support LXRs as potential
anti-atherosclerotic target.

J. Cell. Physiol. 223: 158-167, 2010. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20049870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Bull Mem Acad R Med Belg. 2010;165(7-9):359-65.

[Plasmacytoid dendritic cell responses to adult and neonatal TLR7 & 9 ligands].

[Article in French]

Callenaerel J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Médecine interne, Hôpital Erasme--U.L.B.-Bruxelles.

The plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) belong to the innate immune system and
are responsible for the production of type interferons (IFN-I). These are crucial
for the antiviral and antitumoral responses of the organism. Newborns are unable 
to produce IFN-I in response to viral infections, due to the absence of nuclear
translocation of the transcription factor IRF7 in their pDCs. We have shown that 
this defect is due to the deficient phosphorylation of this factor, and that the 
PI3K-Akt-mTOR-pathway, on the other hand is functional. We have also shown, this 
time in adult pDCs, that the PI3K-Akt-mTOR-pathway, known to be absolutely
necessary for the production of IFN-I in response to TLR9-ligands and RNA
viruses, is surprisingly not required for this production in response to
synthetic TLR7 ligands. These ligands are used in the clinic as vaccine
adjuvants, antiviral and antitumoral agents. The inhibitors of PI3K and + mTOR
are in use as immunosuppressors and adjuvants for chemotherapy, making these
interactions clinically highly relevant.

PMID: 21513095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Chem Res Toxicol. 2010 Feb 15;23(2):396-404. doi: 10.1021/tx900365u.

Chromium(VI) stimulates Fyn to initiate innate immune gene induction in human
airway epithelial cells.

Nemec AA(1), Zubritsky LM, Barchowsky A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of Public Health, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15219, USA.

Mechanisms for pathogenic metal signaling in airway injury or disease promotion
are poorly understood. It is widely believed that one mechanism for pathogenic
and possible carcinogenic effects of inhaled chromium (Cr(VI)) is inhibition of
inducible gene transactivation. However, we recently reported that Cr(VI)
inhibition of Sp1-dependent transactivation required signal transducer and
activator of transcription 1 (STAT1)-dependent expression of an inhibitory
protein in airway epithelium. Thus, Cr(VI) exposures can induce genes, and we
hypothesized that this induction resulted from Cr(VI) signaling through an innate
immune-like STAT1-dependent pathway initiated by Fyn. Exposure of human airway
epithelial (BEAS-2B) cells to Cr(VI) selectively transactivated the
STAT-responsive interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) and induced
ISRE-driven transactivation of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), without
affecting the gamma interferon-activated site (GAS)-driven IRF1 expression.
Cr(VI)-induced IRF7 was absent or greatly reduced in cells that lacked STAT1,
were treated with the Src family kinase inhibitor, PP2, or lacked Fyn. Expressing
Fyn, but not Src, in mouse embryonic fibroblasts cells null for Src, Yes, and Fyn
restored Cr(VI)-stimulated STAT1 tyrosine phosphorylation and IRF7 expression.
Finally, shRNA knockdown of Fyn in BEAS-2B cells prevented Cr(VI)-activated STAT1
transactivation of IRF7. These data support a novel mechanism through which
Cr(VI) stimulates Fyn to initiate interferon-like signaling for STAT1-dependent
gene transactivation.

PMCID: PMC4011023
PMID: 19994902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Virology. 2010 Jan 5;396(1):59-68. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.10.013. Epub 2009
Nov 6.

IFN-alpha expression and antiviral effects are subtype and cell type specific in 
the cardiac response to viral infection.

Li L(1), Sherry B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, NC 27606, USA.

The interferon-beta (IFN-beta) response is critical for protection against viral 
myocarditis in several mouse models, and IFN-alpha or -beta treatment is
beneficial against human viral myocarditis. The IFN-beta response in cardiac
myocytes and cardiac fibroblasts forms an integrated network for organ
protection; however, the different IFN-alpha subtypes have not been studied in
cardiac cells. We developed a quantitative RT-PCR assay that distinguishes
between 13 highly conserved IFN-alpha subtypes and found that reovirus T3D
induces five IFN-alpha subtypes in primary cardiac myocyte and fibroblast
cultures: IFN-alpha1, -alpha2, -alpha4, -alpha5, and -alpha8/6. Murine
IFN-alpha1, -alpha2, -alpha4, or -alpha5 treatment induced IRF7 and ISG56 and
inhibited reovirus T3D replication in both cell types. This first investigation
of IFN-alpha subtypes in cardiac cells for any virus demonstrates that IFN-alpha 
is induced in cardiac cells, that it is both subtype and cell type specific, and 
that it is likely important in the antiviral cardiac response.

PMCID: PMC2787694
PMID: 19896686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Immunol. 2009 Dec 1;183(11):6989-97. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901386. Epub 2009
Nov 4.

Role of double-stranded RNA pattern recognition receptors in rhinovirus-induced
airway epithelial cell responses.

Wang Q(1), Nagarkar DR, Bowman ER, Schneider D, Gosangi B, Lei J, Zhao Y, McHenry
CL, Burgens RV, Miller DJ, Sajjan U, Hershenson MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology., University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

Rhinovirus (RV), a ssRNA virus of the picornavirus family, is a major cause of
the common cold as well as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
exacerbations. Viral dsRNA produced during replication may be recognized by the
host pattern recognition receptors TLR-3, retinoic acid-inducible gene (RIG)-I,
and melanoma differentiation-associated gene (MDA)-5. No study has yet identified
the receptor required for sensing RV dsRNA. To examine this, BEAS-2B human
bronchial epithelial cells were infected with intact RV-1B or
replication-deficient UV-irradiated virus, and IFN and IFN-stimulated gene
expression was determined by quantitative PCR. The separate requirements of
RIG-I, MDA5, and IFN response factor (IRF)-3 were determined using their
respective small interfering RNAs (siRNA). The requirement of TLR3 was determined
using siRNA against the TLR3 adaptor molecule Toll/IL-1R homologous
region-domain-containing adapter-inducing IFN-beta (TRIF). Intact RV-1B, but not 
UV-irradiated RV, induced IRF3 phosphorylation and dimerization, as well as mRNA 
expression of IFN-beta, IFN-lambda1, IFN-lambda2/3, IRF7, RIG-I, MDA5, 10-kDa
IFN-gamma-inducible protein/CXCL10, IL-8/CXCL8, and GM-CSF. siRNA against IRF3,
MDA5, and TRIF, but not RIG-I, decreased RV-1B-induced expression of IFN-beta,
IFN-lambda1, IFN-lambda2/3, IRF7, RIG-I, MDA5, and inflammatory protein-10/CXCL10
but had no effect on IL-8/CXCL8 and GM-CSF. siRNAs against MDA5 and TRIF also
reduced IRF3 dimerization. Finally, in primary cells, transfection with MDA5
siRNA significantly reduced IFN expression, as it did in BEAS-2B cells. These
results suggest that TLR3 and MDA5, but not RIG-I, are required for maximal
sensing of RV dsRNA and that TLR3 and MDA5 signal through a common downstream
signaling intermediate, IRF3.

PMCID: PMC2920602
PMID: 19890046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 Sep;43(3):368-75. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0254OC. 
Epub 2009 Oct 30.

Reduced expression of IRF7 in nasal epithelial cells from smokers after infection
with influenza.

Jaspers I(1), Horvath KM, Zhang W, Brighton LE, Carson JL, Noah TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 27599, 
USA. Ilona_jaspers@med.unc.edu

Smokers are more susceptible to respiratory viral infections, including influenza
virus, but the mechanisms mediating this effect are unknown. To determine how
epithelial cells contribute to the enhanced susceptibility seen in smokers, we
established an in vitro model of differentiated nasal epithelial cells (NECs)
from smokers, which showed enhanced mucin expression. The NECs from smokers
responded to influenza infection with greater cytotoxicity, release of
interleukin-6, and viral shedding than NECs from nonsmokers. Focusing on type I
interferon (IFN) expression, we observed that influenza-infected NECs from
smokers produced significantly less IFN-alpha than NECs from nonsmokers.
Similarly, the expression of IRF7, a key transcription factor controlling the
expression of IFN-alpha, was significantly decreased in influenza-infected and
IFN-beta-stimulated NECs from smokers. Furthermore, our data indicate that the
DNA methylation of the IRF7 gene and expression of the DNA
(cytosine-5-)-methyltransferase 1 was enhanced in NECs from smokers. To confirm
these findings in vivo, we initiated a study in which smoking and nonsmoking
healthy volunteers were inoculated nasally with the live-attenuated influenza
virus (LAIV) vaccine, and nasal biopsies were obtained before and after the
administration of LAIV. The LAIV-induced expression of IRF7 was lower in the
nasal epithelium from smokers, supporting our in vitro observations. These data
demonstrate that infection with influenza results in the reduced expression of
transcription factor IRF7 in NECs from smokers, and that these effects may be
mediated by an epigenetic modification of the IRF7 gene, thus providing a
potential mechanism rendering smokers more susceptible to respiratory virus
infections.

PMCID: PMC2933552
PMID: 19880818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Arthritis Rheum. 2009 Nov;60(11):3436-46. doi: 10.1002/art.24936.

Interleukin-6 and type I interferon-regulated genes and chemokines mark disease
activity in dermatomyositis.

Bilgic H(1), Ytterberg SR, Amin S, McNallan KT, Wilson JC, Koeuth T, Ellingson S,
Newman B, Bauer JW, Peterson EJ, Baechler EC, Reed AM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Comment in
    Arthritis Rheum. 2010 Jul;62(7):2181-2; author reply 2182.

OBJECTIVE: Up-regulation of whole blood type I interferon (IFN)-driven
transcripts and chemokines has been described in a number of autoimmune diseases.
An IFN gene expression "signature" is a candidate biomarker in patients with
dermatomyositis (DM). This study was performed to evaluate the capacity of
IFN-dependent peripheral blood gene and chemokine signatures and levels of
proinflammatory cytokines to serve as biomarkers for disease activity in adult
and juvenile DM.
METHODS: Peripheral blood samples and clinical data were obtained from 56
patients with adult or juvenile DM. The type I IFN gene signature in the whole
blood of patients with DM was defined by determining the expression levels of 3
IFN-regulated genes (IFIT1, G1P2, and IRF7) using quantitative real-time reverse 
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. Multiplexed immunoassays were used to
quantify the serum levels of 4 type I IFN-regulated chemokines (IFN-inducible T
cell alpha chemoattractant, IFNgamma-inducible 10-kd protein, monocyte
chemotactic protein 1 [MCP-1], and MCP-2) and the serum levels of other
proinflammatory cytokines, including interleukin-6 (IL-6).
RESULTS: DM disease activity correlated significantly with the type I IFN gene
signature (r = 0.41, P = 0.007) and with the type I IFN chemokine signature (r = 
0.61, P < 0.0001). Furthermore, the serum levels of IL-6 were significantly
correlated with disease activity (r = 0.45, P = 0.001). In addition, correlations
between the serum levels of IL-6 and both the type I IFN gene signature (r =
0.47, P < 0.01) and the type I IFN chemokine signature (r = 0.71, P < 0.0001)
were detected in patients with DM.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that serum IL-6 production and the type I IFN
gene signature are candidate biomarkers for disease activity in adult and
juvenile DM. Coregulation of the expression of IFN-driven chemokines and IL-6
suggests a novel pathogenic linkage in DM.

PMID: 19877033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Mol Cancer. 2009 Oct 24;8:91. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-8-91.

Mechanisms of FUS1/TUSC2 deficiency in mesothelioma and its tumorigenic
transcriptional effects.

Ivanova AV(1), Ivanov SV, Prudkin L, Nonaka D, Liu Z, Tsao A, Wistuba I, Roth J, 
Pass HI.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology Division, Vanderbilt Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
alla.ivanova@vanderbilt.edu

BACKGROUND: FUS1/TUSC2 is a novel tumor suppressor located in the critical 3p21.3
chromosomal region frequently deleted in multiple cancers. We previously showed
that Tusc2-deficient mice display a complex immuno-inflammatory phenotype with a 
predisposition to cancer. The goal of this study was to analyze possible
involvement of TUSC2 in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) - an aggressive
inflammatory cancer associated with exposure to asbestos.
METHODS: TUSC2 insufficiency in clinical specimens of MPM was assessed via RT-PCR
(mRNA level), Representational Oligonucleotide Microarray Analysis (DNA level),
and immunohistochemical evaluation (protein level). A possible link between TUSC2
expression and exposure to asbestos was studied using asbestos-treated
mesothelial cells and ROS (reactive oxygen species) scavengers. Transcripional
effects of TUSC2 in MPM were assessed through expression array analysis of
TUSC2-transfected MPM cells.
RESULTS: Expression of TUSC2 was downregulated in approximately 84% of MM
specimens while loss of TUSC2-containing 3p21.3 region observed in approximately 
36% of MPMs including stage 1 tumors. Exposure to asbestos led to a
transcriptional suppression of TUSC2, which we found to be ROS-dependent.
Expression array studies showed that TUSC2 activates transcription of multiple
genes with tumor suppressor properties and down-regulates pro-tumorigenic genes, 
thus supporting its role as a tumor suppressor. In agreement with our knockout
model, TUSC2 up-regulated IL-15 and also modulated more than 40 other genes
(approximately 20% of total TUSC2-affected genes) associated with immune system. 
Among these genes, we identified CD24 and CD274, key immunoreceptors that
regulate immunogenic T and B cells and play important roles in systemic
autoimmune diseases. Finally, clinical significance of TUSC2 transcriptional
effects was validated on the expression array data produced previously on
clinical specimens of MPM. In this analysis, 42 TUSC2 targets proved to be
concordantly modulated in MM serving as disease discriminators.
CONCLUSION: Our data support immuno-therapeutic potential of TUSC2, define its
targets, and underscore its importance as a transcriptional stimulator of
anti-tumorigenic pathways.

PMCID: PMC2776015
PMID: 19852844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Hepatology. 2010 Jan;51(1):35-42. doi: 10.1002/hep.23256.

Impaired expression and function of toll-like receptor 7 in hepatitis C virus
infection in human hepatoma cells.

Chang S(1), Kodys K, Szabo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
MA 01605-2324, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) interferes with interferon (IFN)-mediated innate immune
defenses. Toll-like receptor (TLR) 7 agonists robustly inhibit HCV infection. We 
hypothesize that HCV infection may interfere with the expression and/or function 
of TLR7, a sensor of single-stranded RNA. We identified reduced TLR7 RNA and
protein levels in hepatoma cells expressing HCV (full-length, BB7-subgenomic, and
JFH-1 clone) compared with control HCV-naïve cells. The biological relevance of
this finding was confirmed by the observation of decreased TLR7 RNA in livers of 
HCV-infected patients compared with controls. HCV clearance, by IFN-alpha
treatment or restrictive culture conditions, restored the decreased TLR7
expression. Treatment with RNA polymerase inhibitors revealed a shorter TLR7
half-life in HCV-replicating cells compared with controls. Downstream of TLR7, an
increased baseline IRF7 nuclear translocation was observed in HCV-positive cells 
compared with controls. Stimulation with the TLR7 ligand R837 resulted in
significant IRF7 nuclear translocation in control cells. In contrast,
HCV-replicating cells showed attenuated TLR7 ligand-induced IRF7
activation.CONCLUSION: Reduced TLR7 expression, due to RNA instability, directly 
correlates with HCV replication and alters TLR7-induced IRF7-mediated cell
activation. These results suggest a role for TLR7 in HCV-mediated evasion of host
immune surveillance.

PMID: 19821521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Gen Virol. 2010 Jan;91(Pt 1):220-7. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.015172-0. Epub 2009 Oct 
7.

Thogoto virus ML protein is a potent inhibitor of the interferon regulatory
factor-7 transcription factor.

Buettner N(1), Vogt C, Martínez-Sobrido L, Weber F, Waibler Z, Kochs G.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Virologie, Universität Freiburg, D-79008 Freiburg, Germany.

The tick-transmitted orthomyxovirus Thogoto virus (THOV) encodes the ML protein
acting as a viral suppressor of the host interferon (IFN) system. Here, we
describe that type I IFN is strongly induced in primary mouse embryo fibroblasts 
as well as plasmacytoid dendritic cells upon infection with a THOV mutant lacking
the ML gene. However, wild-type THOV encoding ML suppresses induction of IFN by
preventing the activation of members of the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family.
We found that reporter gene expression dependent on IRF3 and IRF7 was strongly
inhibited by ML. Further experiments revealed that ML interacts with IRF7 and
prevents dimerization of the transcription factor and its association with the
coactivator TRAF6. Interestingly, another IRF7 activation step, nuclear
translocation, is not affected by ML. Our data elucidate ML protein as a
virulence factor with an IRF-specific IFN-antagonistic spectrum.

PMID: 19812269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Oncogene. 2010 Jan 14;29(2):273-84. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.318. Epub 2009 Oct 5.

Cytokine expression and signaling in drug-induced cellular senescence.

Novakova Z(1), Hubackova S, Kosar M, Janderova-Rossmeislova L, Dobrovolna J,
Vasicova P, Vancurova M, Horejsi Z, Hozak P, Bartek J, Hodny Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Integrity, Institute of Molecular Genetics, v.v.i.,
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.
hodny@img.cas.cz

Cellular senescence guards against cancer and modulates aging; however, the
underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here, we show that genotoxic
drugs capable of inducing premature senescence in normal and cancer cells, such
as 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU), distamycin A (DMA), aphidicolin and
hydroxyurea, persistently activate Janus kinase-signal transducer and activator
of transcription (JAK/STAT) signaling and expression of interferon-stimulated
genes (ISGs), such as MX1, OAS, ISG15, STAT1, PML, IRF1 and IRF7, in several
human cancer cell lines. JAK1/STAT-activating ligands, interleukin 10 (IL10),
IL20, IL24, interferon gamma (IFNgamma), IFNbeta and IL6, were also expressed by 
senescent cells, supporting autocrine/paracrine activation of JAK1/STAT.
Furthermore, cytokine genes, including proinflammatory IL1, tumor necrosis factor
and transforming growth factor families, were highly expressed. The strongest
inducer of JAK/STAT signaling, cytokine production and senescence was BrdU
combined with DMA. RNA interference-mediated knockdown of JAK1 abolished
expression of ISGs, but not DNA damage signaling or senescence. Thus, although
DNA damage signaling, p53 and RB activation, and the cytokine/chemokine secretory
phenotype are apparently shared by all types of senescence, our data reveal so
far unprecedented activation of the IFNbeta-STAT1-ISGs axis, and indicate a less 
prominent causative role of IL6-JAK/STAT signaling in genotoxic drug-induced
senescence compared with reports on oncogene-induced or replicative senescence.
These results highlight shared and unique features of drug-induced cellular
senescence, and implicate induction of cancer secretory phenotype in
chemotherapy.

PMID: 19802007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. J Immunol. 2009 Oct 15;183(8):5279-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901390. Epub 2009
Sep 30.

Recognition of Borrelia burgdorferi, the Lyme disease spirochete, by TLR7 and
TLR9 induces a type I IFN response by human immune cells.

Petzke MM(1), Brooks A, Krupna MA, Mordue D, Schwartz I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, New York Medical College, Valhalla,
NY 10595, USA. mary_petzke@nymc.edu

Borrelia burgdorferi is the spirochetal agent of Lyme disease, a multisystemic
disorder characterized by inflammation. Using global transcriptional profiling,
we characterized the response of human PBMCs exposed to B. burgdorferi in an ex
vivo coculture system. The expression profiles induced by B. burgdorferi were
marked by the intense up-regulation of IFN-responsive transcripts and transcripts
involved in the JAK/STAT signaling pathway. Transcript levels of IFN-alpha,
IFN-beta, and IRF7, and protein concentrations of IFN-alpha, were significantly
elevated relative to those in unstimulated PBMCs. The induction of IFN-alpha was 
completely dependent upon phagocytosis of B. burgdorferi. Addition of a soluble
type I IFN receptor, B18R, did not abolish the induction of IFN-inducible genes, 
indicating that B. burgdorferi directly elicits enhanced expression of these
genes independently of type I IFN feedback signaling. Inhibitors of either TLR7
or TLR9 significantly reduced B. burgdorferi-stimulated IFN-alpha protein
expression and transcription of IFN-induced genes. Simultaneous inhibition of
both TLR7 and TLR9 completely abrogated IFN-alpha induction. The
IFN-alpha-producing populations in PBMCs were identified as plasmacytoid
dendritic and CD14(+)CD11c(+) cells. These results reveal a TLR7/9-dependent
signaling pathway used by human PBMCs to initiate a type I IFN response to the
extracellular bacterium B. burgdorferi.

PMID: 19794067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Oncogene. 2009 Nov 19;28(46):4116-25. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.263. Epub 2009 Sep
14.

PU.1 induces apoptosis in myeloma cells through direct transactivation of TRAIL.

Ueno S(1), Tatetsu H, Hata H, Iino T, Niiro H, Akashi K, Tenen DG, Mitsuya H,
Okuno Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Kumamoto University of Medicine, Kumamoto 860-8556, 
Japan.

We earlier reported that PU.1 was downregulated in myeloma cell lines and myeloma
cells in a subset of myeloma patients, and that conditional PU.1 expression in
PU.1-negative myeloma cell lines, U266 and KMS12PE, induced growth arrest and
apoptosis. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms of the growth arrest and
apoptosis, we performed DNA microarray analyses to compare the difference in gene
expression before and after PU.1 induction in U266 cells. Among cell
cycle-related genes, cyclin A2, cyclin B1, CDK2 and CDK4 were downregulated and
p21 was upregulated, although among apoptosis-related genes, tumor necrosis
factor (TNF)-related apoptosis inducing ligand (TRAIL) was found highly
upregulated. When TRAIL was knocked down by small interference RNAs, apoptosis of
PU-1-expressing cells was inhibited, suggesting that TRAIL has a critical role in
PU.1-induced apoptosis in both U266 and KMS12PE myeloma cells. In both U266 and
KMS12PE cells expressing PU.1, PU.1 directly bound to a region 30 bp downstream
of the transcription start site of the TRAIL gene. Upregulation of PU.1-induced
transactivation of the TRAIL promoter in reporter assays, and disruption of the
PU.1-binding site in the TRAIL promoter eliminated this transactivation.
Therefore, we conclude that PU.1 is capable of inducing apoptosis in certain
myeloma cells by direct transactivation of TRAIL.

PMCID: PMC2917647
PMID: 19749795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Viruses. 2009 Sep;1(2):255-75. doi: 10.3390/v1020255. Epub 2009 Sep 7.

Regulation of Innate Immune Responses by Bovine Herpesvirus 1 and Infected Cell
Protein 0 (bICP0).

Jones C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, Fair Street at East Campus Loop,
Lincoln, NE, 68583-0905, USA; E-mail: cjones@unlnotes.unl.edu ; Tel.: +1 (402)
472-1890;

Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BoHV-1) infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) is an important
transcriptional regulatory protein that stimulates productive infection. In
transient transfection assays, bICP0 also inhibits interferon dependent
transcription. bICP0 can induce degradation of interferon stimulatory factor 3
(IRF3), a cellular transcription factor that is crucial for activating beta
interferon (IFN-ß) promoter activity. Recent studies also concluded that
interactions between bICP0 and IRF7 inhibit trans-activation of IFN-ß promoter
activity. The C3HC4 zinc RING (really important new gene) finger located near the
amino terminus of bICP0 is important for all known functions of bICP0. A
recombinant virus that contains a single amino acid change in a well conserved
cysteine residue of the C3HC4 zinc RING finger of bICP0 grows poorly in cultured 
cells, and does not reactivate from latency in cattle confirming that the C3HC4
zinc RING finger is crucial for viral growth and pathogenesis. A bICP0 deletion
mutant does not induce plaques in permissive cells, but induces autophagy in a
cell type dependent manner. In summary, the ability of bICP0 to stimulate
productive infection, and repress IFN dependent transcription plays a crucial
role in the BoHV-1 infection cycle.

PMCID: PMC3185490
PMID: 21994549  [PubMed]


480. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2009 Sep;29(9):559-67. doi: 10.1089/jir.2009.0072.

Rotavirus and reovirus modulation of the interferon response.

Sherry B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, USA.
barbara_sherry@ncsu.edu

The mammalian reoviruses and rotaviruses have evolved specific mechanisms to
evade the Type I interferon (IFN) antiviral response. Rotavirus likely represses 
the IFN response by at least 4 mechanisms. First, the rotavirus protein NSP1,
most likely functioning as an E3 ligase, can induce proteasome-dependent
degradation of the transcription factors IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 to prevent their
induction of IFN. Second, NSP1 can induce proteasome-dependent degradation of the
ubiquitin ligase complex protein beta-TrCP, resulting in stabilization of I
kappaB and concomitant failure of virus to activate NF-kappaB for induction of
IFN. Third, rotavirus may sequester NF-kappaB in viroplasms. And fourth,
rotavirus can prevent STAT1 and STAT2 nuclear translocation. The predominant
mechanism for rotavirus inhibition of the IFN response is likely both rotavirus
strain-specific and cell type-specific. The mammalian reoviruses also display
strain-specific differences in their modulation of the IFN response. Reovirus
activates RIG-I and IPS-1 for phosphorylation of IRF3. Reovirus-induced
activation of MDA5 also participates in induction if IFN-beta, perhaps through
activation of NF-kappaB. Reovirus likely inhibits the IFN response by at least 3 
virus strain-specific mechanisms. First, the reovirus mu2 protein can induce an
unusual nuclear accumulation of IRF9 and repress IFN-stimulated gene (ISG)
expression, most likely by disrupting IRF9 function as part of the heterotrimeric
transcription factor complex, ISGF3. Second, the reovirus sigma 3 protein can
bind dsRNA and prevent activation of the latent antiviral effector protein PKR.
And third, genetic approaches have identified the reovirus lambda 2 and sigma 2
proteins in virus strain-specific modulation of the IFN response, but the
significance remains unclear. In sum, members of the family Reoviridae have
evolved a variety of mechanisms to subvert the host's innate protective response.

PMCID: PMC2956631
PMID: 19694545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Ann Clin Lab Sci. 2009 Summer;39(3):251-62.

Truncation of histone H2A's C-terminal tail, as is typical for Ni(II)-assisted
specific peptide bond hydrolysis, has gene expression altering effects.

Karaczyn AA(1), Cheng RY, Buzard GS, Hartley J, Esposito D, Kasprzak KS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Comparative Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute-Frederick,
Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

Nickel(II), capable of transforming cells and causing tumors in humans and
animals, has been previously shown by us to mediate hydrolytic truncation of
histone H2A's C-terminal tail by 8 amino acids in both cell-free and cell culture
systems. Since H2A's C-tail is involved in maintaining chromatin structure, such 
truncation might alter this structure and affect gene expression. To test the
latter possibility, we transfected cultured T-REx 293 human embryonic kidney
cells with plasmids expressing either wild type (wt) or truncated (q) histone H2A
proteins, which were either untagged or N-terminally tagged with fluorescent
proteins. Each histone variant was found to be incorporated into chromatin at 24 
and 48 hr post-transfection. Cells transfected with the untagged plasmids were
tested for gene expression by microarray and real-time PCR. Evaluation of the
results for over 21,000 genes using the multidimensional scaling and hierarchical
clustering methods revealed significant differences in expression of numerous
genes between the q-H2A and wt-H2A transfectants. Many of the differentially
expressed genes, including BAZ2A, CLDN18, CYP51A1, GFR, GIPC2, HMGB1, IRF7, JAK3,
PSIP1, and VEGF, are cancer-related genes. The results thus demonstrate the
potential of q-H2A to contribute to the process of carcinogenesis through
epigenetic mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2772094
PMID: 19667409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 2009 Aug;20(4):283-95. doi:
10.1016/j.cytogfr.2009.07.005. Epub 2009 Aug 3.

The role of differential expression of human interferon--a genes in antiviral
immunity.

Génin P(1), Vaccaro A, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, UPR 2228 - CNRS Laboratoire de Régulation
Transcriptionnelle et Maladies Génétiques UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, 45
rue des Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Immune recognition of virus-associated molecules by Toll-like receptors (TLRs)
and/or RIG-I-like receptors (RLRs) triggers intracellular signaling cascades that
converge on the activation of interferon regulatory factors - particularly IRF3
and IRF7, leading to the transcriptional induction of type 1 interferon genes.
This review summarizes new data describing how these factors regulate the
temporal and quantitative differences in the expression of the multigenic IFN-A
family. The distinctive DNA-binding features of IRF3 and IRF7 affect the
selectivity and affinity of these factors for IFN-A promoters; modification of
the ratio of promoter-bound IRF3 and IRF7 during virus infection may influence
both transcriptional activation and repression of IFN-A genes. This review also
summarizes the structural differences between IFN-beta and different IFN-alpha
subtypes, their interaction with their common receptor IFNAR, and their potency
to elicit antiviral, antiproliferative and antitumoral responses. Taken together,
this information enhances our understanding of the selective advantage of the
multiplicity of IFN-alpha subtypes in the regulation of innate and adaptive
immunity.

PMID: 19651532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. BMC Genomics. 2009 Aug 3;10:350. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-10-350.

Type I interferon receptor-independent and -dependent host transcriptional
responses to mouse hepatitis coronavirus infection in vivo.

Raaben M(1), Groot Koerkamp MJ, Rottier PJ, de Haan CA.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Division, Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, Faculty
of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
m.raaben@uu.nl

BACKGROUND: The role of type I IFNs in protecting against coronavirus (CoV)
infections is not fully understood. While CoVs are poor inducers of type I IFNs
in tissue culture, several studies have demonstrated the importance of the type I
IFN response in controlling MHV infection in animals. The protective effectors
against MHV infection are, however, still unknown.
RESULTS: In order to get more insight into the antiviral gene expression induced 
in the brains of MHV-infected mice, we performed whole-genome expression
profiling. Three different mouse strains, differing in their susceptibility to
infection with MHV, were used. In BALB/c mice, which display high viral loads but
are able to control the infection, 57 and 121 genes were significantly
differentially expressed (> or = 1.5 fold change) upon infection at 2 and 5 days 
post infection, respectively. Functional association network analyses
demonstrated a strong type I IFN response, with Irf1 and Irf7 as the central
players. At 5 days post infection, a type II IFN response also becomes apparent. 
Both the type I and II IFN response, which were more pronounced in mice with a
higher viral load, were not observed in 129SvEv mice, which are much less
susceptible to infection with MHV. 129SvEv mice lacking the type I interferon
receptor (IFNAR-/-), however, were not able to control the infection. Gene
expression profiling of these mice identified type I IFN-independent responses to
infection, with IFN-gamma as the central player. As the BALB/c and the IFNAR-/-
129SvEv mice demonstrated very similar viral loads in their brains, we also
compared their gene expression profiles upon infection with MHV in order to
identify type I IFN-dependent transcriptional responses. Many known IFN-inducible
genes were detected, several of which have previously been shown to play an
important protective role against virus infections. We speculate that the
additional type I IFN-dependent genes that we discovered may also be important
for protection against MHV infection.
CONCLUSION: Transcriptional profiling of mice infected with MHV demonstrated the 
induction of a robust IFN response, which correlated with the viral load.
Profiling of IFNAR-/- mice allowed us to identify type I IFN-independent and
-dependent responses. Overall, this study broadens our present knowledge of the
type I and II IFN-mediated effector responses during CoV infection in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2728740
PMID: 19650917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Trends Cell Biol. 2009 Aug;19(8):404-13. doi: 10.1016/j.tcb.2009.05.006. Epub
2009 Aug 3.

The NF-kappaB-independent functions of IKK subunits in immunity and cancer.

Chariot A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Cluster for Applied Genoproteomics (GIGA-R), GIGA-Signal
Transduction, Laboratory of Medical Chemistry, CHU, Sart-Tilman, University of
Liege, Belgium. Alain.chariot@ulg.ac.be

The I kappaB kinase (IKK) complex is involved in transcriptional activation by
phosphorylating the inhibitory molecule I kappaB alpha, a modification that
triggers its subsequent degradation, enabling activation of nuclear factor kappa 
B (NF-kappaB). Importantly, recent reports indicate that multiple cytoplasmic and
nuclear proteins distinct from the NF-kappaB and I kappaB proteins are
phosphorylated by the catalytic subunits of the IKK complex, IKK alpha or IKK
beta. Here, I describe how IKK subunits can have crucial roles in allergy,
inflammation and immunity by targeting proteins such as SNAP23 and IRF7, but also
in cancer by phosphorylating key molecules such as p53, TSC1 and FOXO3a through
NF-kappaB-independent pathways. Thus, these recent findings considerably widen
the biological roles of these kinases and suggest that a full understanding of
the biological roles of IKK alpha and IKK beta requires an exhaustive
characterization of their substrates.

PMID: 19648011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Hepatology. 2009 Oct;50(4):1094-104. doi: 10.1002/hep.23122.

Toll-like receptor 4 is involved in the development of fructose-induced hepatic
steatosis in mice.

Spruss A(1), Kanuri G, Wagnerberger S, Haub S, Bischoff SC, Bergheim I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Medicine (180 a), University of Hohenheim,
Stuttgart, Germany.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):714-5.
    Hepatology. 2009 Oct;50(4):1004-6.
    Hepatology. 2010 Apr;51(4):1477; author reply 1477-8.

A link between dietary fructose intake, gut-derived endotoxemia, and nonalcoholic
fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has been suggested by the results of human and animal
studies. To further investigate the role of gut-derived endotoxin in the onset of
fructose-induced NAFLD, Toll-like receptor (TLR-) 4-mutant (C3H/HeJ) mice and
wildtype (C3H/HouJ) mice were either fed plain water or water enriched with 30%
fructose for 8 weeks. Hepatic steatosis, plasma alanine aminotransferase (ALT),
and markers of insulin resistance as well as portal endotoxin levels were
determined. Hepatic levels of myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88),
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and 7, and tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha) as well as markers of lipid peroxidation were assessed. Chronic intake
of 30% fructose solution caused a significant increase in hepatic steatosis and
plasma ALT levels in wildtype animals in comparison to water controls. In
fructose-fed TLR-4 mutant mice, hepatic triglyceride accumulation was
significantly reduced by approximately 40% in comparison to fructose-fed wildtype
mice and plasma ALT levels were at the level of water-fed controls. No difference
in portal endotoxin concentration between fructose-fed wildtype and TLR-4-mutant 
animals was detected. In contrast, hepatic lipid peroxidation, MyD88, and
TNFalpha levels were significantly decreased in fructose-fed TLR-4-mutant mice in
comparison to fructose-fed wildtype mice, whereas IRF3 and IRF7 expression
remained unchanged. Markers of insulin resistance (e.g., plasma TNFalpha, retinol
binding protein 4, and hepatic phospho-AKT) were only altered in fructose-fed
wildtype animals.CONCLUSION: Taken together, these data further support the
hypothesis that in mice the onset of fructose-induced NAFLD is associated with
intestinal bacterial overgrowth and increased intestinal permeability,
subsequently leading to an endotoxin-dependent activation of hepatic Kupffer
cells.

PMID: 19637282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Mol Immunol. 2009 Sep;46(15):3131-40. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2009.05.183. Epub
2009 Jul 1.

Expression regulation and functional characterization of a novel interferon
inducible gene Gig2 and its promoter.

Jiang J(1), Zhang YB, Li S, Yu FF, Sun F, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, 7# Donghu South Road, Wuhan 430072, China.

Grass carp hemorrhagic virus (GCHV)-induced gene 2 (Gig2) is a novel gene
previously identified from UV-inactivated GCHV-treated Carassius auratus
blastulae embryonic (CAB) cells, suggesting that it should play a pivotal role in
the interferon (IFN) antiviral response. In this study, a polyclonal anti-Gig2
antiserum was generated and used to study the inductive expression pattern by
Western blot analysis, showing no basal expression in normal CAB cells but a
significant up-regulation upon UV-inactivated GCHV, polyinosinic:polycytidylic
acid (Poly I:C) and recombinant IFN (rIFN). However, constitutive expression of
Gig2 is observed in all tested tissues from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon
idellus), and Poly I:C injection increases the relative amount of Gig2 protein in
skin, spleen, trunk kidney, gill, hindgut and thymus. Moreover, the genomic
sequence covering the whole Gig2 ORF and the upstream promoter region were
amplified by genomic walking. Significantly, the Gig2 promoter contains three
IFN-stimulated response elements (ISREs), nine GAAA/TTTC motifs and five
gamma-IFN activating sites (GAS), which are the characteristics of genes
responsive to both type I IFN and type II IFN. Subsequently, the complete Gig2
promoter sequence was cloned into pGL3-Basic vector, and its activity was
measured by luciferase assays in the transfected CAB cells. The Gig2
promoter-driven construct is highly induced in CAB cells after treatment with
Poly I:C or rIFN, and the functional capability is dependent on IFN regulatory
factor 7 (IRF7), because its activity can be stimulated by IRF7. Collectively,
the data provide strong evidence that Gig2 is indeed a novel IFN inducible gene
and its expression is likely dependent on IRF7 upon Poly I:C or IFN.

PMID: 19573926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Virol. 2009 Sep;83(18):9411-22. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02362-08. Epub 2009 Jul 1.

Conventional bone marrow-derived dendritic cells contribute to toll-like
receptor-independent production of alpha/beta interferon in response to
inactivated parapoxvirus ovis.

Siegemund S(1), Hartl A, von Buttlar H, Dautel F, Raue R, Freudenberg MA, Fejer
G, Büttner M, Köhler G, Kirschning CJ, Sparwasser T, Alber G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, University of Leipzig, Germany.

Parapoxvirus ovis (PPVO) is a member of the Poxviridae family and belongs to the 
genus Parapoxvirus. It displays only limited homology with orthopoxviruses and
has some molecular features such as an unusual high GC content distinct from
orthopoxviruses. Inactivated PPVO (iPPVO) displays strong immunostimulatory
capacities mediating antiviral activity in vivo. The role of dendritic cells (DC)
and the pattern recognition receptors and signaling requirements responsible for 
immunostimulation by iPPVO are unknown. We demonstrate here that bone
marrow-derived plasmacytoid DC (BM-pDC) and bone marrow-derived conventional DC
(BM-cDC) secrete alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) in response to iPPVO.
Furthermore, iPPVO induces tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha) and
interleukin-12/23p40 (IL-12/23p40) release and major histocompatibility complex
class II (MHC-II), MHC-I, and CD86 upregulation by bone marrow-derived DC (BMDC).
After engulfment, iPPVO is located in endosomal compartments and in the cytosol
of BMDC. iPPVO elicits IFN-alpha/beta by Toll-like receptor (TLR)-independent
pathways in BM-cDC, since IFN-alpha/beta release does not require myeloid
differentiation primary response gene 88 (MyD88) or TIR-domain containing adaptor
protein inducing interferon (TRIF). In contrast, iPPVO-induced TNF-alpha release 
and enhanced expression of MHC-I and CD86 but not of MHC-II by BMDC chiefly
requires MyD88 but not TLR2 or TLR4. Induction of IFN-alpha by iPPVO in BM-cDC
occurred in the absence of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) but required the
presence of IRF7, whereas iPPVO-triggered IFN-beta production required the
presence of either IRF7 or IRF3. These results provide the first evidence that
iPPVO mediates its immunostimulatory properties by TLR-independent and
TLR-dependent pathways and demonstrate an important role of cDC for
IFN-alpha/beta production.

PMCID: PMC2738253
PMID: 19570869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000493. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000493. Epub 2009
Jun 26.

Ebola Zaire virus blocks type I interferon production by exploiting the host SUMO
modification machinery.

Chang TH(1), Kubota T, Matsuoka M, Jones S, Bradfute SB, Bray M, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Ebola Zaire virus is highly pathogenic for humans, with case fatality rates
approaching 90% in large outbreaks in Africa. The virus replicates in macrophages
and dendritic cells (DCs), suppressing production of type I interferons (IFNs)
while inducing the release of large quantities of proinflammatory cytokines.
Although the viral VP35 protein has been shown to inhibit IFN responses, the
mechanism by which it blocks IFN production has not been fully elucidated. We
expressed VP35 from a mouse-adapted variant of Ebola Zaire virus in murine DCs by
retroviral gene transfer, and tested for IFN transcription upon Newcastle Disease
virus (NDV) infection and toll-like receptor signaling. We found that VP35
inhibited IFN transcription in DCs following these stimuli by disabling the
activity of IRF7, a transcription factor required for IFN transcription. By yeast
two-hybrid screens and coimmunoprecipitation assays, we found that VP35
interacted with IRF7, Ubc9 and PIAS1. The latter two are the host SUMO E2 enzyme 
and E3 ligase, respectively. VP35, while not itself a SUMO ligase, increased
PIAS1-mediated SUMOylation of IRF7, and repressed Ifn transcription. In contrast,
VP35 did not interfere with the activation of NF-kappaB, which is required for
induction of many proinflammatory cytokines. Our findings indicate that Ebola
Zaire virus exploits the cellular SUMOylation machinery for its advantage and
help to explain how the virus overcomes host innate defenses, causing rapidly
overwhelming infection to produce a syndrome resembling fulminant septic shock.

PMCID: PMC2696038
PMID: 19557165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Blood. 2009 Aug 27;114(9):1794-802. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-216770. Epub 2009 
Jun 24.

TLR7 stimulation in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells leads to the induction of 
early IFN-inducible genes in the absence of type I IFN.

Di Domizio J(1), Blum A, Gallagher-Gambarelli M, Molens JP, Chaperot L, Plumas J.

Author information: 
(1)Université Joseph Fourier, Grenoble, France.

On recognition of influenza virus (Flu) by TLR7, plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(pDCs) produce type I IFN in significant amounts. Synthetic TLR7 ligands induce
the maturation of pDCs, as evidenced by the expression of costimulatory molecules
and the production of proinflammatory cytokines; however, they induce only
low-level production of IFN-alpha. To dissect the TLR7 signaling in pDCs and how 
these different profiles are induced, we studied the effects of 2 TLR7 ligands
(Flu and CL097) on the activation of blood-isolated pDCs and the human GEN2.2 pDC
cell line. Type I IFN production by pDCs correlates with differential interferon 
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) translocation into the nucleus induced by the 2 TLR7
ligands. Surprisingly, with both activators we nevertheless observed the rapid
expression of the IFN-inducible genes mxa, cxcl10, and trail within 4 hours of
stimulation. This expression, controlled by STAT1 phosphorylation, was
independent of type I IFN. STAT1 activation was found to be strictly dependent on
the PI3K-p38MAPK pathway, showing a new signaling pathway leading to rapid
expression of IFN-inducible genes after TLR7 triggering. Thus, pDCs, through this
unusual TLR7 signaling, have the capacity to promptly respond to viral infection 
during the early phases of the innate immune response.

PMCID: PMC2847942
PMID: 19553637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Vaccine. 2009 Aug 6;27(36):4938-46. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2009.06.012. Epub 2009
Jun 21.

Levamisole is a potential facilitator for the activation of Th1 responses of the 
subunit HBV vaccination.

Zhang W(1), Du X, Zhao G, Jin H, Kang Y, Xiao C, Liu M, Wang B.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agro-Biotechnology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, College of Biological Science, China Agricultural University, 2
Yuanmingyuan Xi Road, Beijing 100094, China.

Chemical compounds activating innate responses may present potential adjuvants
for the vaccine development. Levamisole (LMS), demonstrated as a potent adjuvant 
for DNA and viral killed vaccines in our previous studies, may activate such
responses. To confirm this notion, LMS combined with the recombinant HBsAg
(rHBsAg) was investigated. Compared to the vaccination with rHBsAg alone, LMS
could up-regulate the expressions of TLR7&8, MyD88, IRF7 and their downstream
pro-inflammatory cytokines including IFN-alpha and TNF-alpha, which promote DCs
activation. Strikingly, we find that the combination of LMS and alum adjuvant
synergistically enhances immunogenicity of rHBsAg and leads to a robust
cell-mediated response demonstrated by the higher level of IgG2a/IgG1, T cell
proliferation, and importantly, a high level of antigen-specific CTL and
IFN-gamma production within these activated CD8(+) T cells. The achieved robust
responses are at a comparative level with CpG+alum used as a positive control
adjuvant in mice. The combination of LMS+alum with rHBsAg may provide a
cost-effective, safe, and effective therapy to treat those individuals
chronically infected by HBV, since antigen-specific cellular immunity is
implicated for the clearance of HBV chronic infection.

PMID: 19549606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Gen Virol. 2009 Sep;90(Pt 9):2209-20. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.012203-0. Epub 2009
Jun 10.

Infection with herpes simplex type 1-based amplicon vectors results in an
IRF3/7-dependent, TLR-independent activation of the innate antiviral response in 
primary human fibroblasts.

Tsitoura E(1), Thomas J, Cuchet D, Thoinet K, Mavromara P, Epstein AL.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Lyon, F-69003, Lyon, France.

Amplicons are helper-dependent herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1)-based vectors 
that can deliver very large, foreign DNA sequences and, as such, are good
candidates for both gene delivery and vaccine development. However, many studies 
have shown that innate immune responses induced by virus vectors can play a
significant role in the control of transgenic expression and in the induction of 
inflammatory responses. Furthermore, amplicons are very interesting tools to
study innate cellular responses elicited by entry of HSV-1 particles in the
absence of any virus gene expression. For these reasons, in this study we
characterized the innate antiviral response established in human fibroblasts of
limited passage (HFFF-2) infected by amplicons. Our results indicate that
infection with amplicons triggered an interferon (IFN)-regulatory factors 3 and 7
(IRF3/7)-dependent antiviral response, rendered the cells resistant to vesicular 
stomatitis virus infection and induced significant changes in the pattern of
cellular gene expression, including the upregulation of Toll-like receptor 3
(TLR3), IRF7 and IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). In contrast, we observed only a
mild and contained type I IFN response in infected cells. Amplicon infection
induced nuclear translocation and subsequent degradation of IRF3, without
hyperphosphorylation of the protein. Inhibition of endosome-resident TLR
signalling by blocking lysosome maturation or the knockdown of TLR3 and 4 did not
abolish the cellular response to amplicons, whereas knockdown of IRF3 and 7
inhibited ISG and IFN-beta expression severely. Therefore, our results confirm
the existence of TLR-independent, IRF3/7-dependent activation pathways triggered 
by HSV-1 particles in human fibroblasts.

PMID: 19515829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Microb Pathog. 2009 May;46(5):235-42. doi: 10.1016/j.micpath.2009.01.006. Epub
2009 Feb 4.

Gene expression signatures characterizing the development of lymphocyte response 
during experimental Chlamydia pneumoniae infection.

Kyläniemi MK(1), Haveri A, Vuola JM, Puolakkainen M, Lahesmaa R.

Author information: 
(1)Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi
University, Turku, Finland.

In this study experimental mouse model for Chlamydia pneumoniae infection was
used to elucidate the nature of immune response developing during primary and
secondary infection. First we examined the mononuclear cells from different
lymphoid organs in BALB/c mice during C. pneumoniae infection and detected a
strong lymphocyte influx into mediastinal lymph nodes (MLN). To further
characterize the C. pneumoniae induced immune response the gene expression
profiles of MLN derived lymphocytes was studied. To identify genes characteristic
for reinfection we compared gene expression profiles during reinfection and
primary infection and found 148 genes to be differentially regulated in CD19+
cells, 7 in CD4+ cells and 12 in CD8+ cells. A panel of these genes was selected 
to be confirmed by real-time RT-PCR. Genes related to interferon signaling like
Ifit1, Ifit3, Gbp2, Irf7 and Usp18 were found to be upregulated when reinfection 
was compared to primary infection. In our study we were able to identify 8 genes 
that were differentially expressed between reinfection and primary infection in
lymphocytes. These novel gene expression signatures provide new insights and
clues to the nature of protective immunity established during experimental C.
pneumoniae immunity.

PMID: 19486640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Genomics. 2009 Oct;94(4):257-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2009.05.008. Epub 2009 May 
29.

Differentially expressed genes strongly correlated with femur strength in rats.

Alam I(1), Sun Q, Koller DL, Liu L, Liu Y, Edenberg HJ, Li J, Foroud T, Turner
CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis (IUPUI), Indianapolis, IN 46202-5251, USA.

The region of chromosome 1q33-q54 harbors quantitative trait loci (QTL) for femur
strength in COPxDA and F344xLEW F2 rats. The purpose of this study is to identify
the genes within this QTL region that contribute to the variation in femur
strength. Microarray analysis was performed using RNA extracted from femurs of
COP, DA, F344 and LEW rats. Genes differentially expressed in the 1q33-q54 region
among these rat strains were then ranked based on the strength of correlation
with femur strength in F2 animals derived from these rats. A total of 214 genes
in this QTL region were differentially expressed among all rat strains, and 81
genes were found to be strongly correlated (r(2)>0.50) with femur strength. Of
these, 12 candidate genes were prioritized for further validation, and 8 of these
genes (Ifit3, Ppp2r5b, Irf7, Mpeg1, Bloc1s2, Pycard, Sec23ip, and Hps6) were
confirmed by quantitative PCR (qPCR). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis suggested that
these genes were involved in interferon alpha, nuclear factor-kappa B (NFkB),
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(HNF4A) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) pathways.

PMCID: PMC3052638
PMID: 19482074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. PLoS One. 2009 May 25;4(5):e5674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005674.

TRAF6 establishes innate immune responses by activating NF-kappaB and IRF7 upon
sensing cytosolic viral RNA and DNA.

Konno H(1), Yamamoto T, Yamazaki K, Gohda J, Akiyama T, Semba K, Goto H, Kato A, 
Yujiri T, Imai T, Kawaguchi Y, Su B, Takeuchi O, Akira S, Tsunetsugu-Yokota Y,
Inoue J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Biology, Department of Cancer Biology,
Institute of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In response to viral infection, the innate immune system recognizes
viral nucleic acids and then induces production of proinflammatory cytokines and 
type I interferons (IFNs). Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) and TLR9 detect viral RNA 
and DNA, respectively, in endosomal compartments, leading to the activation of
nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) and IFN regulatory factors (IRFs) in
plasmacytoid dendritic cells. During such TLR signaling, TNF receptor-associated 
factor 6 (TRAF6) is essential for the activation of NF-kappaB and the production 
of type I IFN. In contrast, RIG-like helicases (RLHs), cytosolic RNA sensors, are
indispensable for antiviral responses in conventional dendritic cells,
macrophages, and fibroblasts. However, the contribution of TRAF6 to the detection
of cytosolic viral nucleic acids has been controversial, and the involvement of
TRAF6 in IRF activation has not been adequately addressed.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we first show that TRAF6 plays a critical role in RLH
signaling. The absence of TRAF6 resulted in enhanced viral replication and a
significant reduction in the production of IL-6 and type I IFNs after infection
with RNA virus. Activation of NF-kappaB and IRF7, but not that of IRF3, was
significantly impaired during RLH signaling in the absence of TRAF6.
TGFbeta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1) and MEKK3, whose activation by TRAF6 during TLR
signaling is involved in NF-kappaB activation, were not essential for
RLH-mediated NF-kappaB activation. We also demonstrate that TRAF6-deficiency
impaired cytosolic DNA-induced antiviral responses, and this impairment was due
to defective activation of NF-kappaB and IRF7.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Thus, TRAF6 mediates antiviral responses triggered by
cytosolic viral DNA and RNA in a way that differs from that associated with TLR
signaling. Given its essential role in signaling by various receptors involved in
the acquired immune system, TRAF6 represents a key molecule in innate and
antigen-specific immune responses against viral infection.

PMCID: PMC2682567
PMID: 19479062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Virol. 2009 Aug;83(15):7629-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00679-09. Epub 2009 May 27.

Baculovirus induces type I interferon production through toll-like
receptor-dependent and -independent pathways in a cell-type-specific manner.

Abe T(1), Kaname Y, Wen X, Tani H, Moriishi K, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O, Ishii KJ,
Kawai T, Akira S, Matsuura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Autographa californica nuclear polyhedrosis virus (AcNPV) is a
double-stranded-DNA virus that is pathogenic to insects. AcNPV was shown to
induce an innate immune response in mammalian immune cells and to confer
protection of mice from lethal viral infection. In this study, we have shown that
production of type I interferon (IFN) by AcNPV in murine plasmacytoid dendritic
cells (pDCs) and non-pDCs, such as peritoneal macrophages and splenic CD11c+ DCs,
was mediated by Toll-like receptor (TLR)-dependent and -independent pathways,
respectively. IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) was shown to play a crucial role in 
the production of type I IFN by AcNPV not only in immune cells in vitro but also 
in vivo. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), AcNPV produced IFN-beta and
IFN-inducible chemokines through TLR-independent and IRF3-dependent pathways, in 
contrast to the TLR-dependent and IRF3/IRF7-independent production of
proinflammatory cytokines. Although production of IFN-beta and IFN-inducible
chemokines was severely impaired in IFN promoter-stimulator 1 (IPS-1)-deficient
MEFs upon infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, AcNPV produced substantial
amounts of the cytokines in IPS-1-deficient MEFs. These results suggest that a
novel signaling pathway(s) other than TLR- and IPS-1-dependent pathways
participates in the production of type I IFN in response to AcNPV infection.

PMCID: PMC2708616
PMID: 19474102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Ann Rheum Dis. 2010 May;69(5):918-23. doi: 10.1136/ard.2009.112201. Epub 2009 May
26.

Kinetic analysis of synovial signalling and gene expression in animal models of
arthritis.

Fukushima A(1), Boyle DL, Corr M, Firestein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Allergy and Immunology, University of California,
UCSD School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0656, USA.

BACKGROUND: Animal models of arthritis are frequently used to evaluate novel
therapeutic agents. However, their ability to predict responses in humans is
variable.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the time course of signalling molecule and gene expression 
in two models of arthritis to assist with selection of the model and timing of
drug administration.
METHODS: The passive K/BxN serum transfer and collagen-induced arthritis (CIA)
models were studied. Activation of MAP kinase and interferon (IFN)-response
pathways was evaluated by quantitative PCR and western blot analysis of ankle
joints at various time points during the models.
RESULTS: The kinetics of gene expression and kinase phosphorylation were
strikingly different in passive K/BxN and CIA. All three MAP kinases (ERK, JNK
and p38) and upstream kinases were activated within days in passive K/BxN and
declined as arthritis severity decreased. Surprisingly, IFN-regulated genes,
including IRF7, were not induced in the model. In CIA, activation of ERK and JNK 
was surprisingly low and p38 phosphorylation mainly peaked late in the disease.
IFN-response genes were activated during CIA, with especially prominent peaks at 
the onset of clinical arthritis.
CONCLUSIONS: Timing of treatment and selection of CIA or passive K/BxN might have
an important impact on therapeutic response. p38, in particular, increases during
the late stages of CIA. ERK and JNK patterns are similar in passive K/BxN and
rheumatoid arthritis (RA), while IFN-response genes in CIA and RA are similar.
The dichotomy between RA and animal models could help explain the poor
correlation between efficacy in RA and preclinical studies.

PMCID: PMC2859101
PMID: 19473996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. J Hepatol. 2009 Jul;51(1):29-38. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2009.03.012. Epub 2009 Apr
17.

Hepatitis C virus single-stranded RNA induces innate immunity via Toll-like
receptor 7.

Zhang YL(1), Guo YJ, Bin Li, Sun SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Second Military Medical University, 800
Xiang'Yin Road, 200433 Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Innate immune responses to HCV infection are triggered through
host recognition of pathogen-associated molecular patterns. Interferons are
critical for the protection against HCV infection. However, the pathways linking 
virus recognition to IFN induction remain poorly understood.
METHODS: Immune cells and Huh-7 cells were infected with HCV cell culture (HCVcc)
or transfected with HCV-derived immunostimulatory RNA oligonucleotides (ORNs),
and immune activation was assessed.
RESULTS: We found that HCVcc suppressed immune responses because the HCVcc
protein impaired the PBMC and pDC responses. However, HCVcc genomic RNA had an
immunostimulatory effect. HCV encodes G/U-rich ssRNA TLR7 ligands that
significantly activate innate immunity, and induced IFN-alpha production.
Moreover, HCV-derived ORNs also activated IRF7 and NF-kappaB in Huh-7 cells. In
particular, the HCV 3'-UTR strongly induced cytokine production. Different
lengths of polyuridine tract in the 3'-UTR of different HCV strains induced
IFN-alpha production. These data demonstrate that the HCV-specific G/U fragment
is a motif sequence, and is recognized by TLR7 as a PAMP. The requirement for
TLR7 to recognize HCV RNA was confirmed using specific inhibitors, RNAi and by
TLR7overexpression.
CONCLUSION: These results provide an insight into the development of immune
adjuvant for vaccines and for the production of new antiviral drugs.

PMID: 19443072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2009 May 13;7:45. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-7-45.

Analysis of gene expression profiles in HeLa cells in response to overexpression 
or siRNA-mediated depletion of NASP.

Alekseev OM(1), Richardson RT, Alekseev O, O'Rand MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, 27599-7090, USA. oleg_alekseev@med.unc.edu

BACKGROUND: NASP (Nuclear Autoantigenic Sperm Protein) is a linker histone
chaperone required for normal cell division. Changes in NASP expression
significantly affect cell growth and development; loss of gene function results
in embryonic lethality. However, the mechanism by which NASP exerts its effects
in the cell cycle is not understood. To understand the pathways and networks that
may involve NASP function, we evaluated gene expression in HeLa cells in which
NASP was either overexpressed or depleted by siRNA.
METHODS: Total RNA from HeLa cells overexpressing NASP or depleted of NASP by
siRNA treatment was converted to cRNA with incorporation of Cy5-CTP (experimental
samples), or Cy3-CTP (control samples). The labeled cRNA samples were hybridized 
to whole human genome microarrays (Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, Delaware,
USA). Various gene expression analysis techniques were employed: Significance
Analysis of Microarrays (SAM), Expression Analysis Systematic Explorer (EASE),
and Ingenuity Pathways Analysis (IPA).
RESULTS: From approximately 36 thousand genes present in a total human genome
microarray, we identified a set of 47 up-regulated and 7 down-regulated genes as 
a result of NASP overexpression. Similarly we identified a set of 56 up-regulated
and 71 down-regulated genes as a result of NASP siRNA treatment. Gene ontology,
molecular network and canonical pathway analysis of NASP overexpression
demonstrated that the most significant changes were in proteins participating in 
organismal injury, immune response, and cellular growth and cancer pathways
(major "hubs": TNF, FOS, EGR1, NFkappaB, IRF7, STAT1, IL6). Depletion of NASP
elicited the changed expression of proteins involved in DNA replication, repair
and development, followed by reproductive system disease, and cancer and cell
cycle pathways (major "hubs": E2F8, TP53, FGF, FSH, FST, hCG, NFkappaB, TRAF6).
CONCLUSION: This study has demonstrated that NASP belongs to a network of genes
and gene functions that are critical for cell survival. We have confirmed the
previously reported interactions between NASP and HSP90, HSP70, histone H1,
histone H3, and TRAF6. Overexpression and depletion of NASP identified
overlapping networks that included TNF as a core protein, confirming that both
high and low levels of NASP are detrimental to cell cycle progression. Networks
with cancer-related functions had the highest significance, however reproductive 
networks containing follistatin and FSH were also significantly affected, which
confirmed NASP's important role in reproductive tissues. This study revealed
that, despite some overlap, each response was associated with a unique gene
signature and placed NASP in important cell regulatory networks.

PMCID: PMC2686705
PMID: 19439102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Oral Surg Oral Med Oral Pathol Oral Radiol Endod. 2009 May;107(5):661-8. doi:
10.1016/j.tripleo.2009.01.039.

Expression of interferon regulatory factor 1, 3, and 7 in primary Sjögren
syndrome.

Zheng L(1), Yu C, Zhang Z, Yang C, Cai X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Ninth People's Hospital, School 
of Medicine, Shanghai Research Institute of Stomatology, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to investigate the level of interferon regulatory factor
(IRF) 1, 3, and 7 in peripheral blood cells from patients with primary Sjogren
syndrome (pSS) and to determine whether and where IRF1 exists in the parotid
glands of pSS.
METHODS: Peripheral blood cells and parotid gland biopsy specimens from patients 
with pSS were studied. The IRF1, IRF3, and IRF7 gene mRNA levels in peripheral
blood cells were calculated by using real-time PCR. The IRF1-positive cells in
the parotid glands with pSS were observed by using immunohistochemistry and
immunofluorescence. Statistical analysis was performed by Student t test.
RESULTS: Compared with 24 control samples, the IRF1 mRNA levels in peripheral
blood cells of 37 cases with pSS were up-regulated (P < .05), but the IRF3 and
IRF7 mRNA levels of pSS were not up-regulated (P > .05). Relative quantitative
levels of IRF1 mRNA were 2.17-fold higher in pSS patients than control subjects. 
The IRF1-positive cells of the pSS group were localized in the epithelial
islands, lymphocytes, and ductal epithelial cells of the parotid glands. In all
control subjects, the IRF1-positive cells were localized only to the ductal
epithelial cells of parotid glands as determined by immunohistochemical staining 
or immunofluorescence. The scores of IRF1-positive cells of pSS were
significantly higher than that of control samples (P < .05).
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that IRF1 mRNA levels are up-regulated in the
peripheral blood cells of pSS patients. Also, IRF1-positive cells exist in the
epithelial islands, lymphocytes, and ductal epithelial cells of the parotid
glands of individuals affected by pSS, but are limited to the ductal epithelial
cells of healthy control subjects.

PMID: 19426920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Biochem J. 2009 Jun 26;421(2):301-10. doi: 10.1042/BJ20090013.

Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation primes cells to a pro-inflammatory
polarized response to a Toll-like receptor 7 (TLR7) agonist.

Lee J(1), Hayashi M, Lo JF, Fearns C, Chu WM, Luo Y, Xiang R, Chuang TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0663, USA.

TLR7 (Toll-like receptor 7) mediates anti-viral immunity by recognizing ssRNA
(single-stranded RNA) viruses. Small-molecular-mass TLR7 agonists have been
approved, or are being evaluated, for treatment of cancers or infectious
diseases. Although TLR7 is predominantly expressed in a restricted set of immune 
cell types, including pDCs (plasmacytoid dendritic cells), it is also expressed
in non-native expressing cells (e.g. hepatocytes) under certain circumstances. To
elucidate the molecular basis of TLR7 induction by pro-inflammatory stimulation
and the subsequent cellular responses in these non-native TLR7-expressing cell
types, we first cloned and characterized the 5'-promoter region of TLR7. The
proximal region of this promoter drives the transcription of the TLR7 gene.
Pro-inflammatory stimuli activated TLR 7 transcription via a NF-kappaB (nuclear
factor kappaB)-binding motif in this region, and this activation could be blocked
by mutation of the NF-kappaB binding site or addition of NF-kappaB inhibitors.
Further studies showed that pretreatment of the Hep3B hepatocytes with TNF-alpha 
(tumour necrosis factor-alpha) or IL-1 (interleukin-1) rendered them responsive
to TLR7 activation by a TLR7 agonist. However, distinct from TLR7 activation in
pDCs, which respond to stimulation with Th1 polarized cytokine production, TLR7
induction by pro-inflammatory signals in hepatocytes reconstitutes the
NF-kappaB-dependent cascade but not the IRF7 (interferon regulatory factor
7)-dependent cascade, resulting in a pro-inflammatory polarized response rather
than a Th1 polarized response. These results indicate that inflammatory
stimulation is capable of priming cells to respond to TLR7 agonist with an immune
response that differs from that in native TLR7-expressing cells.

PMCID: PMC2746977
PMID: 19426145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Leukoc Biol. 2009 Aug;86(2):411-21. doi: 10.1189/jlb.1108702. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

GM-CSF- and M-CSF-dependent macrophage phenotypes display differential dependence
on type I interferon signaling.

Fleetwood AJ(1), Dinh H, Cook AD, Hertzog PJ, Hamilton JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Melbourne, The Royal Melbourne Hospital,
Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Erratum in
    J Leukoc Biol. 2012 Feb;91(2):347.

M-CSF and GM-CSF are mediators involved in regulating the numbers and function of
macrophage lineage populations and have been shown to contribute to macrophage
heterogeneity. Type I IFN is an important mediator produced by macrophages and
can have profound regulatory effects on their properties. In this study, we
compared bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMM) and GM-CSF-induced BMM (GM-BMM)
from wild-type and IFNAR1(-/-) mice to assess the contribution of endogenous type
I IFN to the phenotypic differences between BMM and GM-BMM. BMM were capable of
higher constitutive IFN-beta production, which contributed significantly to their
basal transcriptome. Microarray analysis found that of the endogenous type I
IFN-regulated genes specific to either BMM or GM-BMM, 488 of these gene
alterations were unique to BMM, while only 50 were unique to GM-BMM. Moreover,
BMM displayed enhanced basal mRNA levels, relative to GM-BMM, of a number of
genes identified as being dependent on type I IFN signaling, including Stat1,
Stat2, Irf7, Ccl5, Ccl12, and Cxcl10. As a result of prior type I IFN "priming," 
upon LPS stimulation BMM displayed increased activation of the MyD88-independent 
IRF-3/STAT1 pathways compared with GM-BMM, which correlated with the distinct
cytokine/chemokine profiles of the two macrophage subsets. Furthermore, the
autocrine type I IFN signaling loop regulated the production of the M1 and M2
signature cytokines, IL-12p70 and IL-10. Collectively, these findings demonstrate
that constitutive and LPS-induced type I IFN play significant roles in regulating
the differences in phenotype and function between BMM and GM-BMM.

PMID: 19406830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 12;284(24):16202-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.008227. Epub 2009
Apr 20.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus M protein inhibits type I
interferon production by impeding the formation of TRAF3.TANK.TBK1/IKKepsilon
complex.

Siu KL(1), Kok KH, Ng MH, Poon VK, Yuen KY, Zheng BJ, Jin DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) coronavirus is highly pathogenic in
humans and evades innate immunity at multiple levels. It has evolved various
strategies to counteract the production and action of type I interferons, which
mobilize the front-line defense against viral infection. In this study we
demonstrate that SARS coronavirus M protein inhibits gene transcription of type I
interferons. M protein potently antagonizes the activation of
interferon-stimulated response element-dependent transcription by double-stranded
RNA, RIG-I, MDA5, TBK1, IKKepsilon, and virus-induced signaling adaptor (VISA)
but has no influence on the transcriptional activity of this element when IRF3 or
IRF7 is overexpressed. M protein physically associates with RIG-I, TBK1,
IKKepsilon, and TRAF3 and likely sequesters some of them in membrane-associated
cytoplasmic compartments. Consequently, the expression of M protein prevents the 
formation of TRAF3.TANK.TBK1/IKKepsilon complex and thereby inhibits
TBK1/IKKepsilon-dependent activation of IRF3/IRF7 transcription factors. Taken
together, our findings reveal a new mechanism by which SARS coronavirus
circumvents the production of type I interferons.

PMCID: PMC2713514
PMID: 19380580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;29(12):3435-50. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01805-08. Epub 2009 Apr 
6.

Differential regulation of human interferon A gene expression by interferon
regulatory factors 3 and 7.

Génin P(1), Lin R, Hiscott J, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228-CNRS, Laboratoire de Régulation Transcriptionnelle et Maladies
Génétiques, UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université Paris Descartes, 45 rue 
des Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Differential expression of the human interferon A (IFN-A) gene cluster is
modulated following paramyxovirus infection by the relative amounts of active
interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and IRF-7. IRF-3 expression activates
predominantly IFN-A1 and IFN-B, while IRF-7 expression induces multiple IFN-A
genes. IFN-A1 gene expression is dependent on three promoter proximal IRF
elements (B, C, and D modules, located at positions -98 to -45 relative to the
mRNA start site). IRF-3 binds the C module of IFN-A1, while other IFN-A gene
promoters are responsive to the binding of IRF-7 to the B and D modules. Maximal 
expression of IFN-A1 is observed with complete occupancy of the three modules in 
the presence of IRF-7. Nucleotide substitutions in the C modules of other IFN-A
genes disrupt IRF-3-mediated transcription, whereas a G/A substitution in the D
modules enhances IRF7-mediated expression. IRF-3 exerts dual effects on IFN-A
gene expression, as follows: a synergistic effect with IRF-7 on IFN-A1 expression
and an inhibitory effect on other IFN-A gene promoters. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments reveal that transient binding of both IRF-3 and
IRF-7, accompanied by CBP/p300 recruitment to the endogenous IFN-A gene
promoters, is associated with transcriptional activation, whereas a biphasic
recruitment of IRF-3 and CBP/p300 represses IFN-A gene expression. This
regulatory mechanism contributes to differential expression of IFN-A genes and
may be critical for alpha interferon production in different cell types by
RIG-I-dependent signals, leading to innate antiviral immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2698742
PMID: 19349300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Mar;5(3):e1000355. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000355. Epub 2009
Mar 27.

Characterization of the interferon-producing cell in mice infected with Listeria 
monocytogenes.

Stockinger S(1), Kastner R, Kernbauer E, Pilz A, Westermayer S, Reutterer B,
Soulat D, Stengl G, Vogl C, Frenz T, Waibler Z, Taniguchi T, Rülicke T, Kalinke
U, Müller M, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology,
University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Production of type I interferons (IFN-I, mainly IFNalpha and IFNbeta) is a
hallmark of innate immune responses to all classes of pathogens. When viral
infection spreads to lymphoid organs, the majority of systemic IFN-I is produced 
by a specialized "interferon-producing cell" (IPC) that has been shown to belong 
to the lineage of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC). It is unclear whether
production of systemic IFN-I is generally attributable to pDC irrespective of the
nature of the infecting pathogen. We have addressed this question by studying
infections of mice with the intracellular bacterium Listeria monocytogenes.
Protective innate immunity against this pathogen is weakened by IFN-I activity.
In mice infected with L. monocytogenes, systemic IFN-I was amplified via
IFN-beta, the IFN-I receptor (IFNAR), and transcription factor interferon
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a molecular circuitry usually characteristic of
non-pDC producers. Synthesis of serum IFN-I did not require TLR9. In contrast, in
vitro-differentiated pDC infected with L. monocytogenes needed TLR9 to transcribe
IFN-I mRNA. Consistent with the assumption that pDC are not the producers of
systemic IFN-I, conditional ablation of the IFN-I receptor in mice showed that
most systemic IFN-I is produced by myeloid cells. Furthermore, results obtained
with FACS-purified splenic cell populations from infected mice confirmed the
assumption that a cell type with surface antigens characteristic of macrophages
and not of pDC is responsible for bulk IFN-I synthesis. The amount of IFN-I
produced in the investigated mouse lines was inversely correlated to the
resistance to lethal infection. Based on these data, we propose that the
engagement of pDC, the mode of IFN-I mobilization, as well as the shaping of the 
antimicrobial innate immune response by IFN-I differ between intracellular
pathogens.

PMCID: PMC2654726
PMID: 19325882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Int J Oncol. 2009 Apr;34(4):971-82.

Expression of RIG-I, IRF3, IFN-beta and IRF7 determines resistance or
susceptibility of cells to infection by Newcastle Disease Virus.

Wilden H(1), Fournier P, Zawatzky R, Schirrmacher V.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, D-69120
Heidelberg, Germany.

Newcastle Disease Virus (NDV) is an avian paramyxovirus with anti-neoplastic and 
immune-stimulatory properties which has raised considerable interest for cancer
therapy. To better understand the molecular nature of the tumor selective
replication of NDV, we investigated the cellular responses of murine normal and
tumor cells after infection by NDV. To this end, we compared the basal expression
of different antiviral proteins as well as the expression induced by the addition
of NDV to the cells in vitro and in vivo. Primary macrophages were found to be
resistant to NDV infection and exhibited a high basal and induced expression of
various antiviral genes. In contrast, macrophage-derived RAW tumor cells were
highly susceptible to NDV infection and displayed a low expression of several
antiviral genes. Macrophage-derived J774 tumor cells were intermediate with
regard to NDV replication and antiviral gene expression. The responsiveness to
exogenously added IFN-alpha was found highest in normal macrophages, lowest in
the RAW cells, and intermediate in the J774 cells. We also analysed dendritic
cells as well as additional normal and tumor cell types. A strong inverse
correlation was obeserved between the susceptibility to infection and the basal
expression of the antiviral genes RIG-I, IRF3, IRF7 and IFN-beta. A strong
expression of these genes can explain the resistance of normal cells to NDV
infection and a weak antiviral gene expression the broad susceptibility of tumor 
cells.

PMID: 19287954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Eur J Immunol. 2009 Apr;39(4):1007-18. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838814.

The IFN regulatory factor 7-dependent type I IFN response is not essential for
early resistance against murine cytomegalovirus infection.

Steinberg C(1), Eisenächer K, Gross O, Reindl W, Schmitz F, Ruland J, Krug A.

Author information: 
(1)II. Medizinische Klinik, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technical University
Munich, Munich, Germany.

IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) has been described as the master regulator of type
I IFN responses and has been shown to be critical for innate antiviral immunity
in vivo. In addition to type I IFN, NK cell responses are involved in the control
of viral replication during acute viral infection. To investigate the role of
IRF7 in the context of a viral infection that induces a strong NK cell response, 
the murine cytomegalovirus (MCMV) infection model was used. WT, IRF7-deficient
and IRF3/IRF7-double deficient mice were infected with MCMV. The systemic
IFN-alpha response to MCMV was entirely dependent on IRF7, but independent of
IRF3. However, peak IFN-beta production during MCMV infection was not affected by
the lack of IRF7 or both IRF7 and IRF3. Despite the complete lack of IFN-alpha
production IRF7- and IRF3/IRF7-deficient mice were surprisingly efficient in
controlling MCMV replication and were only modestly more susceptible to MCMV
infection than WT mice. NK cell cytotoxicity was unimpaired and NK cell IFN-gamma
production was enhanced in IRF7-deficient mice correlating with increased levels 
of bioactive IL-12. Owing to these compensatory mechanisms IRF7-dependent
antiviral immune responses were not essential for resistance against acute MCMV
infection in vivo.

PMID: 19283778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Virology. 2009 Apr 10;386(2):225-36. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.01.024. Epub 2009 
Feb 20.

Poly (I:C) induced immune response in lymphoid tissues involves three sequential 
waves of type I IFN expression.

Démoulins T(1), Baron ML, Kettaf N, Abdallah A, Sharif-Askari E, Sékaly RP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Centre de Recherche du CHUM, Hôpital Saint-Luc,
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

An IFN-alpha heteroduplex-tracking assay (IFN-HTA) was developed to quantify the 
frequency of expression of the 16 genes coding for related interferon-alpha
(IFN-alpha) subtypes in mice. In mLN of mice treated with Poly (I:C), we observed
the induction of three sequential waves of type I IFN production, instead of two 
as is commonly described: early IFNs after 1 h (IFN-beta), late IFNs after 3 h
(mostly IFN-alpha1, -alpha2, -alpha 4 and -alpha 5) and "secondary late IFNs"
after 6 h (IFN-alpha 6T and -alpha 8/6). The late IFN wave was associated with
the upregulation of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-7 mRNA and proteins,
whereas the secondary late IFN wave was associated with a slight upregulation of 
IRF-8 mRNA. Type I IFNs produced in the thymus were associated with a distinct
IRF mRNA expression pattern. This IFN-HTA strategy can serve as a useful tool to 
qualify and quantify the expression of various IFN-alpha subtypes under distinct 
immune responses and thus provides a first step in evaluating their function.

PMID: 19232663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Viral Hepat. 2009 Jun;16(6):388-96. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2893.2009.01095.x. Epub
2009 Feb 5.

Association of genetic polymorphisms with interferon-induced haematologic adverse
effects in chronic hepatitis C patients.

Wada M(1), Marusawa H, Yamada R, Nasu A, Osaki Y, Kudo M, Nabeshima M, Fukuda Y, 
Chiba T, Matsuda F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

Interferon (IFN)-based combination therapy with ribavirin has become the gold
standard for the treatment of chronic hepatitis C virus infection. Haematologic
toxicities, such as neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and anaemia, however,
frequently cause poor treatment tolerance, resulting in poor therapeutic
efficacy. The aim of this study was to identify host genetic polymorphisms
associated with the efficacy or haematologic toxicity of IFN-based combination
therapy in chronic hepatitis C patients. We performed comprehensive single
nucleotide polymorphism detection in all exonic regions of the 12 genes involved 
in the IFN signalling pathway in 32 healthy Japanese volunteers. Of 167
identified polymorphisms, 35 were genotyped and tested for an association with
the efficacy or toxicity of IFN plus ribavirin therapy in 240 chronic hepatitis C
patients. Multiple logistic regression analysis revealed that low viral load,
viral genotypes 2 and 3, and a lower degree of liver fibrosis, but none of the
genetic polymorphisms, were significantly associated with a sustained virologic
response. In contrast to efficacy, multiple linear regression analyses
demonstrated that two polymorphisms (IFNAR1 10848-A/G and STAT2 4757-G/T) were
significantly associated with IFN-induced neutropenia (P = 0.013 and P = 0.011,
respectively). Thrombocytopenia was associated with the IRF7 789-G/A (P = 0.031).
In conclusion, genetic polymorphisms in IFN signalling pathway-related genes were
associated with IFN-induced neutropenia and thrombocytopenia in chronic hepatitis
C patients. In contrast to toxicity, the efficacy of IFN-based therapy was
largely dependent on viral factors and degree of liver fibrosis.

PMID: 19200137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Eur J Cancer. 2009 May;45(7):1282-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2008.12.027. Epub 2009 
Feb 3.

Identification of genes epigenetically silenced by CpG methylation in human
gastric carcinoma.

Jee CD(1), Kim MA, Jung EJ, Kim J, Kim WH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul, Republic of Korea.

To identify novel methylation-silenced genes in gastric cancer, we carried out a 
genome-wide search for genes that are up-regulated after treatment with the
demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5Aza-dC). When three gastric cancer 
cell lines (SNU-1,-601, and -719) were treated with 5Aza-dC, 143 genes were found
to be upregulated by twofold or more using oligonucleotide microarrays. Six of
these genes, i.e. TFPI2, GPX3, GPX1, IGFBP6, IRF7 and DMRT1, showed promoter
hypermethylation in one or more gastric cancer cell lines, but were unmethylated 
in normal gastric mucosa by bisulphite sequencing and methylation-specific PCR
analysis. The following percentages of these genes were found to be aberrantly
methylated in gastric cancer samples; TFPI2 (80.9%), GPX3 (30.1%), DMRT1 (46.9%),
GPX1 (16.7%), IGFBP6 (22.6%) and IRF7 (32.1%). Interestingly, the survival of
patients possessing methylated alleles of TFPI2 (123/152, 80.9%) was poorer than 
that of patients with unmethylated alleles (p=0.023). Multivariate analysis
confirmed that TFPI2 methylation is a significant and independent prognostic
factor in gastric carcinoma. Furthermore, altered TFPI2 expression, as
demonstrated by immunohistochemistry in 566 consecutive gastric cancer tissues,
was found to be significantly associated with sex (p=0.003), WHO classification
(p<0.001), and a mixed subtype by Lauren's classification (p<0.001). Thus, the
present study identified several novel genes, which were methylated in gastric
cancer and among them, methylation of TFPI2 was an unfavourable prognostic
marker.

PMID: 19195878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. J Virol. 2009 Apr;83(8):3420-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02623-08. Epub 2009 Feb 4.

MAVS self-association mediates antiviral innate immune signaling.

Tang ED(1), Wang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Signaling, Division of Oral Biology and Medicine, UCLA
School of Dentistry, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The innate immune system recognizes nucleic acids during viral infection and
stimulates cellular antiviral responses. Intracellular detection of RNA virus
infection is mediated by the RNA helicases RIG-I (retinoic acid inducible gene I)
and MDA-5, which recognize viral RNA and signal through the adaptor molecule MAVS
(mitochondrial antiviral signaling) to stimulate the phosphorylation and
activation of the transcription factors IRF3 (interferon regulatory factor 3) and
IRF7. Once activated, IRF3 and IRF7 turn on the expression of type I interferons,
such as beta interferon. Interestingly, unlike other signaling molecules
identified in this pathway, MAVS contains a C-terminal transmembrane (TM) domain 
that is essential for both type I interferon induction and localization of MAVS
to the mitochondrial outer membrane. However, the role the MAVS TM domain plays
in signaling remains unclear. Here we report the identification of a function for
the TM domain in mediating MAVS self-association. The activation of RIG-I/MDA-5
leads to the TM-dependent dimerization of the MAVS N-terminal caspase recruitment
domain, thereby providing an interface for direct binding to and activation of
the downstream effector TRAF3 (tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factor
3). Our results reveal a role for MAVS self-association in antiviral innate
immunity signaling and provide a molecular mechanism for downstream signal
transduction.

PMCID: PMC2663242
PMID: 19193783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Glia. 2009 Aug 15;57(11):1216-26. doi: 10.1002/glia.20843.

Theiler's virus infection induces TLR3-dependent upregulation of TLR2 critical
for proinflammatory cytokine production.

So EY(1), Kim BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Northwestern University Medical
School, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Theiler's murine encephalomyelitis virus (TMEV) infection directly induces many
proinflammatory genes, including type I interferon (IFN) and a variety of
cytokine genes. These virus-induced cytokines are a critical factor in developing
TMEV-induced demyelinating disease. We have previously reported that the major
activation signal for the cytokine genes is mediated via TLR3. In this study, we 
describe that TLR2 is upregulated via TLR3 signal and cooperatively participates 
in the expression of IL-6, IL-1beta, CCL2, and CCL5 genes following TMEV
infection. The expression of these genes was significantly impaired in both
TLR2-deficient and TLR3-deficient primary astrocytes. However, the induction of
type I IFNs was not affected by TLR2 deficiency in the primary cells. TMEV
infection led to TLR2-mediated NF-kappaB activation, but not IRF3 or IRF7
activation, critical for type I IFN production. More importantly, TLR3 was
required for TMEV-induced early TLR2 upregulation in primary astrocytes leading
to the production of TLR2-dependent cytokines such as IL-6. Interestingly,
soluble factor(s) produced via TLR2/3-dependent signals appears to be partially
associated with the downstream cytokine production. These results indicate that
TMEV utilizes TLR3-induced TLR2 to induce inflammatory cytokines, which are
critical to the development of immune-mediated demyelinating disease.

PMCID: PMC2706926
PMID: 19191335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004319. Epub 2009 Feb 2.

Hepatitis C virus is a weak inducer of interferon alpha in plasmacytoid dendritic
cells in comparison with influenza and human herpesvirus type-1.

Gondois-Rey F(1), Dental C, Halfon P, Baumert TF, Olive D, Hirsch I.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche MédicaleUMR891, Centre de
Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Marseille, France.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) are responsible for the production of type I 
IFN during viral infection. Viral elimination by IFN-alpha-based therapy in more 
than 50% of patients chronically infected with hepatitis C virus (HCV) suggests a
possible impairment of production of endogenous IFN-alpha by pDCs in infected
individuals. In this study, we investigated the impact of HCV on pDC function. We
show that exposure of pDCs to patient serum- and cell culture-derived HCV
resulted in production of IFN-alpha by pDCs isolated from some donors, although
this production was significantly lower than that induced by influenza and human 
herpesvirus type 1 (HHV-1). Using specific inhibitors we demonstrate that
endocytosis and endosomal acidification were required for IFN-alpha production by
pDCs in response to cell culture-derived HCV. HCV and noninfectious HCV-like
particles inhibited pDC-associated production of IFN-alpha stimulated with
Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9) agonists (CpG-A or HHV-1) but not that of IFN-alpha
stimulated with TLR7 agonists (resiquimod or influenza virus). The blockade of
TLR9-mediated production of IFN-alpha, effective only when pDCs were exposed to
virus prior to or shortly after CpG-A stimulation, was already detectable at the 
IFN-alpha transcription level 2 h after stimulation with CpG-A and correlated
with down-regulation of the transcription factor IRF7 expression and of TLR9
expression. In conclusion, rapidly and early occurring particle-host cell protein
interaction during particle internalization and endocytosis followed by blockade 
of TLR9 function could result in less efficient sensing of HCV RNA by TLR7, with 
impaired production of IFN-alpha. This finding is important for our understanding
of HCV-DC interaction and immunopathogenesis of HCV infection.

PMCID: PMC2629532
PMID: 19183807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS Pathog. 2009 Jan;5(1):e1000280. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000280. Epub 2009
Jan 30.

Rotavirus NSP1 inhibits NFkappaB activation by inducing proteasome-dependent
degradation of beta-TrCP: a novel mechanism of IFN antagonism.

Graff JW(1), Ettayebi K, Hardy ME.

Author information: 
(1)Veterinary Molecular Biology, Montana State University, Bozeman, Montana,
United States of America.

Mechanisms by which viruses counter innate host defense responses generally
involve inhibition of one or more components of the interferon (IFN) system.
Multiple steps in the induction and amplification of IFN signaling are targeted
for inhibition by viral proteins, and many of the IFN antagonists have direct or 
indirect effects on activation of latent cytoplasmic transcription factors.
Rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP1 blocks transcription of type I IFNalpha/beta
by inducing proteasome-dependent degradation of IFN-regulatory factors 3 (IRF3), 
IRF5, and IRF7. In this study, we show that rotavirus NSP1 also inhibits
activation of NFkappaB and does so by a novel mechanism. Proteasome-mediated
degradation of inhibitor of kappaB (IkappaBalpha) is required for NFkappaB
activation. Phosphorylated IkappaBalpha is a substrate for polyubiquitination by 
a multisubunit E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, Skp1/Cul1/F-box, in which the F-box
substrate recognition protein is beta-transducin repeat containing protein
(beta-TrCP). The data presented show that phosphorylated IkappaBalpha is stable
in rotavirus-infected cells because infection induces proteasome-dependent
degradation of beta-TrCP. NSP1 expressed in isolation in transiently transfected 
cells is sufficient to induce this effect. Targeted degradation of an F-box
protein of an E3 ligase complex with a prominent role in modulation of innate
immune signaling and cell proliferation pathways is a unique mechanism of IFN
antagonism and defines a second strategy of immune evasion used by rotaviruses.

PMCID: PMC2627925
PMID: 19180189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Virol. 2009 Apr;83(8):3977-81. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02400-08. Epub 2009 Jan 28.

The infected cell protein 0 encoded by bovine herpesvirus 1 (bICP0) associates
with interferon regulatory factor 7 and consequently inhibits beta interferon
promoter activity.

Saira K(1), Zhou Y, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68503, USA.

The bICP0 protein encoded by bovine herpesvirus 1 stimulates productive infection
and viral gene expression but inhibits interferon (IFN)-dependent transcription. 
bICP0 inhibits beta IFN (IFN-beta) promoter activity and induces degradation of
IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3). Although bICP0 inhibits the trans-activation
activity of IRF7, IRF7 protein levels are not reduced. In this study, we
demonstrate that bICP0 is associated with IRF7. Furthermore, bICP0 inhibits the
ability of IRF7 to trans-activate the IFN-beta promoter in the absence of IRF3
expression. The interaction between bICP0 and IRF7 correlates with reduced
trans-activation of the IFN-beta promoter by IRF7.

PMCID: PMC2663255
PMID: 19176627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Immunol. 2009 Jan 15;182(2):820-8.

TLR4 ligands induce IFN-alpha production by mouse conventional dendritic cells
and human monocytes after IFN-beta priming.

Richez C(1), Yasuda K, Watkins AA, Akira S, Lafyatis R, van Seventer JM, Rifkin
IR.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Exacerbation of disease in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is associated with 
bacterial infection. In conventional dendritic cells (cDCs), the TLR4 ligand
bacterial LPS induces IFN-beta gene expression but does not induce IFN-alpha. We 
hypothesized that when cDCs are primed by cytokines, as may frequently be the
case in SLE, LPS would then induce the production of IFN-alpha, a cytokine
believed to be important in lupus pathogenesis. In this study we show that mouse 
cDCs and human monocytes produce abundant IFN-alpha following TLR4 engagement
whether the cells have been pretreated either with IFN-beta or with a supernatant
from DCs activated by RNA-containing immune complexes from lupus patients. This
TLR4-induced IFN-alpha induction is mediated by both an initial TRIF-dependent
pathway and a subsequent MyD88-dependent pathway, in contrast to TLR3-induced
IFN-alpha production, which is entirely TRIF-dependent. There is also a distinct 
requirement for IFN regulatory factors (IRFs), with LPS-induced IFN-alpha
induction being entirely IRF7- and partially IRF5-dependent, in contrast to
LPS-induced IFN-beta gene induction which is known to be IRF3-dependent but
largely IRF7-independent. This data demonstrates a novel pathway for IFN-alpha
production by cDCs and provides one possible explanation for how bacterial
infection might precipitate disease flares in SLE.

PMCID: PMC2858919
PMID: 19124725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Exp Neurol. 2009 Apr;216(2):306-11. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2008.12.002. Epub
2008 Dec 14.

Type I interferon receptor signalling is induced during demyelination while its
function for myelin damage and repair is redundant.

Schmidt H(1), Raasch J, Merkler D, Klinker F, Krauss S, Brück W, Prinz M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University Medical Center, Georg August
University, Göttingen, Germany.

The type I interferons, interferon-beta and alpha (IFN-beta, IFN-alpha), are
widely used for the treatment of autoimmune demyelination in the central nervous 
system (CNS). Their effects on de- and remyelination through the broadly
expressed type I IFN receptor (IFNAR), however, are highly speculative. In order 
to elucidate the role of endogenous type I interferons for myelin damage and
recovery we induced toxic demyelination in the absence of IFNAR1. We demonstrate 
that IFNAR signalling was induced during acute demyelination since the cytokine
IFN-beta as well as the IFN-dependent genes IRF7, ISG15 and UBP43 were strongly
upregulated. Myelin damage, astrocytic and microglia response, however, were not 
significantly reduced in the absence of IFNAR1. Furthermore, motor skills of
IFNAR1-deficient animals during non-immune demyelination were unaltered. Finally,
myelin recovery was found to be independent from endogenous IFNAR signalling,
indicating a redundant role of this receptor for non-inflammatory myelin damage
and repair.

PMID: 19121307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Exp Med. 2008 Dec 22;205(13):3119-31. doi: 10.1084/jem.20082292. Epub 2008 Dec 
1.

Yellow fever vaccine induces integrated multilineage and polyfunctional immune
responses.

Gaucher D(1), Therrien R, Kettaf N, Angermann BR, Boucher G, Filali-Mouhim A,
Moser JM, Mehta RS, Drake DR 3rd, Castro E, Akondy R, Rinfret A, Yassine-Diab B, 
Said EA, Chouikh Y, Cameron MJ, Clum R, Kelvin D, Somogyi R, Greller LD, Balderas
RS, Wilkinson P, Pantaleo G, Tartaglia J, Haddad EK, Sékaly RP.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie, Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de
l'Université de Montréal (CR-CHUM) Saint-Luc, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Correlates of immune-mediated protection to most viral and cancer vaccines are
still unknown. This impedes the development of novel vaccines to incurable
diseases such as HIV and cancer. In this study, we have used functional genomics 
and polychromatic flow cytometry to define the signature of the immune response
to the yellow fever (YF) vaccine 17D (YF17D) in a cohort of 40 volunteers
followed for up to 1 yr after vaccination. We show that immunization with YF17D
leads to an integrated immune response that includes several effector arms of
innate immunity, including complement, the inflammasome, and interferons, as well
as adaptive immunity as shown by an early T cell response followed by a brisk and
variable B cell response. Development of these responses is preceded, as
demonstrated in three independent vaccination trials and in a novel in vitro
system of primary immune responses (modular immune in vitro construct [MIMIC]
system), by the coordinated up-regulation of transcripts for specific
transcription factors, including STAT1, IRF7, and ETS2, which are upstream of the
different effector arms of the immune response. These results clearly show that
the immune response to a strong vaccine is preceded by coordinated induction of
master transcription factors that lead to the development of a broad,
polyfunctional, and persistent immune response that integrates all effector cells
of the immune system.

PMCID: PMC2605227
PMID: 19047440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 2009 Mar 15;128(1-3):7-15. doi:
10.1016/j.vetimm.2008.10.290. Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Dendritic cells--at the front-line of pathogen attack.

McCullough KC(1), Ruggli N, Summerfield A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunoprophylaxis, Research Department,
Sensemattstrasse 293, CH-3147 Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.
Kenneth.mccullough@ivi.admin.ch

Efficient immune defence function is dependent on the role played by dendritic
cells (DCs), particularly the interaction between conventional DC (cDC) and
plasmacytoid DC (pDC), together with other monocytic cells. This functionality of
immune defences is open to manipulation by viral pathogens infecting DC, a
situation further complicated by the diversity of mechanisms employed by
different viruses and the subset of DC involved. The present review uses two
virus examples--classical swine fever virus (CSFV) and porcine circovirus type 2 
(PCV2)--to demonstrate the complexity of this host-pathogen scenario. CSFV is a
monocytotropic RNA virus infecting and replicating in both cDC and pDC. This
virus employs its non-structural Npro protein for antagonizing the Type I
interferon (IFN) induction pathway. The Npro protein promotes proteasomal
degradation of interferon regulatory factor (IRF)3, particularly notable in cDC. 
In contrast, CSFV infection induces IFNalpha production by pDC, probably due to a
lack of interference by the Npro protein with the IRF7 more prominent in pDC.
Such ability of the virus to inhibit cDC while augmenting IFNalpha production by 
pDC might lead to an exaggerated pDC response, relating to the immunopathological
characteristics of the disease. PCV2 is an ssDNA containing virus, which in
contrast to CSFV is inefficient in its capacity to replicate in DC. Recent
evidence suggests that virus replication occurs in endothelial cells, with the DC
being more involved through their particularly elevated endocytosis of the virus.
PCV2 can accumulate to high levels both in vitro and in vivo, a phenomenon
dependent on the virus capsid protein, inferring that the viral capsid or genome 
impedes DC endocytic degradation of the virus. Nevertheless, the presence of PCV2
in cDC does not interfere with processing of other antigens. The immunoregulatory
characteristics of PCV2 are manifest as impairment of "danger" recognition by
cells of the innate defences. This varies dependent on the "danger" signal and
the cells responding, especially when one compares cDC and pDC. Overall, the
PCV2-induced immunomodulation contrasts with that of CSFV in being a property
dependent on the viral genome, particularly the dsDNA replicative form, and with 
immunoregulatory capacity for both cDC and pDC. Moreover, PCV2 compromises immune
defence development against other pathogens rather than itself. In conclusion,
the DC family represents a critical immune defence element open to modulation by 
virus infection, with serious consequences for host resistance to disease. The
characteristics of the immune modulation depend on the virus and the DC subsets
involved. Overall, the roles played by the pDC can be decisive in shaping the
outcome of the infection and the characteristics of the virus-induced
immunocompromisation.

PMID: 19036457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Cancer. 2009 Feb 15;124(4):827-33. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23994.

Epigenetic regulation and molecular characterization of C/EBPalpha in pancreatic 
cancer cells.

Kumagai T(1), Akagi T, Desmond JC, Kawamata N, Gery S, Imai Y, Song JH, Gui D,
Said J, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, UCLA School 
of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA. kumamed1_2001@yahoo.co.jp

Molecular-targeted therapy is a hopeful approach for pancreatic cancer. Silencing
of tumor suppressor genes can occur by histone deacetylation and/or DNA
methylation in the promoter. Here, we identified epigenetically silenced genes in
pancreatic cancer cells. Pancreatic cancer cell line, PANC-1 cells were treated
either with or without 5Aza-dC (a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor) and
suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA, a histone deacetylase inhibitor), and mRNA
was isolated from these cells. Oligonucleotide microarray analysis revealed that 
30 genes including UCHL1, C/EBPalpha, TIMP2 and IRF7 were up-regulated after
treatment with 5Aza-dC and SAHA in PANC-1. The induction of these 4 genes was
validated by real-time PCR in several pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Interestingly, expression of C/EBPalpha was significantly restored in 6 of 6
pancreatic cancer cell lines. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that
histone H3 of the promoter region of C/EBPalpha was acetylated in PANC-1 treated 
with SAHA; and bisulfate sequencing showed methylation of its promoter region in 
several pancreatic cancer cell lines. Forced expression of C/EBPalpha markedly
suppressed clonal proliferation of PANC-1 cells. Co-immunoprecipitation assay
showed the interaction of C/EBPalpha and E2F1; and the interaction caused the
inhibition of E2F1 transcriptional activity. Immunohistochemical analysis
revealed that C/EBPalpha localized in the cytoplasm in pancreatic adenocarcinoma 
cells, whereas it localized predominantly in the nucleus in normal pancreatic
cells. Our data demonstrated that aberrant silencing, as well as, inappropriate
cytoplasmic localization of C/EBPalpha causes dysregulation of its function,
suggesting that C/EBPalpha is a novel candidate tumor suppressor gene in
pancreatic cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3471542
PMID: 19035457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 25;105(47):18448-53. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0809933105. Epub 2008 Nov 18.

IRF7 activation by Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 requires
localization at activation sites and TRAF6, but not TRAF2 or TRAF3.

Song YJ(1), Izumi KM, Shinners NP, Gewurz BE, Kieff E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Channing Laboratory/Brigham & Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, 181 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent infection membrane protein 1 (LMP1), a
constitutively aggregated and activated pseudoreceptor, activates IFN regulatory 
factor 7 (IRF7) through RIP1. We now report that the LMP1 cytoplasmic carboxyl
terminal amino acids 379-386 bound IRF7 and activated IRF7. IRF7 activation
required TRAF6 and RIP1, but not TRAF2 or TRAF3. LMP1 Y(384)YD(386), which are
required for TRADD and RIP1 binding and for NF-kappaB activation, were not
required for IRF7 binding, but were required for IRF7 activation, implicating
signaling through TRADD and RIP1 in IRF7 activation. Association with active LMP1
signaling complexes was also critical for IRF7 activation because (i) a
dominant-negative IRF7 bound to LMP1, blocked IRF7 association and activation,
but did not inhibit LMP1 induced NF-kappaB or TBK1 or Sendai virus-mediated IFN
stimulated response element activation; and (ii) two different LMP1 transmembrane
domain mutants, which fail to aggregate, each bound IRF7 and prevented LMP1 from 
binding and activating IRF7 in the same cell, but did not prevent NF-kappaB
activation. Thus, efficient IRF7 activation required association with LMP1 CTAR2 
in proximity to LMP1 CTAR2 mediated kinase activation sites.

PMCID: PMC2587557
PMID: 19017798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Blood. 2009 Mar 5;113(10):2127-35. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-10-178152. Epub 2008
Nov 17.

Developmental regulation of MHC II expression and transport in human
plasmacytoid-derived dendritic cells.

Sadaka C(1), Marloie-Provost MA, Soumelis V, Benaroch P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Department, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

Plasmacytoid predendritic cells (pDCs) play a key role in antiviral immunity
through their capacity to produce large amounts of type I interferons in response
to Toll-like receptor triggering, and to differentiate into dendritic cells
(DCs). However, their antigen processing and presentation pathways remain poorly 
characterized. In this study, we analyzed major histocompatibility complex class 
II (MHC II) synthesis and transport in primary human pDCs. We show that
stimulation of pDCs with influenza virus leads to a sustained neosynthesis of MHC
II molecules, which rapidly accumulate in antigen loading compartments organized 
around the microtubule organization center. MHC II endocytosis as well as antigen
internalization remain active during the entire process of pDC differentiation
into DCs, suggesting a capacity to constantly renew surface peptide-MHC II
complexes. Formation of the intracellular pool of MHC II in activated pDCs is
nuclear factor-kappaB-dependent and associated with acquisition of a dendritic
phenotype, but independent of the IRF7-type I interferon-dependent pathway,
suggesting that innate and adaptive functions of pDCs are differentially
regulated. Our data demonstrate that the regulation of MHC II expression and
transport is drastically different in pDCs compared with conventional DCs,
indicating distinct and potentially complementary immunoregulatory functions.

PMID: 19015396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Eur J Immunol. 2008 Nov;38(11):3150-8. doi: 10.1002/eji.200838559.

IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3/7-dependent and -independent gene induction by
mammalian DNA that escapes degradation.

Okabe Y(1), Kawane K, Nagata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

DNase II in macrophages cleaves the DNA of engulfed apoptotic cells and of nuclei
expelled from erythroid precursor cells. Macrophages in DNase II-deficient mice
accumulate undigested DNA and constitutively produce IFN-beta as well as
TNF-alpha. The IFN-beta causes severe anemia in the DNase II(-/-) embryos, which 
die prenatally. On the other hand, when the DNase II gene is inactivated
postnatally, mice develop polyarthritis owing to the TNF-alpha produced by
macrophages. Here, we showed that the IFN-beta gene activation in DNase II(-/-)
mice is dependent on IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and 7. Accordingly, DNase
II(-/-)IRF3(-/-)IRF7(-/-) mice do not suffer from anemia, but they still produce 
TNF-alpha, and age-dependently develop chronic polyarthritis. A microarray
analysis of the gene expression in the fetal liver revealed a set of genes that
is induced in DNase II(-/-) mice in an IRF3/IRF7-dependent manner, and another
set that is induced independent of these factors. These results indicate that the
mammalian chromosomal DNA that accumulates in macrophages due to inefficient
degradation activates genes in both IRF3/IRF7-dependent and -independent manners.

PMID: 18991290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Virol. 2009 Jan;83(2):1140-6. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00602-08. Epub 2008 Nov 5.

Epstein-Barr virus LF2: an antagonist to type I interferon.

Wu L(1), Fossum E, Joo CH, Inn KS, Shin YC, Johannsen E, Hutt-Fletcher LM, Hass
J, Jung JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Tumor Virology Division,
New England Primate Research Center, Harvard Medical School, Southborough,
Massachusetts 01772, USA.

Upon viral infection, the major defense mounted by the host immune system is
activation of the interferon (IFN)-mediated antiviral pathway, which is mediated 
by IFN regulatory factors (IRFs). In order to complete their life cycle, viruses 
must modulate host IFN-mediated immune responses. Despite its association with
significant human health problems, activities of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a
human tumor-inducing herpesvirus, to evade host IFN-mediated innate immunity have
not been well characterized. To search for EBV genes that block IFN signal
transduction, we carried out a screening of EBV open reading frames for their
abilities to block IFN-alpha/beta-mediated luciferase expression upon Sendai
virus infection. This screening demonstrates that EBV LF2 tegument protein
specifically interacts with the central inhibitory association domain of IRF7,
and this interaction leads to inhibition of the dimerization of IRF7, which
suppresses IFN-alpha production and IFN-mediated immunity. This demonstrates a
novel immune evasion mechanism of EBV LF2 in blocking cellular IRF7-mediated
innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC2612359
PMID: 18987133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 15;181(10):7316-23.

Dual regulatory roles of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase in IFN signaling.

Kaur S(1), Sassano A, Joseph AM, Majchrzak-Kita B, Eklund EA, Verma A, Brachmann 
SM, Fish EN, Platanias LC.

Author information: 
(1)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center and Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA.

PI3K is activated by the type I and II IFN receptors, but its precise role in the
generation of IFN responses is not well understood. In the present study we used 
embryonic fibroblasts from mice with targeted disruption of the genes encoding
for both the p85alpha and p85beta regulatory subunits of PI3'-kinase
(p85alpha(-/-)beta(-/-)) to precisely define the role of PI3K in the control of
IFN-induced biological responses. Our data demonstrate that PI3K plays dual
regulatory roles in the induction of IFN responses by controlling both IFN-alpha-
and IFN-gamma-dependent transcriptional regulation of IFN-sensitive genes and
simultaneously regulating the subsequent initiation of mRNA translation for such 
genes. These processes include the Isg15, Cxcl10, and/or Irf7 genes, whose
functions are important in the generation of the biological effects of IFNs.
Consistent with this, the induction of IFN antiviral responses is defective in
double p85alpha/p85beta knockout cells. Thus, integration of signals via PI3K is 
a critical event during engagement of the IFN receptors that complements both the
transcriptional activity of Jak-STAT pathways and controls initiation of mRNA
translation.

PMCID: PMC2597572
PMID: 18981154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Immunol. 2008 Nov 15;181(10):6747-56.

Aging impairs IFN regulatory factor 7 up-regulation in plasmacytoid dendritic
cells during TLR9 activation.

Stout-Delgado HW(1), Yang X, Walker WE, Tesar BM, Goldstein DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) are innate sensors that produce IFN-alpha in 
response to viral infections. Determining how aging alters the cellular and
molecular function of these cells may provide an explanation of increased
susceptibility of older people to viral infections. Hence, we examined whether
aging critically impairs pDC function during infection with HSV-2, a viral
pathogen that activates TLR9. We found that impaired IFN-alpha production by aged
murine pDCs led to impaired viral clearance with aging. Upon TLR9 activation,
aged pDCs displayed defective up-regulation of IFN-regulatory factor 7, a key
adaptor in the type I IFN pathway, as compared with younger counterparts. Aged
pDCs had more oxidative stress, and reducing oxidative stress in aged pDCs partly
recovered the age-induced IFN-alpha defect during TLR9 activation. In sum, aging 
impairs the type I IFN pathway in pDCs, and this alteration may contribute to the
increased susceptibility of older people to certain viral infections.

PMCID: PMC2605669
PMID: 18981092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Blood. 2009 Jan 29;113(5):1045-52. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-117861. Epub 2008
Oct 29.

Hematopoietic cell-derived interferon controls viral replication and
virus-induced disease.

Lang PA(1), Cervantes-Barragan L, Verschoor A, Navarini AA, Recher M, Pellegrini 
M, Flatz L, Bergthaler A, Honda K, Ludewig B, Ohashi PS, Lang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Immunology, University Hospital of Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland. philipp.lang@gmx.net

Type I interferon (IFN-I) strongly inhibits viral replication and is a crucial
factor in controlling virus infections and diseases. Cellular activation through 
pattern recognition receptors induces interferon production in a wide variety of 
hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cell types, including dendritic cells,
fibroblasts, hepatocytes, and cells of neuronal origin. The relative contribution
of hematopoietic and nonhematopoietic cells to the overall interferon response is
an important issue which has not been fully addressed. Using irf7(-/-) and
wild-type bone marrow chimeras we analyzed the contribution of IFN-I from bone
marrow-derived sources in the control of viral infections and immunopathology in 
mice. We found that during systemic cytopathic virus infection, hematopoietic
cells were essential for production of IFN-I, inhibition of viral spread to
peripheral organs, and limiting cell damage. In a model of autoimmune diabetes
induced by noncytopathic virus infection, hematopoietic cell-derived IFN-I was
essential for CD8(+) T cell-dependent cytotoxicity in pancreatic beta-islet cells
and induction of diabetes. These data suggest that during systemic viral
infection primarily hematopoietic cell-derived IFN-I controls viral replication
and viral-induced disease.

PMID: 18971424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell Mol Immunol. 2008 Oct;5(5):357-64. doi: 10.1038/cmi.2008.44.

17beta-estradiol suppresses cytotoxicity and proliferative capacity of murine
splenic NK1.1+ cells.

Hao S(1), Li P, Zhao J, Hu Y, Hou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Reproductive Biology Lab of Medical School & State Key
Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093,
China.

In order to clarify the effects of 17beta-estradiol (E2) on natural killer (NK)
cells and the possibly regulatory mechanisms, we obtained highly purified and
viable NK cells from C57BL/6J mouse spleen by a magnetic cell sorter (MACS).
These cells were treated with E2 and then their cytotoxicity and proliferative
capacity were examined. To further investigate the mechanisms on the effect of E2
on NK cells, expressions of activation-associated markers (CD69, CD122) and
inhibitory receptors (CD94, Ly49), and intracellular cytokine production were
analyzed. At last, we performed the cDNA microarray to explore the possible
involved genes. We found that E2 could suppress NK cell cytotoxicity and
proliferative capacity in vitro. E2 reduced NK cell cytotoxicity and
proliferative capacity, which may be through influencing the phenotypes and
cytokine expression of NK cells, mainly involving CD94 and IFN-gamma.
Furthermore, regulation of Stat4, Fyn, Sh2d1a, Eat2, Cd244, Irf1, Runx1, Irf7,
Irf5, Esrra and Nr5a1 genes may be related to the cytotoxicity, proliferation and
cytokine production of E2-mediated purified NK cells.

PMCID: PMC4073696
PMID: 18954559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Virol. 2008 Dec;82(24):12365-73. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01321-08. Epub 2008 Oct 15.

Measles virus V protein is a decoy substrate for IkappaB kinase alpha and
prevents Toll-like receptor 7/9-mediated interferon induction.

Pfaller CK(1), Conzelmann KK.

Author information: 
(1)Max von Pettenkofer-Institute & Gene Center, Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25, D-81377
Munich, Germany.

The central role of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC) in activating host immune 
responses stems from their high capacity to express alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) 
after stimulation of Toll-like receptors 7 and 9 (TLR7 and -9). This involves the
adapter MyD88 and the kinases interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase 1 (IRAK1),
IRAK4, and IkappaB kinase alpha (IKKalpha), which activates IFN regulatory factor
7 (IRF7) and is independent of the canonical kinases TBK1 and IKKepsilon. We have
recently shown that the immunosuppressive measles virus (MV) abolishes
TLR7/9/MyD88-dependent IFN induction in human pDC (Schlender et al., J. Virol.
79:5507-5515, 2005), but the molecular mechanisms remained elusive. Here, we have
reconstituted the pathway in cell lines and identified IKKalpha and IRF7 as
specific targets of the MV V protein (MV-V). Binding of MV-V to IKKalpha resulted
in phosphorylation of V on the expense of IRF7 phosphorylation by IKKalpha in
vitro and in living cells. This corroborates the role of IKKalpha as the kinase
phosphorylating IRF7. MV-V in addition bound to IRF7 and to phosphomimetic IRF7
and inhibited IRF7 transcriptional activity. Binding to both IKKalpha and IRF7
required the 68-amino-acid unique C-terminal domain of V. Inhibition of
TLR/MyD88-dependent IFN induction by MV-V is unique among paramyxovirus V
proteins and should contribute to the unique immunosuppressive phenotype of
measles. The mechanisms employed by MV-V inspire strategies to interfere with
immunopathological TLR/MyD88 signaling.

PMCID: PMC2593327
PMID: 18922877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cell. 2008 Oct 3;135(1):37-48. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.09.016.

Transcription factor E2-2 is an essential and specific regulator of plasmacytoid 
dendritic cell development.

Cisse B(1), Caton ML, Lehner M, Maeda T, Scheu S, Locksley R, Holmberg D, Zweier 
C, den Hollander NS, Kant SG, Holter W, Rauch A, Zhuang Y, Reizis B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs) represent a unique immune cell type
specialized in type I interferon (IFN) secretion in response to viral nucleic
acids. The molecular control of PDC lineage specification has been poorly
understood. We report that basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor (E
protein) E2-2/Tcf4 is preferentially expressed in murine and human PDCs.
Constitutive or inducible deletion of murine E2-2 blocked the development of PDCs
but not of other lineages and abolished IFN response to unmethylated DNA.
Moreover, E2-2 haploinsufficiency in mice and in human Pitt-Hopkins syndrome
patients was associated with aberrant expression profile and impaired IFN
response of the PDC. E2-2 directly activated multiple PDC-enriched genes,
including transcription factors involved in PDC development (SpiB, Irf8) and
function (Irf7). These results identify E2-2 as a specific transcriptional
regulator of the PDC lineage in mice and humans and reveal a key function of E
proteins in the innate immune system.

PMCID: PMC2631034
PMID: 18854153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Immunol. 2008 Dec;46(2):269-85. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2008.08.265. Epub 2008 
Sep 20.

Molecular characterization of IRF3 and IRF7 in rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus
mykiss: functional analysis and transcriptional modulation.

Holland JW(1), Bird S, Williamson B, Woudstra C, Mustafa A, Wang T, Zou J, Blaney
SC, Collet B, Secombes CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Fish Immunology Research Centre, Aberdeen University, Aberdeen AB24
2TZ, Scotland, United Kingdom.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRF) 3 and 7 in mammals are known to be crucial in
regulating the type I interferon (IFN) response to viral infection as part of
transcriptional complexes binding to IRF-binding elements (IRF-Es) and interferon
stimulatory response elements (ISREs) within IFN and interferon-stimulated genes 
(ISGs). Here we report the sequencing and characterization of full-length cDNA
homologues of rainbow trout (rt)IRF7 and, for the first time in fish, IRF3.
RtIRF3 consists of 2127 bp with a 159 bp 5'-UTR-containing two upstream AUGs and 
a 573 bp 3'-UTR. RtIRF7 was found to be 2055 bp, with a 102 bp 5'-UTR and a 705
bp 3'-UTR. The open reading frames (ORFs) translate into 464 amino acid and 415
amino acid proteins, respectively, each possessing a putative DNA-binding domain 
(DBD) containing a tryptophan cluster, which is characteristic of all IRF family 
members. The presence of putative IRF association domain (IAD)s, serine-rich C
terminal domains (poorly conserved in trout IRF3), and phylogenetic analysis
places the two genes in the IRF3 subfamily. Both genes were found to be
upregulated by poly I:C, type I recombinant rainbow trout (r) IFN (second
isoform, type I rIFN), type II rIFN (rIFNgamma), LPS, and rIL-1beta in the trout 
macrophage cell line, RTS-11. Poly I:C and type I rIFN also induced IRF3 and IRF7
expression in a trout fibroblast cell line (RTG-2). Transient transfection of
RTG-2 cells with each IRF fused to GFP revealed a predominant cytoplasmic
distribution found most intensely around the nucleus and, to a lesser extent,
within cell nuclei. Transient transfection of rtIRF3 in the Mx-1-luciferase
reporter cell line, RTG-P1, revealed a modest increase in luciferase activity
relative to the vehicle control, which was lost in cells over-expressing a
DBD-truncated form of rtIRF3. Both full-length and DBD-truncated forms of rtIRF7 
increased reporter activity relative to the control, although to a
non-significant extent. Electromobility shift assays (EMSAs) did not reveal a
specific interaction between each IRF and the ISRE element found in the Mx-1
promoter, although the Mx-1 ISRE bound specifically to endogenous transcriptional
complexes. These data support the premise that rtIRF3 and rtIRF7 are important
molecules in the regulation of antiviral responses in fish, with the impact of
rIFNgamma on rtIRF3/7 expression implying a role for these IRFs in immune
processes other than type I IFN-driven antiviral responses.

PMID: 18805586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 1;181(7):4523-33.

Promoter analysis reveals critical roles for SMAD-3 and ATF-2 in expression of
IL-23 p19 in macrophages.

Al-Salleeh F(1), Petro TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology and Nebraska Center for Virology, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.

IL-23 p19/p40, produced by macrophages and dendritic cells, is critical for
development of Th17 in several autoimmune diseases. In this study, bone
marrow-derived (BMM) and splenic macrophages (SPM) from SJL/J mice, susceptible
to autoimmune demyelinating disease following Theiler's virus (TMEV) infection,
expressed IL-23 in response to TMEV. We identified potential binding sites for
IFN response factor (IRF)-3 (nt -734 to -731), Sma- and Mad-related protein
(SMAD)-3 (nt -584 to -581), activating transcription factor (ATF)-2 (nt -571 to
-568), IRF-7 (nt -533 to-525), and NF-kappaB (nt -215 to -209) in the murine p19 
promoter. The p19(prom) in the pGL3 promoter-reporter vector responded to TMEV or
poly(I:C), a TLR3 agonist in the RAW264.7 macrophage cell line. Deletions
upstream from the IRF-3 site and mutations at the IRF-3, SMAD-3, ATF-2, or
NF-kappaB, but not the IRF-7, sites significantly reduced promoter activity.
ATF-2 or SMAD-3, but not IRF-3, short-hairpin RNA reduced p19 promoter activity
and protein expression in RAW264.7 cells responding to TMEV. Chromosomal DNA
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that SMAD-3 and ATF-2 bind to the endogenous 
p19 promoter in RAW264.7 cells and SJL/J SPM following challenge with TMEV.
TGF-beta1, which activates SMAD-3, was induced in RAW264.7 cells, BMM, and SPM by
TMEV. Neutralizing Ab to TGF-beta1 eliminated TMEV-induced IL-23 production and
SMAD-3 activation in RAW264.7 cells, BMM, and SPM. Activation of ATF-2 was JNK,
but not p38 or ERK MAPK dependent. Inhibition of the JNK, but also the ERK MAPK
pathways decreased expression of p19. These results suggest that ATF-2 and SMAD-3
are transcription factors, which are, in addition to NF-kappaB, essential for
IL-23 p19 expression.

PMID: 18802055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Hepatology. 2008 Oct;48(4):1224-31. doi: 10.1002/hep.22470.

The critical role of toll-like receptor (TLR) 4 in alcoholic liver disease is
independent of the common TLR adapter MyD88.

Hritz I(1), Mandrekar P, Velayudham A, Catalano D, Dolganiuc A, Kodys K,
Kurt-Jones E, Szabo G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Massachusetts Medical School, University
of Massachusetts, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

The Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) that recognizes endotoxin, a trigger of
inflammation in alcoholic liver disease (ALD), activates two signaling pathways
utilizing different adapter molecules: the common TLR adapter, myeloid
differentiation factor 88 (MyD88), or Toll/interleukin
immune-response-domain-containing adaptor inducing interferon (IFN)-beta. The
MyD88 pathway induces proinflammatory cytokine activation, a critical mediator of
ALD. Here we evaluated the role of MyD88 in alcohol-induced liver injury in
wild-type, TLR2-deficient, TLR4-deficient, or MyD88-deficient (knockout [KO])
mice after administration of the Lieber-De-Carli diet (4.5% volume/volume
ethanol) or an isocaloric liquid control diet for 5 weeks. Alcohol feeding
resulted in a significant increase in serum alanine aminotransferase levels,
liver steatosis and triglyceride levels suggesting liver damage in WT, TLR2-KO,
and MyD88-KO but not in TLR4-KO mice. Expression of inflammatory mediators (tumor
necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin-6) and TLR4 coreceptors (CD14 and MD2) was 
significantly higher in livers of alcohol-fed WT, TLR2-KO, or MyD88-KO, but not
in TLR4-KO mice, compared to controls. Reactive oxygen radicals produced by
cytochrome P450 and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate complexes
contribute to alcoholic liver damage. Alcohol feeding-induced expression and
activation of cytochrome P450 and the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
complex were prevented by TLR4-deficiency but not by MyD88-deficiency. Liver
expression of interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a MyD88-independent
signaling molecule, was not affected by chronic alcohol treatment in whole livers
of WT mice or in any of the KO mice. However, the induction of IRF7, an
IRF3-inducible gene, was found in Kupffer cells of alcohol-fed WT mice. Alcohol
feeding also induced nuclear factor-kappaB activation in a TLR4-dependent
MyD88-independent manner.CONCLUSION: While TLR4 deficiency was protective, MyD88 
deficiency failed to prevent alcohol-induced liver damage and inflammation. These
results suggest that the common TLR adapter, MyD88, is dispensable in
TLR4-mediated liver injury in ALD.

PMID: 18792393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Nat Immunol. 2008 Oct;9(10):1157-64. doi: 10.1038/ni.1645. Epub 2008 Aug 31.

Toll-like receptor-mediated induction of type I interferon in plasmacytoid
dendritic cells requires the rapamycin-sensitive PI(3)K-mTOR-p70S6K pathway.

Cao W(1), Manicassamy S, Tang H, Kasturi SP, Pirani A, Murthy N, Pulendran B.

Author information: 
(1)Emory Vaccine Center, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.

Robust production of type I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) in plasmacytoid dendritic
cells (pDCs) is crucial for antiviral immunity. Here we show involvement of the
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway in regulating interferon production 
by pDCs. Inhibition of mTOR or its 'downstream' mediators, the p70 ribosomal S6
protein kinases p70S6K1 and p70S6K2, during pDC activation by Toll-like receptor 
9 (TLR9) blocked the interaction of TLR9 with the adaptor MyD88 and subsequent
activation of the interferon-regulatory factor IRF7, which resulted in impaired
IFN-alpha/beta production. Microarray analysis confirmed that inhibition of mTOR 
by the immunosuppressive drug rapamycin suppressed antiviral and
anti-inflammatory gene expression. Consistent with this, targeting
rapamycin-encapsulated microparticles to antigen-presenting cells in vivo
resulted in less IFN-alpha/beta production in response to CpG DNA or the yellow
fever vaccine virus strain 17D. Thus, mTOR signaling is crucial in TLR-mediated
IFN-alpha/beta responses by pDCs.

PMCID: PMC3732485
PMID: 18758466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Oct;28(20):6536-46. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00785-08. Epub 2008 Aug 
18.

TRAF6 and the three C-terminal lysine sites on IRF7 are required for its
ubiquitination-mediated activation by the tumor necrosis factor receptor family
member latent membrane protein 1.

Ning S(1), Campos AD, Darnay BG, Bentz GL, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

We have recently shown that interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is activated by
Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1), a member of the tumor
necrosis factor receptor (TNFR) superfamily, through receptor-interacting
protein-dependent K63-linked ubiquitination (L. E. Huye, S. Ning, M. Kelliher,
and J. S. Pagano, Mol. Cell. Biol. 27:2910-2918, 2007). In this study, with the
use of small interfering RNA and TNFR-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) knockout cells,
we first show that TRAF6 and its E3 ligase activity are required for
LMP1-stimulated IRF7 ubiquitination. In Raji cells which are latently infected
and express high levels of LMP1 and IRF7 endogenously, expression of a TRAF6
small hairpin RNA construct reduces endogenous ubiquitination and endogenous
activity of IRF7. In TRAF6(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts, reconstitution with 
TRAF6 expression, but not with TRAF6(C70A), which lacks the E3 ligase activity,
recovers LMP1's ability to stimulate K63-linked ubiquitination of IRF7. Further, 
we identify IRF7 as a substrate for TRAF6 E3 ligase and show that IRF7 is
ubiquitinated by TRAF6 at multiple sites both in vitro and in vivo. Most
important, we determine that the last three C-terminal lysine sites (positions
444, 446, and 452) of human IRF7 variant A are essential for activation of IRF7; 
these are the first such sites identified. A ubiquitination-deficient mutant of
IRF7 with these sites mutated to arginines completely loses transactivational
ability in response not only to LMP1 but also to the IRF7 kinase IkappaB kinase
epsilon. In addition, we find that K63-linked ubiquitination of IRF7 occurs
independently of its C-terminal functional phosphorylation sites. These data
support our hypothesis that regulatory ubiquitination of IRF7 is a prerequisite
for its phosphorylation. This is the first evidence to imply that ubiquitination 
is required for phosphorylation and activation of a transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC2577435
PMID: 18710948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Vaccine. 2008 Sep 15;26(39):5004-13. doi: 10.1016/j.vaccine.2008.07.050. Epub
2008 Aug 6.

Gene profiling analysis of ALVAC infected human monocyte derived dendritic cells.

Harenberg A(1), Guillaume F, Ryan EJ, Burdin N, Spada F.

Author information: 
(1)Sanofi-Pasteur, Campus Mérieux, 1541 Avenue Marcel Mérieux, 69280 Marcy
l'Etoile, France. anke.harenberg2@sanofipasteur.com

The recombinant canarypox virus ALVAC is being extensively studied as vaccine
vector for the development of new vaccine strategies against chronic infectious
diseases and cancer. However, the mechanisms by which ALVAC initiates the immune 
response have not been completely elucidated. In order to determine the type of
innate immunity triggered by ALVAC, we characterized the gene expression profile 
of human monocyte derived dendritic cells (MDDCs) upon ALVAC infection. These
cells are permissive to poxvirus infection and play a key role in the initiation 
of immune responses. The majority of the genes that were up-regulated by ALVAC
belong to the type I interferon signaling pathway including IRF7, STAT1, RIG-1,
and MDA-5. Genes involved in the NF-kappaB pathway were not up-regulated. The
gene encoding for the chemokine CXCL10, a direct target of the transcription
factor IRF3 was among those up-regulated and DC secretion of CXCL10 following
exposure to ALVAC was confirmed by ELISA. Many downstream type I interferon
activated genes with anti-viral activity (PKR, Mx, ISG15 and OAS among others)
were also up-regulated in response to ALVAC. Among these, ISG15 expression in its
unconjugated form by Western blot analysis was demonstrated. In view of these
results we propose that ALVAC induces type I interferon anti-viral innate
immunity via a cytosolic pattern-recognition-receptor (PRR) sensing
double-stranded DNA, through activation of IRF3 and IRF7. These findings may aid 
in the design of more effective ALVAC-vectored vaccines.

PMID: 18691624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. EMBO J. 2008 Aug 6;27(15):2147-57. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2008.143. Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Viral targeting of DEAD box protein 3 reveals its role in
TBK1/IKKepsilon-mediated IRF activation.

Schröder M(1), Baran M, Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)Viral Immune Evasion Group, School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity
College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

Viruses are detected by different classes of pattern recognition receptors
(PRRs), such as Toll-like receptors and RIG-like helicases. Engagement of PRRs
leads to activation of interferon (IFN)-regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7
through IKKepsilon and TBK1 and consequently IFN-beta induction. Vaccinia virus
(VACV) encodes proteins that manipulate host signalling, sometimes by targeting
uncharacterised proteins. Here, we describe a novel VACV protein, K7, which can
inhibit PRR-induced IFN-beta induction by preventing TBK1/IKKepsilon-mediated IRF
activation. We identified DEAD box protein 3 (DDX3) as a host target of K7.
Expression of DDX3 enhanced Ifnb promoter induction by TBK1/IKKepsilon, whereas
knockdown of DDX3 inhibited this, and virus- or dsRNA-induced IRF3 activation.
Further, dominant-negative DDX3 inhibited virus-, dsRNA- and cytosolic
DNA-stimulated Ccl5 promoter induction, which is also TBK1/IKKepsilon dependent. 
Both K7 binding and enhancement of Ifnb induction mapped to the N-terminus of
DDX3. Furthermore, virus infection induced an association between DDX3 and
IKKepsilon. Therefore, this study shows for the first time the involvement of a
DEAD box helicase in TBK1/IKKepsilon-mediated IRF activation and Ifnb promoter
induction.

PMCID: PMC2516890
PMID: 18636090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 12;283(37):25660-70. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804479200. Epub 2008
Jul 17.

Virus infection triggers SUMOylation of IRF3 and IRF7, leading to the negative
regulation of type I interferon gene expression.

Kubota T(1), Matsuoka M, Chang TH, Tailor P, Sasaki T, Tashiro M, Kato A, Ozato
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology III, National Institute of Infectious Diseases, Gakuen 
4-7-1, Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo, Japan. kubota@nih.go.jp

Viral infection activates Toll-like receptor and RIG-I (retinoic acid-inducible
gene I) signaling pathways, leading to phosphorylation of IRF3 (interferon
regulatory factor 3) and IRF7 and stimulation of type I interferon (IFN)
transcription, a process important for innate immunity. We show that upon
vesicular stomatitis virus infection, IRF3 and IRF7 are modified not only by
phosphorylation but by the small ubiquitin-related modifiers SUMO1, SUMO2, and
SUMO3. SUMOylation of IRF3 and IRF7 was dependent on the activation of Toll-like 
receptor and RIG-I pathways but not on the IFN-stimulated pathway. However,
SUMOylation of IRF3 and IRF7 was not dependent on their phosphorylation, and vice
versa. We identified Lys(152) of IRF3 and Lys(406) of IRF7 to be their sole small
ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) conjugation site. IRF3 and IRF7 mutants
defective in SUMOylation led to higher levels of IFN mRNA induction after viral
infection, relative to the wild type IRFs, indicating a negative role for
SUMOylation in IFN transcription. Together, SUMO modification is an integral part
of IRF3 and IRF7 activity that contributes to postactivation attenuation of IFN
production.

PMCID: PMC2533075
PMID: 18635538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2008 Oct;21(5):545-58. doi:
10.1111/j.1755-148X.2008.00484.x. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Identification of novel epigenetically modified genes in human melanoma via
promoter methylation gene profiling.

Liu S(1), Ren S, Howell P, Fodstad O, Riker AI.

Author information: 
(1)Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of South Alabama, Mobile, AL, USA.

The inactivation of tumor-related genes through the aberrant methylation of
promoter CpG islands is thought to contribute to tumor initiation and
progression. We therefore investigated promoter methylation events involved in
cutaneous melanoma by screening 30 genes of interest for evidence of promoter
hypermethylation, examining 20 melanoma cell lines and 40 freshly procured
melanoma samples. Utilizing quantitative methylation-specific PCR, we identified 
five genes (SOCS1, SOCS2, RAR-beta 2, TNFSF10C, and TNFSF10D) with
hypermethylation frequencies ranging from 50% to 80% in melanoma cell lines as
well as freshly procured tissue samples. Eighteen genes (LOX, RASSF1A, WFDC1, TM,
APC, TFPI2, TNFSF10A, CDKN2A, MGMT, TIMP3, ASC, TPM1, IRF8, CIITA-PIV, CDH1, SYK,
HOXB13, and DAPK1) were methylated at lower frequencies (2-30%). Two genes
(CDKN1B and PTEN), previously reported as methylated in melanoma, and five other 
genes (RECK, IRF7, PAWR, TNFSF10B, and Rb) were not methylated in the samples
screened here. Daughter melanoma cell lines showed identical methylation patterns
when compared with original samples from which they were derived, as did
synchronous metastatic lesions from the same patient. We identified four genes
(TNFSF10C, TNFSF10D, LOX, and TPM1) that have never before been identified as
hypermethylated in melanoma, with an overall methylation frequency of 60, 80, 50,
and 10%, respectively, hypothesizing that these genes may play an important role 
in melanoma progression.

PMID: 18627528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS Pathog. 2008 Jul 11;4(7):e1000099. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1000099.

RIG-I mediates the co-induction of tumor necrosis factor and type I interferon
elicited by myxoma virus in primary human macrophages.

Wang F(1), Gao X, Barrett JW, Shao Q, Bartee E, Mohamed MR, Rahman M, Werden S,
Irvine T, Cao J, Dekaban GA, McFadden G.

Author information: 
(1)BioTherapeutics Research Group, Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario,
Canada.

The sensing of pathogen infection and subsequent triggering of innate immunity
are key to controlling zoonotic infections. Myxoma virus (MV) is a cytoplasmic
DNA poxvirus that in nature infects only rabbits. Our previous studies have shown
that MV infection of primary mouse cells is restricted by virus-induced type I
interferon (IFN). However, little is known about the innate sensor(s) involved in
activating signaling pathways leading to cellular defense responses in primary
human immune cells. Here, we show that the complete restriction of MV infection
in the primary human fibroblasts requires both tumor necrosis factor (TNF) and
type I IFN. We also demonstrate that MV infection of primary human macrophages
(pHMs) activates the cytoplasmic RNA sensor called retinoic acid inducible gene I
(RIG-I), which coordinately induces the production of both TNF and type I IFN. Of
note, RIG-I sensing of MV infection in pHMs initiates a sustained TNF induction
through the sequential involvement of the downstream IFN-regulatory factors 3 and
7 (IRF3 and IRF7). Thus, RIG-I-mediated co-induction of TNF and type I IFN by
virus-infected pHMs represents a novel innate defense mechanism to restrict viral
infection in human cells. These results also reveal a new regulatory mechanism
for TNF induction following viral infection.

PMCID: PMC2438611
PMID: 18617992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Gen Virol. 2008 Jul;89(Pt 7):1605-15. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.2008/000968-0.

Efficient dengue virus (DENV) infection of human muscle satellite cells
upregulates type I interferon response genes and differentially modulates MHC I
expression on bystander and DENV-infected cells.

Warke RV(1), Becerra A, Zawadzka A, Schmidt DJ, Martin KJ, Giaya K, Dinsmore JH, 
Woda M, Hendricks G, Levine T, Rothman AL, Bosch I.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Disease and Vaccine Research, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Dengue virus (DENV) is a mosquito-borne flavivirus that causes an acute febrile
disease in humans, characterized by musculoskeletal pain, headache, rash and
leukopenia. The cause of myalgia during DENV infection is still unknown. To
determine whether DENV can infect primary muscle cells, human muscle satellite
cells were exposed to DENV in vitro. The results demonstrated for the first time 
high-efficiency infection and replication of DENV in human primary muscle
satellite cells. Changes in global gene expression were also examined in these
cells following DENV infection using Affymetrix GeneChip analysis. The
differentially regulated genes belonged to two main functional categories: cell
growth and development, and antiviral type I interferon (IFN) response genes.
Increased expression of the type I IFN response genes for tumour necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), melanoma-derived antigen 5
(MDA-5), IFN-gamma-inducible protein 10 (IP-10), galectin 3 soluble binding
protein (LGals3BP) and IFN response factor 7 (IRF7) was confirmed by quantitative
RT-PCR. Furthermore, higher levels of cell-surface-bound intracellular adhesion
molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and soluble ICAM-1 in the cell-culture medium were detected
following DENV infection. However, DENV infection impaired the ability of the
infected cells in the culture medium to upregulate cell-surface expression of MHC
I molecules, suggesting a possible mechanism of immune evasion by DENV. The
findings of this study warrant further clinical research to identify whether
muscle cells are targets for DENV infection during the acute stage of the disease
in vivo.

PMID: 18559930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2008 May;28(5):317-31. doi: 10.1089/jir.2007.0131.

IFN-beta1b induces transient and variable gene expression in relapsing-remitting 
multiple sclerosis patients independent of neutralizing antibodies or changes in 
IFN receptor RNA expression.

Reder AT(1), Velichko S, Yamaguchi KD, Hamamcioglu K, Ku K, Beekman J, Wagner TC,
Perez HD, Salamon H, Croze E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60687, USA.

Multiple sclerosis (MS) is an inflammatory disease of the central nervous system 
(CNS). Interferon-beta (IFN-beta) therapy for MS is hypothesized to cause
short-term and long-term changes in gene expression that shift the inflammation
from Th1 to Th2. In vivo gene induction to define kinetics of response to
IFN-beta therapy in a large cohort of MS patients is described. Differential gene
expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) obtained from
relapsing-remitting MS patients (RRMS) was assessed using high content
microarrays. Rapid onset of gene expression appeared within 4 h of subcutaneous
IFN-beta administration, returning to baseline levels at 42 h in clinically
stable RRMS. IFN-beta therapy in vivo rapidly but transiently induced strong
upregulation of genes mediating immune modulation, IFN signaling, and antiviral
responses. RT-PCR showed significant patient-to-patient variation in the
magnitude of expression of multiple genes, especially for IFN-beta-inducible
genes, such as MxA, IRF7, and CCL8, a Th1 product. Variation among patients in
IFN-beta-induced RNA transcription was not explained by neutralizing antibodies
or IFN receptor expression. Surprisingly, genes regulated in vivo by IFN-beta
therapy do not support a simple Th1 to Th2 shift. A complex interplay between
both proinflammatory and anti-inflammatory immune regulatory genes is likely to
act in concert in the treatment of RRMS.

PMID: 18547162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Lupus. 2008 Jun;17(6):568-74. doi: 10.1177/0961203308089340.

Promoter polymorphisms in the IRF3 gene confer protection against systemic lupus 
erythematosus.

Akahoshi M(1), Nakashima H, Sadanaga A, Miyake K, Obara K, Tamari M, Hirota T,
Matsuda A, Shirakawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Genetics of Allergic Diseases, SNP Research Center, RIKEN
Yokohama Institute, The Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN),
Yokohama, Japan. akahoshi@intmed1.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

In order to identify a novel candidate gene in systemic lupus erythematosus
(SLE), we analysed a panel of six genes encoding molecules involved in the type I
interferon (IFN) system. We first identified variants in the five genes related
to type I IFN pathway by sequencing. Genotyping of a panel of eight selected
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in six candidate genes (TLR9, MYD88, IRF3,
IRF7, IFNB1, IFNA17) was performed in 137 patients with SLE and matched with 152 
healthy controls using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis. In functional assay, quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction was performed to assess constitutive IRF3 mRNA expression in
peripheral blood mononuclear cells from healthy subjects with different IRF3
promoter haplotypes. Among eight SNPs genotyped, an IRF3 SNP at -925 was found to
be associated with SLE after correction for multiple tests (corrected P=0.016).
Of total five IRF3 SNPs genotyped, the promoter IRF3 SNPs -925A/G and -776C/T
showed the most significant association with SLE. With regard to -925A/G, the
frequency of GG genotype was significantly decreased among SLE patients compared 
with the control group (1.5% vs. 9.9%; chi(2)=10.0, P=0.0015, odds ratio 0.12,
95% confidence interval 0.027-0.554). Our experimental data indicated that
constitutive IRF3 mRNA expression was significantly lower in cells carrying the
minor G-T/G-T haplotype pair compared with those carrying the major A-C
haplotype. In conclusion, we showed that the promoter SNPs of the IRF3 gene were 
significantly associated with resistance against SLE.

PMID: 18539711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 8;372(4):772-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.103. Epub 2008 Jun 2.

Regulation of IRF2 transcriptional activity by its sumoylation.

Han KJ(1), Jiang L, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research Center, Denver,
CO 80206, USA.

IRFs constitute a family of transcription factors involved in IFN signaling and
in the development and differentiation of the immune system. IRFs activities are 
regulated at transcriptional level (such as IRF1) and post-translational
modifications (such as IRF3 and IRF7). Here we show that IRF2 interacts with the 
SUMO-E3 ligase PIASy and is sumoylated in vivo. Mutagenesis analysis suggests
that IRF2 contains three sumoylation sites. Sumoylation of IRF2 has no
significant effects on its nuclear localization and DNA-binding activity, but
increases its ability to inhibit IRF1 transcriptional activity and decreases its 
ability to activate the ISRE and H4 promoters. Our findings suggest that
sumoylation of IRF2 regulates its transcriptional activities.

PMID: 18514056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Mol Cancer Res. 2008 May;6(5):770-84. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-07-0114.

Interferon regulatory factors IRF5 and IRF7 inhibit growth and induce senescence 
in immortal Li-Fraumeni fibroblasts.

Li Q(1), Tang L, Roberts PC, Kraniak JM, Fridman AL, Kulaeva OI, Tehrani OS,
Tainsky MA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology and Genetics, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer
Institute, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 110 East Warren, Detroit,
MI 48201, USA.

Cellular immortalization is one of the prerequisite steps in carcinogenesis. By
gene expression profiling, we have found that genes in the interferon (IFN)
pathway were dysregulated during the spontaneous cellular immortalization of
fibroblasts from Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) patients with germ-line mutations in 
p53. IFN signaling pathway genes were down-regulated by epigenetic silencing
during immortalization, and some of these same IFN-regulated genes were activated
during replicative senescence. Bisulfite sequencing of the promoter regions of
two IFN regulatory transcription factors (IRF5 and IRF7) revealed that IRF7, but 
not IRF5, was epigenetically silenced by methylation of CpG islands in immortal
LFS cells. The induction of IRF7 gene by IFNalpha in immortal LFS cells was
potentiated by pretreatment with the demethylation agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. 
Overexpression of IRF5 and IRF7 revealed that they can act either alone or in
tandem to activate other IFN-regulated genes. In addition, they serve to inhibit 
the proliferation rate and induce a senescence-related phenotype in immortal LFS 
cells. Furthermore, polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid treatment of the
IRF-overexpressing cells showed a more rapid induction of several IFN-regulated
genes. We conclude that the epigenetic inactivation of the IFN pathway plays a
critical role in cellular immortalization, and the reactivation of IFN-regulated 
genes by transcription factors IRF5 and/or IRF7 is sufficient to induce cellular 
senescence. The IFN pathway may provide valuable molecular targets for
therapeutic interventions at early stages of cancer development.

PMCID: PMC3842195
PMID: 18505922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. BMC Genomics. 2008 Apr 26;9:192. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-192.

Importance of the interferon-alpha system in murine large intestine indicated by 
microarray analysis of commensal bacteria-induced immunological changes.

Munakata K(1), Yamamoto M, Anjiki N, Nishiyama M, Imamura S, Iizuka S, Takashima 
K, Ishige A, Hioki K, Ohnishi Y, Watanabe K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Kampo Medicine, School of Medicine, Keio University, 35
Shinano-machi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan. di055014@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Although microbiota play a critical role in the normal development
and function of host immune systems, the underlying mechanisms, especially those 
involved in the large intestine (LI), remain unknown. In the present study, we
performed transcriptome analysis of the LI of germ-free (GF) and specific
pathogen-free (SPF) mice of the IQI strain, an inbred strain established from ICR
mice.
RESULTS: GeneChip analysis, quantitative real-time RT-PCR, and reconfirmation
using bacteria-inoculated GF mice revealed differences in the expression levels
of several immune-related genes, such as cryptdin-related sequences (CRS),
certain subsets of type 1 interferon (IFN)-related genes, class Ib MHC molecules,
and certain complements. LI expressed no authentic cryptdins but predominantly
expressed CRS2, 4, and 7. The mRNA levels of IFN-related genes, including Irf7,
Isgf3g, Ifit1 and Stat1, were lower in SPF- and flora-reconstituted mice. When an
oral IFN-alpha inducer tilorone analog, R11567DA, was administered to SPF mice,
IFN-alpha was induced rapidly in the LI at 4 h, whereas no IFN-alpha protein was 
detected in the small intestine (SI) or blood. In situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry suggested that the IFN-alpha production originated from
Paneth cells in the SI, and portions of lamina proprial CD11b- or mPDCA1-positive
cells in the LI.
CONCLUSION: The present study suggests that microbial colonization, while
inducing the expression of anti-microbial peptides, results in the
down-regulation of certain genes responsible for immune responses, especially for
type I IFN synthesis. This may reflect the adaptation process of the immune
system in the LI to prevent excessive inflammation with respect to continuous
microbial exposure. Further, the repertoire of anti-microbial peptides and the
extraordinary role of interferon producing cells in the LI have been found to be 
distinct from those in the SI.

PMCID: PMC2408602
PMID: 18439305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Immunobiology. 2008;213(3-4):353-66. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2007.10.011. Epub 2007 
Dec 31.

Immediate lymphotoxin beta receptor-mediated transcriptional response in host
defense against L. monocytogenes.

Kutsch S(1), Degrandi D, Pfeffer K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene,
Heinrich-Heine-University of Düsseldorf, Universitätsstr. 1, D-40225 Düsseldorf, 
Germany.

The lymphotoxin beta receptor (LTbetaR) mediates crucial signals in host defense 
against intracellular bacteria and viruses. Mice deficient in LTbetaR readily
succumb to infections with Listeria monocytogenes, Mycobacterium tuberculosis and
murine cytomegalovirus (mCMV). LTbetaR has been shown to be important for the
early induction of interferon (IFN) beta after infection with mCMV. However, up
to now, it is not known which host effector molecules are induced in cells of the
innate immune system after bacterial infections. In order to address this
question, comprehensive transcriptome profiling of LTbetaR-deficient and control 
splenocytes depleted from T and B lymphocytes was performed and differentially
regulated genes were identified. Interestingly, a deficiency in IFNalpha- and
IFNgamma-mRNA transcription could be found in LTbetaR-deficient cells leading to 
a marked failure in the immediate up-regulation of IFN controlled genes. These
encompass interferon regulatory factors (IRF1 and IRF7), signal transducer
activator of transcription (STAT) proteins (STAT1 and STAT2), chemokines, IFN
regulated GTPases (IRGs, GBPs), and IFN-induced protein with tetratricopeptide
repeats (IFITs). Thus, the immediate LTbetaR-initiated transcriptional response
of innate immune cells carries an IFN signature and is responsible for mounting
an effective innate immune response to L. monocytogenes.

PMID: 18406380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Trends Biochem Sci. 2008 Apr;33(4):171-80. doi: 10.1016/j.tibs.2008.01.002. Epub 
2008 Mar 18.

Are the IKKs and IKK-related kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon similarly activated?

Chau TL(1), Gioia R, Gatot JS, Patrascu F, Carpentier I, Chapelle JP, O'Neill L, 
Beyaert R, Piette J, Chariot A.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Cluster for Applied Genoproteomics, University of Liège,
Sart-Tilman, 4000 Liège, Belgium.

The IkappaB kinases (IKKs) IKK-alpha and IKK-beta, and the IKK-related kinases
TBK1 and IKK-epsilon, have essential roles in innate immunity through
signal-induced activation of NF-kappaB, IRF3 and IRF7, respectively. Although the
signaling events within these pathways have been extensively studied, the
mechanisms of IKK and IKK-related complex assembly and activation remain poorly
defined. Recent data provide insight into the requirement for scaffold proteins
in complex assembly; NF-kappaB essential modulator coordinates some IKK
complexes, whereas TANK, NF-kappaB-activating kinase-associated protein 1 (NAP1) 
or similar to NAP1 TBK1 adaptor (SINTBAD) assemble TBK1 and IKK-epsilon
complexes. The different scaffold proteins undergo similar post-translational
modifications, including phosphorylation and non-degradative polyubiquitylation. 
Moreover, increasing evidence indicates that distinct scaffold proteins assemble 
IKK, and potentially TBK1 and IKK-epsilon subcomplexes, in a stimulus-specific
manner, which might be a mechanism to achieve specificity.

PMID: 18353649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nat Immunol. 2008 Apr;9(4):378-87. doi: 10.1038/ni1576. Epub 2008 Mar 16.

TNF activates an IRF1-dependent autocrine loop leading to sustained expression of
chemokines and STAT1-dependent type I interferon-response genes.

Yarilina A(1), Park-Min KH, Antoniv T, Hu X, Ivashkiv LB.

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis and Tissue Degeneration Program, Hospital for Special Surgery, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Rapid induction of inflammatory genes by tumor necrosis factor (TNF) has been
well studied, but little is known about delayed and chronic TNF responses. Here
we investigated the kinetics of primary macrophage responses to TNF and
discovered that TNF initiates an interferon-beta-mediated autocrine loop that
sustains expression of inflammatory genes and induces delayed expression of
interferon-response genes such as those encoding the transcription factors STAT1 
and IRF7, which enhance macrophage responses to stimulation of cytokines and
Toll-like receptors. TNF-induced interferon-beta production depended on
interferon-response factor 1, and downstream gene expression was mediated by
synergy between small amounts of interferon-beta and canonical TNF-induced
signals. Thus, TNF activates a 'feed-forward' loop that sustains inflammation but
avoids the potential toxicity associated with the high interferon production
induced by stimulation of Toll-like receptors.

PMID: 18345002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2008 Mar;28(3):167-79. doi: 10.1089/jir.2007.0054.

Cigarette smoke suppresses type I interferon-mediated antiviral immunity in lung 
fibroblast and epithelial cells.

Bauer CM(1), Dewitte-Orr SJ, Hornby KR, Zavitz CC, Lichty BD, Stämpfli MR,
Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Gene Therapeutics, Department of Pathology and Molecular
Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5.

The objective of this study was to investigate the impact of cigarette smoke on
innate antiviral defense mechanisms; specifically, we examined the effects of
cigarette smoke on the induction of type I interferon (IFN). We observed a
dose-dependent decrease in the ability of human lung fibroblast and epithelial
cells to elicit an antiviral response against a viral double-strand RNA (dsRNA)
mimic, polyI:C, in the presence of cigarette smoke-conditioned medium (SCM).
Mechanistically, SCM decreases the expression of IFN-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15)
and IFN regulatory factor-7 (IRF-7) transcripts and suppresses the nuclear
translocation of key transcription factors, nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) and
IRF-3, after polyI:C stimulation. Furthermore, we provide evidence that the
intercellular defense strategy against viral infection is also impaired. We
observed a decrease in the ability of fibroblasts to elicit an antiviral state in
response to IFN-beta stimulation. This was associated with decreased nuclear
translocation of phosphorylated Stat1 in response to IFN-beta treatment. The
effects elicited by SCM are reversible and are almost entirely abrogated in the
presence of an antioxidant, such as glutathione. Our findings suggest that
cigarette smoke affects the immediate-early, inductive, and amplification phases 
of the type I IFN response.

PMID: 18338949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Nature. 2008 Mar 20;452(7185):323-8. doi: 10.1038/nature06730. Epub 2008 Feb 13.

Translational control of the innate immune response through IRF-7.

Colina R(1), Costa-Mattioli M, Dowling RJ, Jaramillo M, Tai LH, Breitbach CJ,
Martineau Y, Larsson O, Rong L, Svitkin YV, Makrigiannis AP, Bell JC, Sonenberg
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and McGill Cancer Center, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Transcriptional activation of cytokines, such as type-I interferons (interferon
(IFN)-alpha and IFN-beta), constitutes the first line of antiviral defence. Here 
we show that translational control is critical for induction of type-I IFN
production. In mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking the translational repressors
4E-BP1 and 4E-BP2, the threshold for eliciting type-I IFN production is lowered. 
Consequently, replication of encephalomyocarditis virus, vesicular stomatitis
virus, influenza virus and Sindbis virus is markedly suppressed. Furthermore,
mice with both 4E- and 4E-BP2 genes (also known as Eif4ebp1 and Eif4ebp2,
respectively) knocked out are resistant to vesicular stomatitis virus infection, 
and this correlates with an enhanced type-I IFN production in plasmacytoid
dendritic cells and the expression of IFN-regulated genes in the lungs. The
enhanced type-I IFN response in 4E-BP1-/- 4E-BP2-/- double knockout mouse
embryonic fibroblasts is caused by upregulation of interferon regulatory factor 7
(Irf7) messenger RNA translation. These findings highlight the role of 4E-BPs as 
negative regulators of type-I IFN production, via translational repression of
Irf7 mRNA.

PMID: 18272964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Int J Cancer. 2008 May 15;122(10):2249-54. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23397.

Genomic profiling of 766 cancer-related genes in archived esophageal normal and
carcinoma tissues.

Chen J(1), Guo L, Peiffer DA, Zhou L, Chan OT, Bibikova M, Wickham-Garcia E, Lu
SH, Zhan Q, Wang-Rodriguez J, Jiang W, Fan JB.

Author information: 
(1)Illumina Inc., San Diego, CA 92121, USA.

We employed the BeadArraytrade mark technology to perform a genetic analysis in
33 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) human esophageal carcinomas, mostly
squamous-cell-carcinoma (ESCC), and their adjacent normal tissues. A total of
1,432 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) derived from 766 cancer-related
genes were genotyped with partially degraded genomic DNAs isolated from these
samples. This directly targeted genomic profiling identified not only previously 
reported somatic gene amplifications (e.g., CCND1) and deletions (e.g., CDKN2A
and CDKN2B) but also novel genomic aberrations. Among these novel targets, the
most frequently deleted genomic regions were chromosome 3p (including tumor
suppressor genes FANCD2 and CTNNB1) and chromosome 5 (including tumor suppressor 
gene APC). The most frequently amplified genomic region was chromosome 3q
(containing DVL3, MLF1, ABCC5, BCL6, AGTR1 and known oncogenes TNK2, TNFSF10,
FGF12). The chromosome 3p deletion and 3q amplification occurred coincidently in 
nearly all of the affected cases, suggesting a molecular mechanism for the
generation of somatic chromosomal aberrations. We also detected significant
differences in germline allele frequency between the esophageal cohort of our
study and normal control samples from the International HapMap Project for 10
genes (CSF1, KIAA1804, IL2, PMS2, IRF7, FLT3, NTRK2, MAP3K9, ERBB2 and PRKAR1A), 
suggesting that they might play roles in esophageal cancer susceptibility and/or 
development. Taken together, our results demonstrated the utility of the
BeadArray technology for high-throughput genetic analysis in FFPE tumor tissues
and provided a detailed genetic profiling of cancer-related genes in human
esophageal cancer.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18241037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Korean Med Sci. 2007 Dec;22(6):987-92.

Interferon-stimulated genes response in endothelial cells following Hantaan virus
infection.

Kim IW(1), Hwang JY, Kim SK, Kim JK, Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Microbiology, College of Natural Resources, Yeungnam
University, Daegu, Korea.

The regulation mechanism of interferon (IFN) and IFN-stimulated genes is a very
complex procedure and is dependent on cell types and virus species. We observed
molecular changes related to anti-viral responses in endothelial cells during
Hantaan virus (HTNV) infection. We found that there are two patterns of gene
expression, the first pattern of gene expression being characterized by early
induction and short action, as in that of type I IFNs,' and the other being
characterized by delayed induction and long duration, as those of IRF-7, MxA, and
TAP-1/2. Even though there are significant differences in their induction folds, 
we found that all of IFN-alpha/beta, IRF- 3/7, MxA, and TAP-1/2 mRNA expressions 
reached the peak when the viral replication was most active, which took place 3
days of post infection (d.p.i.). In addition, an interesting phenomenon was
observed; only one gene was highly expressed in paired genes such as
IFN-alpha/beta' (3/277-folds), IRF-3/7 (2.2/29.4-folds), and TAP- 1/2
(26.2/6.1-folds). Therefore, IFN-beta, IRF-7, and TAP-1 seem to be more important
for the anti-viral response in HTNV infection. MxA was increased to 296-folds at 
3 d.p.i. and kept continuing 207-folds until 7 d.p.i.. The above results indicate
that IFN-beta works for an early anti-viral response, while IRF7, MxA, and TAP-1 
work for prolonged anti-viral response in HTNV infection.

PMCID: PMC2694265
PMID: 18162711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Immunol. 2008 Apr;45(7):1926-34. Epub 2007 Dec 18.

Differential regulation of IKK alpha-mediated activation of IRF3/7 by NIK.

Wang RP(1), Zhang M, Li Y, Diao FC, Chen D, Zhai Z, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Type I interferons (IFNs) are critical mediators of the innate immune system to
defend viral infection. Interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7 are
transcription factors that play critical roles in type I IFN production in
response to viral infection. It has been shown that the protein kinase I kappaB
kinase alpha (IKK alpha) is critically involved in IRF7 activation and IFN-alpha 
production in Toll-like receptor 7/9 (TLR7/9) signaling cascades. However,
overexpression of IKK alpha does not activate the IFN-alpha promoters. Here we
show that the protein kinase nuclear factor kappaB-inducing kinase (NIK) confers 
IKK alpha the ability to activate IRF3/7. Previous studies have shown that NIK
phosphorylates IKK alpha at Ser-176 and Ser-180 residues, and mutation of each of
the two residues to glutamate, which mimics its phosphorylation, caused
constitutive activation of NF-kappaB. However, mutation of the two serine
residues has differential effects on IKK alpha-mediated activation of IRF3/7.
While IKK alpha(S176E) constitutively activates IRF3/7, IKK alpha(S180E) losses
its ability to activate IRF3/7. These findings suggest that IKK alpha-mediated
activation of NF-kappaB and IRF3/7 are differentially regulated by NIK, and NIK
plays an important role in TLR7/9-mediated IFN-alpha production.

PMID: 18068231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Brain Behav Immun. 2008 May;22(4):503-16. Epub 2007 Nov 28.

Sex differences in the recognition of and innate antiviral responses to Seoul
virus in Norway rats.

Hannah MF(1), Bajic VB, Klein SL.

Author information: 
(1)The W. Harry Feinstone, Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology,
The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 615 North Wolfe Street,
Baltimore, MD 21205-2179, USA.

Among rodents that carry hantaviruses, more males are infected than females. Male
rats also have elevated copies of Seoul virus RNA and reduced transcription of
immune-related genes in the lungs than females. To further characterize sex
differences in antiviral defenses and whether these differences are mediated by
gonadal hormones, we examined viral RNA in the lungs, virus shedding in saliva,
and antiviral defenses among male and female rats that were intact,
gonadectomized neonatally, or gonadectomized in adulthood. Following inoculation 
with Seoul virus, high amounts viral RNA persisted longer in lungs from intact
males than intact females. Removal of the gonads in males reduced the amount of
viral RNA to levels comparable with intact females at 40 days post-inoculation
(p.i.). Intact males shed more virus in saliva than intact females 15 days p.i.; 
removal of the gonads during either the neonatal period or in adulthood increased
virus shedding in females and decreased virus shedding in males. Induction of
pattern recognition receptors (PRRs; Tlr7 and Rig-I), expression of antiviral
genes (Myd88, Visa, Jun, Irf7, Ifnbeta, Ifnar1, Jak2, Stat3, and Mx2), and
production of Mx protein was elevated in the lungs of intact females compared
with intact males. Gonadectomy had more robust effects on the induction of PRRs
than on downstream IFNbeta or Mx2 expression. Putative androgen and estrogen
response elements are present in the promoters of several of these antiviral
genes, suggesting the propensity for sex steroids to directly affect dimorphic
antiviral responses against Seoul virus infection.

PMCID: PMC2396444
PMID: 18053684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Immunol. 2007 Dec 1;179(11):7777-90.

Identification of signaling pathways in macrophage exposed to Porphyromonas
gingivalis or to its purified cell wall components.

Zhou Q(1), Amar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontology and Oral Biology, School of Dental Medicine,
Boston University, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Porphyromonas gingivalis (P. gingivalis) can trigger an inflammatory condition
leading to the destruction of periodontal tissues. However P. gingivalis LPS and 
its fimbriae (FimA) play different roles compared with the live bacteria in the
context of intracellular molecule induction and cytokine secretion. To elucidate 
whether this difference results from different signaling pathways in host immune 
response to P. gingivalis, its LPS, or its FimA, we examined gene expression
profile of human macrophages exposed to P. gingivalis, its LPS, or its FimA. A
comparison of gene expression resulted in the identification of three distinct
groups of expressed genes. Furthermore, computer-assisted promoter analysis of a 
subset of each group of differentially regulated genes revealed four putative
transcriptional regulation models that associate with transcription factors
NFkappaB, IRF7, and KLF4. Using gene knockout mice and siRNA to silence mouse
genes, we showed that both TLR2 and TLR7 are essential for the induction of
NFkappaB-containing genes and NFkappaB-IFN-sensitive response element (ISRE)
cocontaining genes by either P. gingivalis or its purified components. The gene
induction via either TLR2 or TLR7 is dependent on both MyD88 and p38 MAPK.
However, the unique induction of IFN-beta by P. gingivalis LPS requires TLR7 and 
IFNalphabetaR cosignaling, and the induction of ISRE-containing gene is dependent
on the activation of IFN-beta autocrine loop. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that P. gingivalis and its components induce NFkappaB-containing
genes through either TLR2- or TLR7-MyD88-p38 MAPK pathway, while P. gingivalis
LPS uniquely induces ISRE-containing genes, which requires IFNalphabetaR
signaling involving IRF7, KLF4, and pY701 STAT1.

PMID: 18025224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Immunol. 2007 Dec 1;179(11):7215-9.

Cutting edge: A transcriptional repressor and corepressor induced by the
STAT3-regulated anti-inflammatory signaling pathway.

El Kasmi KC(1), Smith AM, Williams L, Neale G, Panopoulos AD, Watowich SS, Häcker
H, Foxwell BM, Murray PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol. 2008 Mar 1;180(5):3612. Panopolous, Athanasia [corrected to
Panopoulos, Athanasia D].

IL-10 regulates anti-inflammatory signaling via the activation of STAT3, which in
turn controls the induction of a gene expression program whose products execute
inhibitory effects on proinflammatory mediator production. In this study we show 
that IL-10 induces the expression of an ETS family transcriptional repressor,
ETV3, and a helicase family corepressor, Strawberry notch homologue 2 (SBNO2), in
mouse and human macrophages. IL-10-mediated induction of ETV3 and SBNO2
expression was dependent upon both STAT3 and a stimulus through the TLR pathway. 
We also observed that ETV3 expression was strongly induced by the STAT3 pathway
regulated by IL-10 but not by STAT3 signaling activated by IL-6, which cannot
activate the anti-inflammatory signaling pathway. ETV3 and SBNO2 repressed
NF-kappaB- but not IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)-activated transcriptional
reporters. Collectively our data suggest that ETV3 and SBNO2 are components of
the pathways that contribute to the downstream anti-inflammatory effects of
IL-10.

PMID: 18025162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9(5):R99.

The influence of the NOD Nss1/Idd5 loci on sialadenitis and gene expression in
salivary glands of congenic mice.

Hjelmervik TO(1), Lindqvist AK, Petersen K, Johannesson M, Stavrum AK, Johansson 
A, Jonsson R, Holmdahl R, Bolstad AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Sciences-Periodontology, Faculty of Dentistry, University
of Bergen, Arstadveien, N-5009 Bergen, Norway. trond.hjelmervik@gades.uib.no

The nonobese diabetic (NOD) Nss1 and Idd5 loci have been associated with
sialadenitis development in mice. In this study the NOD Nss1 and Idd5 loci were
backcrossed onto the healthy control strain B10.Q by using the speed congenic
breeding strategy, resulting in three congenic strains: B10.Q.Nss1,
B10.Q.Nss1/Idd5 heterozygous and B10.Q.Nss1/Idd5 homozygous. We investigated the 
effects of the Nss1 and Idd5 loci on sialadenitis and gene expression in NOD
congenic mice. One submandibular salivary gland from each mouse was used for
histological analysis of sialadenitis, whereas the contralateral salivary gland
was used for gene expression profiling with the Applied Biosystems Mouse Genome
Survey chip v.1.0. The results were validated using quantitative reverse
transcriptase PCR. The NOD Nss1 and Idd5 loci had clear influence on the onset
and progression of sialadenitis in congenic mice. Double congenic mice exhibited 
the most severe phenotype. We successfully identified several genes that are
located in the NOD congenic regions to be differentially expressed between the
congenic strains and the control strain. Several of these were found to be
co-regulated, such as Stat1, complement component C1q genes and Tlr12. Also, a
vast contingency of interferon-regulated genes (such as Ltb, Irf7 and Irf8) and
cytokine and chemokine genes (such as Ccr7 and Ccl19) were differentially
expressed between the congenic strains and the control strain.
Over-representation of inflammatory signalling pathways was observed among the
differentially expressed genes. We have found that the introgression of the NOD
loci Nss1 and Idd5 on a healthy background caused sialadenitis in NOD congenic
mouse strains, and we propose that genes within these loci are important factors 
in the pathogenesis. Furthermore, gene expression profiling has revealed several 
differentially expressed genes within and outside the NOD loci that are similar
to genes found to be differentially expressed in patients with Sjögren's
syndrome, and as such are interesting candidates for investigation to enhance our
understanding of disease mechanisms and to develop future therapies.

PMCID: PMC2212552
PMID: 17900348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Feb 1;75(3):589-602. Epub 2007 Aug 6.

The interplay between viruses and innate immune signaling: recent insights and
therapeutic opportunities.

Unterholzner L(1), Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2,
Ireland.

The immediate response to viral infection relies on pattern-recognition receptors
(PRRs), most prominently the Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and the RNA helicases
RIG-I and MDA5, as well as double stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) and
the DNA receptor, DAI. These PRRs recognize pathogen-associated molecular
patterns (PAMPs) such as viral proteins and nucleic acids. The engagement of
these receptors then initiates intracellular signaling cascades which ultimately 
cause the activation of transcription factors and the expression of type I
interferons and pro-inflammatory cytokines. This innate response establishes an
anti-viral state in the infected cell and its neighbours and alerts immune cells 
to the danger. In order to establish a productive infection, viruses need to
overcome this initial anti-viral response. Evasion of innate immune defences is
achieved by means of viral proteins that inhibit the signaling cascades emanating
from the PRRs. The same innate signal transduction pathways have been implicated 
in conditions of sterile inflammation, such as rheumatoid arthritis and multiple 
sclerosis, and in autoimmunity. Because viral proteins target crucial host
proteins involved in these pathways, they can point the way to key drug targets. 
Further, the viral proteins themselves or derivatives of them may be of use
therapeutically to curtail inflammation and autoimmunity.

PMID: 17868652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Virol. 2007 Nov;81(22):12439-49. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Highly pathogenic avian influenza H5N1 viruses elicit an attenuated type i
interferon response in polarized human bronchial epithelial cells.

Zeng H(1), Goldsmith C, Thawatsupha P, Chittaganpitch M, Waicharoen S, Zaki S,
Tumpey TM, Katz JM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology and Pathogenesis Branch, Influenza Division, National Center for
Immunization and Respiratory Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, GA 30333, USA.

The unparalleled spread of highly pathogenic avian influenza A (HPAI) H5N1
viruses has resulted in devastating outbreaks in domestic poultry and sporadic
human infections with a high fatality rate. To better understand the mechanism(s)
of H5N1 virus pathogenesis and host responses in humans, we utilized a polarized 
human bronchial epithelial cell model that expresses both avian alpha-2,3- and
human alpha-2,6-linked sialic acid receptors on the apical surface and supports
productive replication of both H5N1 and H3N2 viruses. Using this model, we
compared the abilities of selected 2004 HPAI H5N1 viruses isolated from humans
and a recent human H3N2 virus to trigger the type I interferon (IFN) response.
H5N1 viruses elicited significantly less IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) nuclear
translocation, as well as delayed and reduced production of IFN-beta compared
with the H3N2 virus. Furthermore, phosphorylation of Stat2 and induction of
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs), such as MX1, ISG15, IRF7, and retinoic
acid-inducible gene I, were substantially delayed and reduced in cells infected
with H5N1 viruses. We also observed that the highly virulent H5N1 virus
replicated more efficiently and induced a weaker IFN response than the H5N1 virus
that exhibited low virulence in mammals in an earlier study. Our data suggest
that the H5N1 viruses tested, especially the virus with the high-pathogenicity
phenotype, possess greater capability to attenuate the type I IFN response than
the human H3N2 virus. The attenuation of this critical host innate immune defense
may contribute to the virulence of H5N1 viruses observed in humans.

PMCID: PMC2169033
PMID: 17855549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Int Immunol. 2007 Nov;19(11):1261-70. Epub 2007 Sep 5.

Thymosin alpha1 activates the TLR9/MyD88/IRF7-dependent murine cytomegalovirus
sensing for induction of anti-viral responses in vivo.

Bozza S(1), Gaziano R, Bonifazi P, Zelante T, Pitzurra L, Montagnoli C, Moretti
S, Castronari R, Sinibaldi P, Rasi G, Garaci E, Bistoni F, Romani L.

Author information: 
(1)Microbiology Section, Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical
Sciences, University of Perugia, Via del Giochetto, 06122 Perugia, Perugia,
Italy.

Reactivation of latent human cytomegalovirus following allogeneic transplantation
is a major cause of morbidity and mortality and predisposes to severe
complications. Thymosin alpha1 (Talpha1), a naturally occurring thymic peptide,
is approved for treatment of some viral infections and as an immune adjuvant.
Talpha1 successfully primed dendritic cells (DCs) for anti-microbial T helper
type 1 resistance through Toll-like receptor (TLR) 9 signaling. We sought to
determine here whether Talpha1 could play a role in murine cytomegalovirus
infection (MCMV). To this purpose, susceptible, resistant and TLR-deficient mice 
were infected with MCMV, treated with Talpha1 and assessed for protection in term
of microbiological and immunological parameters. Talpha1 protected susceptible
and resistant mice from MCMV infection. The anti-viral effect of Talpha1 occurred
through the activation of plasmacytoid DCs via the TLR9/myeloid differentiation
primary response gene 88-dependent viral recognition sensing, leading to the
activation of IFN regulatory factor 7 and the promotion of the
IFN-alpha/IFN-gamma-dependent effector pathway.

PMID: 17804687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 15;179(6):4219-30.

Impaired plasmacytoid dendritic cell innate immune responses in patients with
herpes virus-associated acute retinal necrosis.

Kittan NA(1), Bergua A, Haupt S, Donhauser N, Schuster P, Korn K, Harrer T,
Schmidt B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical and Molecular Virology, German National Reference Centre
for Retroviruses, Erlangen, Germany.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC), the main producers of type I IFNs in the
blood, are important for the recognition and control of viral and bacterial
infections. Because several viruses induce IFN-alpha production, severe courses
of herpes virus infections in nonimmunocompromised patients may be related to
numerical or functional PDC deficits. To evaluate this hypothesis, PBMC and PDC
were repeatedly isolated from nine patients with acute retinal necrosis (ARN),
caused by herpes simplex or varicella zoster virus. The patients experienced
meningitis/encephalitis and frequent infections in childhood (n = 2), recurrent
herpes virus infections at unusual localizations (n = 2), ocular surgery (n = 1),
infections (n = 4), and stress around ARN (n = 6). The median percentage of
isolated PDC was significantly lower in patients compared with 18 age-matched
healthy controls (p < 0.001), confirmed by FACS analysis using peripheral blood, 
and was extremely low during acute disease. PDC counts dropped in five controls
suffering from respiratory infections or diarrhea. IFN-alpha production in PDC
and PBMC exposed to different stimuli was significantly lower in patients than in
controls (p < 0.05). Anergy to these stimuli was observed on four occasions, in
particular during acute disease. PDC of patients showed up-regulated IFN
regulatory factor-7 mRNA levels and evidence of in vivo activation (CD80) and
maturation (CD83) (p < 0.05). CD8+ cell responses were significantly lower in
patients vs controls (p = 0.04). These data support a risk factor model in which 
numerical and functional deficits in PDC-mediated innate immune responses
contribute to an impaired control of latent herpes virus infections and
subsequent development of ARN.

PMID: 17785862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Immunol. 2007 Sep 15;179(6):3434-42.

IFN regulatory factor family members differentially regulate the expression of
type III IFN (IFN-lambda) genes.

Osterlund PI(1), Pietilä TE, Veckman V, Kotenko SV, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland. pamela.osterlund@ktl.fi

Virus replication induces the expression of antiviral type I (IFN-alphabeta) and 
type III (IFN-lambda1-3 or IL-28A/B and IL-29) IFN genes via TLR-dependent and
-independent pathways. Although type III IFNs differ genetically from type I
IFNs, their similar biological antiviral functions suggest that their expression 
is regulated in a similar fashion. Structural and functional characterization of 
the IFN-lambda1 and IFN-lambda3 gene promoters revealed them to be similar to
IFN-beta and IFN-alpha genes, respectively. Both of these promoters had
functional IFN-stimulated response element and NF-kappaB binding sites. The
binding of IFN regulatory factors (IRF) to type III IFN promoter IFN-stimulated
response element sites was the most important event regulating the expression of 
these genes. Ectopic expression of the components of TLR7 (MyD88 plus IRF1/IRF7),
TLR3 (Toll/IL-1R domain-containing adapter-inducing factor), or retinoic
acid-inducible gene I (RIG-I) signal transduction pathways induced the activation
of IFN-lambda1 promoter, whereas the IFN-lambda3 promoter was efficiently
activated only by overexpression of MyD88 and IRF7. The ectopic expression of
Pin1, a recently identified suppressor for IRF3-dependent antiviral response,
decreased the IFN promoter activation induced by any of these three signal
transduction pathways, including the MyD88-dependent one. To conclude, the data
suggest that the IFN-lambda1 gene is regulated by virus-activated IRF3 and IRF7, 
thus resembling that of the IFN-beta gene, whereas IFN-lambda2/3 gene expression 
is mainly controlled by IRF7, thus resembling those of IFN-alpha genes.

PMID: 17785777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Diagn Mol Pathol. 2007 Sep;16(3):158-68.

Gene expression profiling of Epstein-Barr virus-positive and -negative
monomorphic B-cell posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders.

Craig FE(1), Johnson LR, Harvey SA, Nalesnik MA, Luo JH, Bhattacharya SD,
Swerdlow SH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopathology, Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. craigfe@upmc.edu

Although most posttransplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD) are related to 
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection, approximately 20% lack detectable EBV (EBV-).
It is uncertain whether the latter cases are truly distinct from EBV+ PTLD or
possibly relate to another infectious agent. This study used gene expression
profiling to further investigate the relationship between EBV+ and EBV-
monomorphic B-cell PTLD, and to search for clues to their pathogenesis.
Affymetrix HU133A GeneChips were used to compare 4 EBV+ and 4 EBV- cases of
monomorphic B-cell PTLD. Hierarchical clustering successfully distinguished the
EBV+ and EBV- groups. Relative to EBV- PTLD, 54 transcripts were over-expressed
in EBV+ PTLD. The transcripts identified included IRF7 (a known regulator of EBV 
LMP1 expression), EBI2 (EBV-induced gene 2), and 3 that are interferon induced
(MX1, IFITM1, and IFITM3). In addition, the EBV+ group contained 232 transcripts 
decreased relative to the EBV- group, including changes concordant with those
previously reported after EBV infection of cultured B-cell lines. In summary, in 
a small group of monomorphic B-cell PTLD, EBV+ cases demonstrated a subset of
gene expression changes associated with EBV infection of B cells. By contrast,
EBV- PTLD lacked viral-associated changes suggesting that they are biologically
distinct.

PMID: 17721324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Immunity. 2007 Aug;27(2):228-39. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

The feedback phase of type I interferon induction in dendritic cells requires
interferon regulatory factor 8.

Tailor P(1), Tamura T, Kong HJ, Kubota T, Kubota M, Borghi P, Gabriele L, Ozato
K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Dendritic cells (DCs) produce type I interferons (IFNs) in greater amounts than
other cells, but the mechanisms remain elusive. Here we studied the role of a
transcription factor, IRF8, in DC induction of type I IFNs. Upon newcastle
disease virus (NDV) infection, bone marrow-derived plasmacytoid and conventional 
DCs induced IFN transcripts, exhibiting two-phase kinetics. The second,
amplifying phase represented an IFN feedback response that accounted for much of 
IFN protein production. Induction of second phase transcription required IRF8.
Mouse cytomegalovirus (MCMV) and Toll-like receptor-mediated IFN induction in DCs
also required IRF8. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that IRF7,
IRF8, and RNA polymerase II were recruited to the IFN promoters upon stimulation.
Moreover, sustained RNA polymerase II recruitment to the promoters critically
depended on IRF8. Together, these data indicate that IRF8 magnifies the second
phase of IFN transcription in DCs by prolonging binding of basic transcription
machinery to the IFN promoters, thereby playing a role in innate immunity.

PMCID: PMC2768351
PMID: 17702615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Immunol. 2007 Aug 1;179(3):1796-802.

Early innate immune responses to Sin Nombre hantavirus occur independently of IFN
regulatory factor 3, characterized pattern recognition receptors, and viral
entry.

Prescott JB(1), Hall PR, Bondu-Hawkins VS, Ye C, Hjelle B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Infectious Diseases and Immunity, School
of Medicine, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131, USA.

Sin Nombre virus (SNV) is a highly pathogenic New World virus and etiologic agent
of hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome. We have previously shown that
replication-defective virus particles are able to induce a strong IFN-stimulated 
gene (ISG) response in human primary cells. RNA viruses often stimulate the
innate immune response by interactions between viral nucleic acids, acting as a
pathogen-associated molecular pattern, and cellular pattern-recognition receptors
(PRRs). Ligand binding to PRRs activates transcription factors which regulate the
expression of antiviral genes, and in all systems examined thus far, IFN
regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) has been described as an essential intermediate for
induction of ISG expression. However, we now describe a model in which IRF3 is
dispensable for the induction of ISG transcription in response to viral
particles. IRF3-independent ISG transcription in human hepatoma cell lines is
initiated early after exposure to SNV virus particles in an entry- and
replication-independent fashion. Furthermore, using gene knockdown, we discovered
that this activation is independent of the best-characterized RNA- and
protein-sensing PRRs including the cytoplasmic caspase recruitment
domain-containing RNA helicases and the TLRs. SNV particles engage a heretofore
unrecognized PRR, likely located at the cell surface, and engage a novel
IRF3-independent pathway that activates the innate immune response.

PMID: 17641046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Immunol. 2007 Jul 15;179(2):1166-77.

Type I IFN induction in response to Listeria monocytogenes in human macrophages: 
evidence for a differential activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3).

Reimer T(1), Schweizer M, Jungi TW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Virology, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
reimer@ivv.unibe.ch

Listeria monocytogenes is a prototypic bacterium for studying innate and adaptive
cellular immunity as well as host defense. Using human monocyte-derived
macrophages, we report that an infection with a wild-type strain, but not a
listeriolysin O-deficient strain, of the Gram-positive bacterium L. monocytogenes
induces expression of IFN-beta and a bioactive type I IFN response. Investigating
the activation of signaling pathways in human macrophages after infection
revealed that a wild-type strain and a hemolysin-deficient strain of L.
monocytogenes activated the NF-kappaB pathway and induced a comparable TNF
response. p38 MAPK and activating transcription factor 2 were phosphorylated
following infection with either strain, and IFN-beta gene expression induced by
wild-type L. monocytogenes was reduced when p38 was inhibited. However, neither
IFN regulatory factor (IRF) 3 translocation to the nucleus nor posttranslational 
modifications and dimerizations were observed after L. monocytogenes infection.
In contrast, vesicular stomatitis virus and LPS triggered IRF3 activation and
signaling. When IRF3 was knocked down using small interfering RNA, a L.
monocytogenes-induced IFN-beta response remained unaffected whereas a vesicular
stomatitis virus-triggered response was reduced. Evidence against the possibility
that IRF7 acts in place of IRF3 is provided. Thus, we show that wild-type L.
monocytogenes induced an IFN-beta response in human macrophages and propose that 
this response involves p38 MAPK and activating transcription factor 2. Using
various stimuli, we show that IRF3 is differentially activated during type I IFN 
responses in human macrophages.

PMID: 17617610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. BMC Genomics. 2007 Jul 5;8:215.

Transcriptome profiling of the small intestinal epithelium in germfree versus
conventional piglets.

Chowdhury SR(1), King DE, Willing BP, Band MR, Beever JE, Lane AB, Loor JJ,
Marini JC, Rund LA, Schook LB, Van Kessel AG, Gaskins HR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801,
USA. shankarc@uiuc.edu <shankarc@uiuc.edu>

BACKGROUND: To gain insight into host-microbe interactions in a piglet model, a
functional genomics approach was used to address the working hypothesis that
transcriptionally regulated genes associated with promoting epithelial barrier
function are activated as a defensive response to the intestinal microbiota.
Cesarean-derived germfree (GF) newborn piglets were colonized with adult swine
feces, and villus and crypt epithelial cell transcriptomes from colonized and GF 
neonatal piglets were compared using laser-capture microdissection and
high-density porcine oligonucleotide microarray technology.
RESULTS: Consistent with our hypothesis, resident microbiota induced the
expression of genes contributing to intestinal epithelial cell turnover, mucus
biosynthesis, and priming of the immune system. Furthermore, differential
expression of genes associated with antigen presentation (pan SLA class I, B2M,
TAP1 and TAPBP) demonstrated that microbiota induced immune responses using a
distinct regulatory mechanism common for these genes. Specifically, gene network 
analysis revealed that microbial colonization activated both type I (IFNAR) and
type II (IFNGR) interferon receptor mediated signaling cascades leading to
enhanced expression of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
(STAT1), STAT2 and IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) transcription factors and the
induction of IFN-inducible genes as a reflection of intestinal epithelial
inflammation. In addition, activated RNA expression of NF-kappa-B inhibitor alpha
(NFkappaBIA; a.k.a I-kappa-B-alpha, IKBalpha) and toll interacting protein
(TOLLIP), both inhibitors of inflammation, along with downregulated expression of
the immunoregulatory transcription factor GATA binding protein-1 (GATA1) is
consistent with the maintenance of intestinal homeostasis.
CONCLUSION: This study supports the concept that the intestinal epithelium has
evolved to maintain a physiological state of inflammation with respect to
continuous microbial exposure, which serves to sustain a tight intestinal barrier
while preventing overt inflammatory responses that would compromise barrier
function.

PMCID: PMC1949829
PMID: 17615075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 25;26(14):3451-62. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Involvement of the ubiquitin-like domain of TBK1/IKK-i kinases in regulation of
IFN-inducible genes.

Ikeda F(1), Hecker CM, Rozenknop A, Nordmeier RD, Rogov V, Hofmann K, Akira S,
Dötsch V, Dikic I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt,
Germany.

TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1/NAK/T2K) and I-kappaB Kinase (IKK-i/IKK-epsilon) play
important roles in the regulation of interferon (IFN)-inducible genes during the 
immune response to bacterial and viral infections. Cell stimulation with ssRNA
virus, dsDNA virus or gram-negative bacteria leads to activation of TBK1 or
IKK-i, which in turn phosphorylates the transcription factors, IFN-regulatory
factor (IRF) 3 and IRF7, promoting their translocation in the nucleus. To
understand the molecular basis of activation of TBK1, we analyzed the sequence of
TBK1 and IKK-i and identified a ubiquitin-like domain (ULD) adjacent to their
kinase domains. Deletion or mutations of the ULD in TBK1 or IKK-i impaired
activation of respective kinases, failed to induce IRF3 phosphorylation and
nuclear localization and to activate IFN-beta or RANTES promoters. The importance
of the ULD of TBK1 in LPS- or poly(I:C)-stimulated IFN-beta production was
demonstrated by reconstitution experiments in TBK1-IKK-i-deficient cells. We
propose that the ULD is a regulatory component of the TBK1/IKK-i kinases involved
in the control of the kinase activation, substrate presentation and downstream
signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC1933404
PMID: 17599067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS One. 2007 Jul 4;2(7):e584.

A novel unsupervised method to identify genes important in the anti-viral
response: application to interferon/ribavirin in hepatitis C patients.

Brodsky LI(1), Wahed AS, Li J, Tavis JE, Tsukahara T, Taylor MW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Evolution, University of Haifa, Haifa, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Treating hepatitis C with interferon/ribavirin results in a varied
response in terms of decrease in viral titer and ultimate outcome. Marked
responders have a sharp decline in viral titer within a few days of treatment
initiation, whereas in other patients there is no effect on the virus (poor
responders). Previous studies have shown that combination therapy modifies
expression of hundreds of genes in vitro and in vivo. However, identifying which,
if any, of these genes have a role in viral clearance remains challenging.
AIMS: The goal of this paper is to link viral levels with gene expression and
thereby identify genes that may be responsible for early decrease in viral titer.
METHODS: Microarrays were performed on RNA isolated from PBMC of patients
undergoing interferon/ribavirin therapy. Samples were collected at pre-treatment 
(day 0), and 1, 2, 7, 14 and 28 days after initiating treatment. A novel method
was applied to identify genes that are linked to a decrease in viral titer during
interferon/ribavirin treatment. The method uses the relationship between
inter-patient gene expression based proximities and inter-patient viral titer
based proximities to define the association between microarray gene expression
measurements of each gene and viral-titer measurements.
RESULTS: We detected 36 unique genes whose expressions provide a clustering of
patients that resembles viral titer based clustering of patients. These genes
include IRF7, MX1, OASL and OAS2, viperin and many ISG's of unknown function.
CONCLUSION: The genes identified by this method appear to play a major role in
the reduction of hepatitis C virus during the early phase of treatment. The
method has broad utility and can be used to analyze response to any group of
factors influencing biological outcome such as antiviral drugs or anti-cancer
agents where microarray data are available.

PMCID: PMC1978073
PMID: 17589564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Virol. 2007 Aug;81(15):8282-92. Epub 2007 May 23.

Inhibition of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7)-mediated interferon signal
transduction by the Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus viral IRF homolog
vIRF3.

Joo CH(1), Shin YC, Gack M, Wu L, Levy D, Jung JU.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Virology Division, New England Primate Research Center, Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Harvard Medical School, 1 Pine Hill Drive,
Southborough, MA 01772, USA.

Upon viral infection, the major defense mounted by the host immune system is
activation of the interferon (IFN)-mediated antiviral pathway that is mediated by
IFN regulatory factors (IRFs). In order to complete their life cycle, viruses
must modulate the host IFN-mediated immune response. Kaposi's sarcoma-associated 
herpesvirus (KSHV), a human tumor-inducing herpesvirus, has developed a unique
mechanism for antagonizing cellular IFN-mediated antiviral activity by
incorporating viral homologs of the cellular IRFs, called vIRFs. Here, we report 
a novel immune evasion mechanism of KSHV vIRF3 to block cellular IRF7-mediated
innate immunity in response to viral infection. KSHV vIRF3 specifically interacts
with either the DNA binding domain or the central IRF association domain of IRF7,
and this interaction leads to the inhibition of IRF7 DNA binding activity and,
therefore, suppression of alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) production and
IFN-mediated immunity. Remarkably, the central 40 amino acids of vIRF3,
containing the double alpha helix motifs, are sufficient not only for binding to 
IRF7, but also for inhibiting IRF7 DNA binding activity. Consequently, the
expression of the double alpha helix motif-containing peptide effectively
suppresses IRF7-mediated IFN-alpha production. This demonstrates a remarkably
efficient means of viral avoidance of host antiviral activity.

PMCID: PMC1951281
PMID: 17522209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):6876-85.

Murine dendritic cell type I IFN production induced by human IgG-RNA immune
complexes is IFN regulatory factor (IRF)5 and IRF7 dependent and is required for 
IL-6 production.

Yasuda K(1), Richez C, Maciaszek JW, Agrawal N, Akira S, Marshak-Rothstein A,
Rifkin IR.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Section, Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Dendritic cell (DC) activation by nucleic acid-containing IgG complexes is
implicated in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) pathogenesis. However, it has
been difficult to definitively examine the receptors and signaling pathways by
which this activation is mediated. Because mouse FcgammaRs recognize human IgG,
we hypothesized that IgG from lupus patients might stimulate mouse DCs, thereby
facilitating this analysis. In this study, we show that sera and purified IgG
from lupus patients activate mouse DCs to produce IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, and IL-6
and up-regulate costimulatory molecules in a FcgammaR-dependent manner. This
activation is only seen in sera with reactivity against ribonucleoproteins and is
completely dependent on TLR7 and the presence of RNA. As anticipated, IFN
regulatory factor (IRF)7 is required for IFN-alpha and IFN-beta production.
Unexpectedly, however, IRF5 plays a critical role in IFN-alpha and IFN-beta
production induced not only by RNA-containing immune complexes but also by
conventional TLR7 and TLR9 ligands. Moreover, DC production of IL-6 induced by
these stimuli is dependent on a functional type I IFNR, indicating the need for a
type I IFN-dependent feedback loop in the production of inflammatory cytokines.
This system may also prove useful for the study of receptors and signaling
pathways used by immune complexes in other human diseases.

PMID: 17513736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):6770-6.

Lack of essential role of NF-kappa B p50, RelA, and cRel subunits in
virus-induced type 1 IFN expression.

Wang X(1), Hussain S, Wang EJ, Wang X, Li MO, García-Sastre A, Beg AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Interdisciplinary Oncology, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center &
Research Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612, USA.

Type 1 IFNs (IFN-alphabeta) play pivotal roles in the host antiviral response and
in TLR-induced signaling. IFN regulatory factor (IRF) and NF-kappaB transcription
factors are thought to be crucial for virus-induced mRNA expression of IFN-beta. 
Although recent studies have demonstrated essential roles for IRF3 and IRF7, the 
definitive role of NF-kappaB factors in IFN-beta (or IFN-alpha) expression
remains unknown. Using mice deficient in distinct members of the NF-kappaB
family, we investigated NF-kappaB function in regulating type 1 IFN expression in
response to Sendai virus and Newcastle disease virus infection. Surprisingly,
IFN-beta and IFN-alpha expression was strongly induced following virus infection 
of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) from p50(-/-), RelA/p65(-/-), cRel(-/-),
p50(-/-)cRel(-/-), and p50(-/-)RelA(-/-) mice. Compared with wild-type MEFs, only
RelA(-/-) and p50(-/-)RelA(-/-) MEFs showed a modest reduction in IFN-beta
expression. To overcome functional redundancy between different NF-kappaB
subunits, we expressed a dominant-negative IkappaBalpha protein in
p50(-/-)RelA(-/-) MEFs to inhibit activation of remaining NF-kappaB subunits.
Although viral infection of these cells failed to induce detectable NF-kappaB
activity, both Sendai virus and Newcastle disease virus infection led to robust
IFN-beta expression. Virus infection of dendritic cells or TLR9-ligand CpG-D19
treatment of plasmacytoid dendritic cells from RelA(-/-) or p50(-/-)cRel(-/-)
mice also induced robust type 1 IFN expression. Our findings therefore indicate
that NF-kappaB subunits p50, RelA, and cRel play a relatively minor role in
virus-induced type 1 IFN expression.

PMID: 17513724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Invest Dermatol. 2007 Oct;127(10):2391-8. Epub 2007 May 17.

Human basal cell carcinoma is associated with Foxp3+ T cells in a Th2 dominant
microenvironment.

Kaporis HG(1), Guttman-Yassky E, Lowes MA, Haider AS, Fuentes-Duculan J, Darabi
K, Whynot-Ertelt J, Khatcherian A, Cardinale I, Novitskaya I, Krueger JG, Carucci
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Investigative Dermatology, Rockefeller University, New York,
New York, USA.

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC), the most common human cancer, undergoes spontaneous
regression in certain circumstances, which is potentially immune-mediated. To
understand the immune response surrounding BCCs, we characterized the genomic,
protein, and cellular microenvironment associated with BCC in comparison to
normal skin. Our results demonstrated the following: (1) CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+
surround epithelial tumor aggregates; (2) Immature dendritic cells (DCs) were
abundant in the tumor microenvironment; (3) BCC showed increased expression of
IL-4, IL-10, and CCL22 and increased expression of interferon-associated genes
(IFI27, IRF1, IRF7, and G1P2) and IL-12/23, gene indicating a Th2 dominant
microenvironment. Our findings suggest a dynamic state within the immune
microenvironment associated with BCC. The finding of phenotypic T regs, in
conjunction with immature DCs and Th2 cytokines, suggests an attenuated state of 
immunity to human BCC. In contrast, abundant CD8+ T cells, an interferon signal, 
and IL-12/23 suggest partial host antitumor response. A better understanding of
these opposing forces within the immune microenvironment may facilitate
development of more potent immune-based treatment for BCC and other human
carcinomas.

PMID: 17508019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Gene Ther. 2007 Aug;14(15):1166-74. Epub 2007 May 17.

Restricted tissue tropism and acquired resistance to Sindbis viral vector
expression in the absence of innate and adaptive immunity.

Tseng JC(1), Zheng Y, Yee H, Levy DE, Meruelo D.

Author information: 
(1)NYU Cancer Institute, Department of Pathology, NYU Gene Therapy Center, NYU
School of Medicine, New York University, New York, NY, USA.

Our previous studies suggest that replication-defective Sindbis vectors might be 
promising agents for specific tumor targeting and detection. However, the effects
of innate and/or adaptive anti-viral immunity, in particular, the IFN-I/STAT1
signaling pathway, may impact their therapeutic potential. Using a bioluminescent
imaging system, we demonstrate that although most normal cells are not
permissively transduced by replication-defective Sindbis vector, transduction of 
liver non-sinusoidal endothelial occurs the first time IFN-I/STAT1 signaling
deficient mice are inoculated with the vector. Transduction of some cells is not 
surprising since STAT1 knockout animals show significant delay in IFN responses
such as the production of IFN-alpha/beta and transcriptional activation of
several anti-viral genes (IRF7, RIG-I, PKR, TLR3, USP18, ISG15). However, beyond 
the initial vector transduction, which resolves rapidly, secondary inoculums of
Sindbis vectors do not transduce any liver cells, suggesting that an alternative 
antiviral pathway may protect against further transduction. Other known signaling
pathways were examined using mice lacking functional TLR3, tumor necrosis
factoralphaR or nuclear factor-kappa B (p50). Surprisingly, none of those
pathways seem to play a significant role in anti-Sindbis responses. Thus it
appears that in vivo, in contrast to the ready transduction of tumor cells,
transduction of normal cells by replication-defective Sindbis vector is limited, 
possibly by a novel mechanism.

PMID: 17508007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2007 Nov;56(11):1845-52. Epub 2007 May 15.

STAT1-dependent and STAT1-independent gene expression in murine immune cells
following stimulation with interferon-alpha.

Zimmerer JM(1), Lesinski GB, Radmacher MD, Ruppert A, Carson WE 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Biological Sciences Graduate Program, The Ohio State University
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

PURPOSE: The precise molecular targets of interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) therapy of
melanoma are unknown but likely involve signal transducer and activator of
transcription 1 (STAT1) signal transduction within host immune effector cells. We
hypothesized that microarray analysis could be utilized to identify candidate
molecular targets important for mediating the anti-tumor effect of exogenously
administered IFN-alpha.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS: To identify the STAT1-dependent genes regulated by
IFN-alpha, the gene expression profile of splenocytes from wild type (WT) and
STAT1(-/-) mice was characterized.
RESULTS: This analysis identified 30 genes that required STAT1 signal
transduction for optimal expression in response to IFN-alpha (p < 0.001). These
genes include granzyme b (Gzmb), interferon regulatory factor 7 (Irf7), Fas death
domain-associated protein (Daxx), and lymphocyte antigen 6 complex, locus C
(Ly6c). The expression of 20 genes was found to be suppressed in the presence of 
STAT1 including chemokine ligand 2 (Ccl2), Ccl5, and Ccl7. Nineteen genes were
significantly upregulated in murine splenocytes following treatment with
IFN-alpha regardless of the presence of STAT1 including CD86, lymphocyte antigen 
6 complex, locus A (Ly6a), and Tap binding protein (Tapbp). The expression of
representative IFN-responsive genes was confirmed at the transcriptional level by
Real Time PCR.
CONCLUSION: This report is the first to demonstrate that STAT1-mediated signal
transduction plays a major role in the transcriptional response of murine immune 
cells to IFNalpha.

PMID: 17503042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nat Immunol. 2007 Jun;8(6):592-600. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

The NEMO adaptor bridges the nuclear factor-kappaB and interferon regulatory
factor signaling pathways.

Zhao T(1), Yang L, Sun Q, Arguello M, Ballard DW, Hiscott J, Lin R.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal H3T 1E2, Canada.

Intracellular detection of RNA virus infection is mediated by the RNA helicase
RIG-I, which is recruited to mitochondria by the adaptor protein MAVS and
triggers activation of the transcription factors NF-kappaB, IRF3 and IRF7. Here
we demonstrate that virus-induced activation of IRF3 and IRF7 depended on the
NF-kappaB modulator NEMO, which acted 'upstream' of the kinases TBK1 and
IKKepsilon. IRF3 phosphorylation, formation of IRF3 dimers and DNA binding, as
well as IRF3-dependent gene expression, were abrogated in NEMO-deficient cells.
IRF3 phosphorylation and interferon production were restored by ectopic
expression of NEMO. Thus, NEMO, like MAVS, acts as an adaptor protein that allows
RIG-I to activate both the NF-kappaB and IRF signaling pathways.

PMID: 17468758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Nat Rev Immunol. 2007 May;7(5):353-64.

The family of five: TIR-domain-containing adaptors in Toll-like receptor
signalling.

O'Neill LA(1), Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 2,
Ireland. laoneill@tcd.ie agbowie@tcd.ie

Signalling by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) involves five adaptor proteins known as 
MyD88, MAL, TRIF, TRAM and SARM. Recent insights have revealed additional
functions for MyD88 apart from NF-kappaB activation, including activation of the 
transcription factors IRF1, IRF5 and IRF7, and also a role outside the TLRs in
interferon-gamma signalling. Biochemical information on MAL and TRAM has shown
that both act as bridging adaptors, with MAL recruiting MyD88 to TLR2 and TLR4,
and TRAM recruiting TRIF to TLR4 to allow for IRF3 activation. Finally, the
function of the fifth adaptor, SARM, has been revealed, which negatively
regulates TRIF. These new insights allow for a detailed description of the
function of the five TIR-domain-containing adaptors in the initiation of TLR
signalling.

PMID: 17457343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Biol Markers. 2007 Jan-Mar;22(1):34-8.

Differential expression patterns of IRF3 and IRF7 in pediatric lymphoid
disorders.

Park HS(1), Kim YJ, Bae YK, Lee NH, Lee YJ, Hah JO, Park TI, Lee KS, Park JB, Kim
HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Daegu,
Korea.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are multifunctional transcriptional factors.
To define the role of IRFs in lymphoid disorders, we determined the expression
patterns of IRF3 and IRF7 by immunohistochemistry in 5 normal lymph nodes, 12
reactive hyperplastic lymph nodes, and 27 pediatric lymphomas. IRF3 was
prominently expressed in the nuclei of the histiocytes, and was expressed very
weakly in the cytoplasm of most of the lymphocytes of the normal lymph nodes.
However, IRF7 was expressed strongly in the nuclei of over 50% of the lymphocytes
throughout the normal lymph nodes, but the histiocytes and fibroblasts were
spared. In the reactive hyperplastic lymph nodes, the number of IRF3- and IRF7-
positive cells in the nuclei was elevated. In the lymphomas, the number of
IRF3-positive cells in the nucleus appeared to have decreased, and the cells were
scattered throughout the lymphoma tissue in no specific pattern. However, in most
cases the number of IRF7-positive cells was elevated. These results suggested
that IRF3 was activated principally in the histiocytes and T cells under
inflammatory conditions, but IRF3 activation was attenuated in cases of lymphoma.
However, the number of IRF7-positive cells was found to be elevated in the
reactive hyperplastic lymph nodes and pediatric lymphoma.

PMID: 17393359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cancer Res. 2007 Mar;5(3):261-70.

BRCA1 regulates IFN-gamma signaling through a mechanism involving the type I
IFNs.

Buckley NE(1), Hosey AM, Gorski JJ, Purcell JW, Mulligan JM, Harkin DP, Mullan
PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's
University Belfast, UK.

BRCA1 encodes a tumor suppressor gene that is mutated in the germ line of women
with a genetic predisposition to breast and ovarian cancer. BRCA1 has been
implicated in a number of important cellular functions including DNA damage
repair, transcriptional regulation, cell cycle control, and ubiquitination. Using
an Affymetrix U95A microarray, IRF-7 was identified as a BRCA1 transcriptional
target and was also shown to be synergistically up-regulated by BRCA1
specifically in the presence of IFN-gamma, coincident with the synergistic
induction of apoptosis. We show that BRCA1, signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)-1, and STAT2 are all required for the induction of IRF-7
following stimulation with IFN-gamma. We also show that the induction of IRF-7 by
BRCA1 and IFN-gamma is dependent on the type I IFNs, IFN-alpha and IFN-beta. We
show that BRCA1 is required for the up-regulation of STAT1, STAT2, and the type I
IFNs in response to IFN-gamma. We show that BRCA1 is localized at the promoters
of the molecules involved in type I IFN signaling leading to their up-regulation.
Blocking this intermediary type I IFN step using specific antisera shows the
requirement for IFN-alpha and IFN-beta in the induction of IRF-7 and apoptosis.
Finally, we outline a mechanism for the BRCA1/IFN-gamma regulation of target
genes involved in the innate immune response, which is dependent on type I IFN
signaling.

PMID: 17374731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2006;26(6):747-9.

Expression of plasmacytoid dendritic cells, IRF-7, IFN-alpha mRNA in the lesions 
of psoriasis vulgaris.

Chen J(1), Tan Z, Liu H, Liu Z, Wu Y, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.

To investigate the expression of plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs), interferon 
regulatory factor-7 (IRF-7) and interferon alpha (IFN- alpha) mRNA in skin
lesions of patients with psoriasis vulgaris, the expressions of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells, IRF-7, IFN-alpha mRNA in the lesional skin of psoriasis vulgaris
were detected by immunohistochemical technique (SP) and RT-PCR. Normal skin of
healthy volunteers, serving as control, was also tested. The immunohistochemical 
study showed that the expression of pDCs in the psoriatic lesions was
significantly higher than that in the normal controls. RT-PCR showed that the
mRNA expression of IRF-7 was much higher than that in normal controls, but no
difference in the expression of IFN-alpha mRNA was found between two groups. Our 
findings indicate that up-regulated expression of pDCs, IRF-7 mRNA might be
involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis.

PMID: 17357508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Comp Biochem Physiol Part D Genomics Proteomics. 2006 Mar;1(1):77-88.

Conservation of Toll-Like Receptor Signaling Pathways in Teleost Fish.

Purcell MK, Smith KD, Hood L, Winton JR, Roach JC.

In mammals, Toll-like receptors (TLR) recognize ligands, including
pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMPs), and respond with ligand-specific 
induction of genes. In this study, we establish evolutionary conservation in
teleost fish of key components of the TLR-signaling pathway that act as switches 
for differential gene induction, including MYD88, TIRAP, TRIF, TRAF6, IRF3, and
IRF7. We further explore this conservation with a molecular phylogenetic analysis
of MYD88. To the extent that current genomic analysis can establish, each
vertebrate has one ortholog to each of these genes. For molecular tree
construction and phylogeny inference, we demonstrate a methodology for including 
genes with only partial primary sequences without disrupting the topology
provided by the high-confidence full-length sequences. Conservation of the
TLR-signaling molecules suggests that the basic program of gene regulation by the
TLR-signaling pathway is conserved across vertebrates. To test this hypothesis,
leukocytes from a model fish, rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), were
stimulated with known mammalian TLR agonists including: diacylated and
triacylated forms of lipoprotein, flagellin, two forms of LPS, synthetic
double-stranded RNA, and two imidazoquinoline compounds (loxoribine and R848).
Trout leukocytes responded in vitro to a number of these agonists with distinct
patterns of cytokine expression that correspond to mammalian responses. Our
results support the key prediction from our phylogenetic analyses that strong
selective pressure of pathogenic microbes has preserved both TLR recognition and 
signaling functions during vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC1524722
PMID: 17330145  [PubMed]


82. Antivir Ther. 2006;11(7):901-8.

Modulation of interferon-specific gene expression by albumin-interferon-alpha in 
interferon-alpha-experienced patients with chronic hepatitis C.

Balan V(1), Nelson DR, Sulkowski MS, Everson GT, Lambiase LR, Wiesner RH, Dickson
RC, Garcia A, Moore PA, Yu R, Subramanian GM.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Clinic, Phoenix, AZ, USA. Balan.Vijayan@mayo.edu

Albumin-interferon-alpha (alb-IFN) is a novel recombinant protein derived from
IFN-alpha2b genetically fused to human albumin. The resulting single polypeptide 
combines in one molecule the antiviral properties of IFN-alpha with the long
serum half-life of albumin. IFN-mediated biological responses stem from the
engagement of IFN-alpha with its target receptor and subsequent modulation of
IFN-specific gene (ISG) expression. To evaluate the pharmacodynamics of alb-IFN
during the Phase I/II study conducted in patients with chronic hepatitis C (CHC) 
who had previously failed IFN-alpha-containing regimens, ISG induction was
evaluated in peripheral blood and compared with antiviral response. Whole blood
was obtained at day 0, day 7 and day 28 from 21 patients enrolled in the higher
dose (500-900 microg) alb-IFN cohort, who received two injections on day 0 and
day 14. Taqman real-time PCR was used to assess candidate ISG expression. There
was sustained induction on day 7 and day 28 of the ISG's OAS1, IRF-7, IFI44 and
IFI27. Although all patients showed a molecular response to alb-IFN, individual
variability in pretreatment gene expression levels and fold of modulation during 
treatment was observed. At day 28, induction of OAS1, IFI44 and IRF7 showed
pairwise correlation in individual patients (P < 0.05). Moreover, the induction
of expression at day 28, and pretreatment levels of OAS1 and IFI44 correlated
with hepatitis C virus RNA reduction at day 28 (P < 0.05). In conclusion, alb-IFN
demonstrated robust induction of ISG that was consistent with the response
associated with an IFN-alpha.

PMID: 17302252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Virol. 2007 May;81(9):4473-81. Epub 2007 Feb 14.

Rotavirus NSP1 inhibits expression of type I interferon by antagonizing the
function of interferon regulatory factors IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7.

Barro M(1), Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Disease, National Institutes of Health, 50 South Drive, Bethesda, MD
20892-8026, USA.

Secretion of interferon (IFN) by virus-infected cells is essential for activating
autocrine and paracrine pathways that promote cellular transition to an antiviral
state. In most mammalian cells, IFN production is initiated by the activation of 
constitutively expressed IFN regulatory factor 3, IRF3, which in turn leads to
the induction of IRF7, the "master regulator" of IFN type I synthesis (alpha/beta
IFN). Previous studies established that rotavirus NSP1 antagonizes IFN signaling 
by inducing IRF3 degradation. In the present study, we have determined that, in
comparison to wild-type rotaviruses, rotaviruses encoding defective NSP1 grow to 
lower titers in some cell lines and that this poor growth phenotype is due to
their failure to suppress IFN expression. Furthermore, we provide evidence that
rotaviruses encoding wild-type NSP1 subvert IFN signaling by inducing the
degradation of not only IRF3, but also IRF7, with both events occurring through
proteasome-dependent processes that proceed with similar efficiencies. The
capacity of NSP1 to induce IRF7 degradation may allow rotavirus to move across
the gut barrier by enabling the virus to replicate in specialized trafficking
cells (dendritic cells and macrophages) that constitutively express IRF7. Along
with IRF3 and IRF7, NSP1 was found to induce the degradation of IRF5, a factor
that upregulates IFN expression and that is involved in triggering apoptosis
during viral infection. Our analysis suggests that NSP1 mediates the degradation 
of IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 by recognizing a common element of IRF proteins, thereby 
allowing NSP1 to act as a broad-spectrum antagonist of IRF function.

PMCID: PMC1900170
PMID: 17301153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Apr;27(8):2910-8. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 is activated by a viral oncoprotein through
RIP-dependent ubiquitination.

Huye LE(1), Ning S, Kelliher M, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Campus
Box 7295, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

As a key mediator of type I interferon (IFN) (IFN-alpha/beta) responses, IFN
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is essential to host immune defenses. Activation of
IRF7 generally requires virus-induced C-terminal phosphorylation, which leads to 
its nuclear accumulation and activation of target genes. Here we use the
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) oncoprotein LMP1, which activates IRF7, to identify
factors involved in IRF7 activation. We demonstrate for the first time that RIP
activates IRF7 and that RIP and IRF7 interact under physiological conditions in
EBV-positive Burkitt's lymphoma cells. We provide evidence that both RIP and IRF7
are ubiquitinated in these cells and that IRF7 preferentially interacts with
ubiquitinated RIP. RIP is required for full activation of IRF7 by LMP1, with LMP1
stimulating the ubiquitination of RIP and its interaction with IRF7. Moreover,
LMP1 stimulates RIP-dependent K63-linked ubiquitination of IRF7, which regulates 
protein function rather than proteasomal degradation of proteins. We suggest that
RIP may serve as a general activator of IRF7, responding to and transmitting the 
signals from various stimuli, and that ubiquitination may be a general mechanism 
for enhancing the activity of IRF7.

PMCID: PMC1899925
PMID: 17296724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Virology. 2007 Jun 5;362(2):304-13. Epub 2007 Feb 12.

Vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein G activates a specific antiviral
Toll-like receptor 4-dependent pathway.

Georgel P(1), Jiang Z, Kunz S, Janssen E, Mols J, Hoebe K, Bahram S, Oldstone MB,
Beutler B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey
Pines Rd, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. philippe.georgel@hemato-ulp.u-strasbg.fr

We have previously shown that mutations of CD14 or TLR4 impair type I interferon 
(IFN) production and macrophage survival during infection with vesicular
stomatitis virus (VSV). We now report that VSV glycoprotein G (gpG) is essential 
for the induction of a previously unrecognized CD14/TLR4-dependent response
pathway in which the adapter TRAM has predominant importance, absent any need for
MyD88 or Mal, and with only a partial requirement for TRIF. Downstream of TRAM,
IRF7 activation leads to a type I IFN response. The pathway is utilized by
myeloid dendritic cells (mDCs) and macrophages rather than plasmacytoid DCs. This
new mode of TLR4 signal transduction, which does not stimulate NF-kappaB
activation, reveals the importance of viral protein recognition by mDCs and shows
that TLR4 can drive qualitatively different events within the cell in response to
different ligands.

PMID: 17292937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Immunol. 2007 Feb 15;178(4):2429-39.

Fas-associated death domain-containing protein-mediated antiviral innate immune
signaling involves the regulation of Irf7.

Balachandran S(1), Venkataraman T, Fisher PB, Barber GN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology and Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

The induction of type I (alphabeta) IFN following virus infection is necessary
for the stimulation of effective antiviral host defense. In fibroblasts, a subset
of primary genes (including those encoding IFN-beta and IFN-alpha4) are induced
directly by intracellular dsRNA generated by the virus during its replication.
These primary type I IFNs induce expression of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-7,
required for production of a second cascade of IFN-alpha subtypes and the further
establishment of a complete antiviral state. Previously, we had reported on a
role for Fas-associated death domain-containing protein (FADD) in the control of 
TLR-independent innate immune responses to virus infection. Our data in this
study demonstrate that FADD is not only required for efficient primary gene
induction, but is also essential for induction of Irf7 and effective expression
of secondary IFN-alphas and other antiviral genes. Ectopic overexpression of
IRF-7 partially rescued dsRNA responsiveness and IFN-alpha production, and a
constitutively active variant of IRF-7 displayed normal activity in Fadd(-/-)
murine embryonic fibroblasts. MC159, a FADD-interacting viral protein encoded by 
the molluscum contagiosum poxvirus was found to inhibit dsRNA-activated signaling
events upstream of IRF-7. These data indicate that FADD's antiviral activity
involves regulation of IRF-7-dependent production of IFN-alpha subtypes and
consequent induction of secondary antiviral genes.

PMID: 17277150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Eur J Immunol. 2007 Feb;37(2):528-39.

Involvement of TBK1 and IKKepsilon in lipopolysaccharide-induced activation of
the interferon response in primary human macrophages.

Solis M(1), Romieu-Mourez R, Goubau D, Grandvaux N, Mesplede T, Julkunen I,
Nardin A, Salcedo M, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Montreal, QE, Canada.

Interferon (IFN) is an important effector of the innate immune response, induced 
by different viral or bacterial components through Toll-like receptor-dependent
and -independent mechanisms. In human macrophages and macrophage-activated killer
cells, we demonstrate that (i) the type I IFN response to lipopolysaccharide
(LPS) is weak compared to the host response to virus infection; (ii) there is a
temporal difference in the induction of tank-binding kinase-1 (TBK1) and IkappaB 
kinase (IKK)-related kinase epsilon (IKKepsilon) kinase activities in response to
LPS, with TBK1 activated early and IKKepsilon induced in the late phase of IFN
induction; and (iii) interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-7 is induced following
LPS treatment, but there is no evidence that IRF-7 becomes activated by
phosphorylation in vivo. Specifically, TBK1 kinase activity is rapidly increased 
after LPS stimulation (15 min) whereas IKKepsilon activation occurs at 8 h. RNA
interference-mediated inhibition of TBK1 and IKKepsilon expression in macrophages
interfere with IFNB and IRF7 gene expression following LPS activation. Macrophage
priming with rIFN-alpha increased IRF-7 expression, led to a sharp up-regulation 
of the IFNB gene and to a rapid induction of IFNA2 upon LPS stimulation. These
data support a differential role of TBK1 and IKKepsilon in the downstream
response mediated by IRF-3 and IRF-7 to LPS in primary human macrophages.

PMID: 17236232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(7):3087-96. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

Classical swine fever virus Npro interacts with interferon regulatory factor 3
and induces its proteasomal degradation.

Bauhofer O(1), Summerfield A, Sakoda Y, Tratschin JD, Hofmann MA, Ruggli N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunoprophylaxis (IVI), Sensemattstrasse 293,
CH-3147 Mittelhäusern, Switzerland.

Viruses have evolved a multitude of strategies to subvert the innate immune
system by interfering with components of the alpha/beta interferon
(IFN-alpha/beta) induction and signaling pathway. It is well established that the
pestiviruses prevent IFN-alpha/beta induction in their primary target cells, such
as epitheloidal and endothelial cells, macrophages, and conventional dendritic
cells, a phenotype mediated by the viral protein N(pro). Central players in the
IFN-alpha/beta induction cascade are interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and
IRF7. Recently, it was proposed that classical swine fever virus (CSFV), the
porcine pestivirus, induced the loss of IRF3 by inhibiting the transcription of
IRF3 mRNA. In the present study, we show that endogenous IRF3 and IRF3 expressed 
from a cytomegalovirus (CMV) promoter are depleted in the presence of CSFV by
means of N(pro), while CSFV does not inhibit CMV promoter-driven protein
expression. We also demonstrate that CSFV does not reduce the transcriptional
activity of the IRF3 promoter and does not affect the stability of IRF3 mRNA. In 
fact, CSFV N(pro) induces proteasomal degradation of IRF3, as demonstrated by
proteasome inhibition studies. Furthermore, N(pro) coprecipitates with IRF3,
suggesting that the proteasomal degradation of IRF3 is induced by a direct or
indirect interaction with N(pro). Finally, we show that N(pro) does not
downregulate IRF7 expression.

PMCID: PMC1866024
PMID: 17215286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(7):3077-86. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

The infected cell protein 0 encoded by bovine herpesvirus 1 (bICP0) induces
degradation of interferon response factor 3 and, consequently, inhibits beta
interferon promoter activity.

Saira K(1), Zhou Y, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68503, USA.

The ICP0 protein (bICP0) encoded by bovine herpesvirus 1 is the major viral
regulatory protein because it stimulates all viral promoters and, consequently,
productive infection. Like other ICP0 analogues encoded by Alphaherpesvirinae
subfamily members, bICP0 contains a zinc RING finger near its amino terminus that
is necessary for activating transcription, regulating subcellular localization,
and inhibiting interferon-dependent transcription. In this study, we discovered
that sequences near the C terminus, and the zinc RING finger, are necessary for
inhibiting the human beta interferon (IFN-beta) promoter. In contrast to herpes
simplex virus type 1-encoded ICP0, bICP0 reduces interferon response factor 3
(IRF3), but not IRF7, protein levels in transiently transfected cells. The zinc
RING finger and sequences near the C terminus are necessary for bICP0-induced
degradation of IRF3. A proteasome inhibitor, lactacystin, interfered with
bICP0-induced degradation of IRF3, suggesting that bICP0, directly or indirectly,
targets IRF3 for proteasome-dependent degradation. IRF3, but not IRF7, is not
readily detectable in the nuclei of productively infected bovine cells during the
late stages of infection. In the context of productive infection, IRF3 and IRF7
are detected in the nucleus at early times after infection. At late times after
infection, IRF7, but not IRF3, is still detectable in the nuclei of infected
cells. Collectively, these studies suggest that the ability of bICP0 to reduce
IRF3 protein levels is important with respect to disarming the IFN response
during productive infection.

PMCID: PMC1866033
PMID: 17215277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 1;178(1):253-61.

Multiple NF-kappaB and IFN regulatory factor family transcription factors
regulate CCL19 gene expression in human monocyte-derived dendritic cells.

Pietilä TE(1), Veckman V, Lehtonen A, Lin R, Hiscott J, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland. taija.pietila@ktl.fi

CCL19 chemokine has a central role in dendritic cell (DC) biology regulating DC
traffic and recruitment of naive T cells to the vicinity of activated DCs. In
this study, we have analyzed the regulation of CCL19 gene expression in human
monocyte-derived DCs. DCs infected with Salmonella enterica or Sendai virus
produced CCL19 at late times of infection. The CCL19 promoter was identified as
having two putative NF-kappaB binding sites and one IFN-stimulated response
element (ISRE). Transcription factor binding experiments demonstrated that
Salmonella or Sendai virus infection increased the binding of classical p50+p65
and alternative p52+RelB NF-kappaB proteins to both of the CCL19 promoter
NF-kappaB elements. Interestingly, Salmonella or Sendai virus infection also
increased the binding of multiple IFN regulatory factors (IRFs), STAT1, and
STAT2, to the ISRE element. Enhanced binding of IRF1, IRF3, IRF7, and IRF9 to the
CCL19 promoter ISRE site was detected in Salmonella or Sendai virus-infected cell
extracts. The CCL19 promoter in a luciferase reporter construct was activated by 
the expression of NF-kappaB p50+p65 or p52+RelB dimers. IRF1, IRF3, and IRF7
proteins also activated CCL19 promoter in the presence of Sendai virus infection.
CCL19 promoter constructs mutated at NF-kappaB and/or ISRE sites were only weakly
activated. Ectopic expression of RIG-I (DeltaRIG-I, CARDIF) or TLR3/4 (TRIF,
MyD88, IKKepsilon, or TBK1) signaling pathway components induced CCL19 promoter
activity, suggesting that these pathways are important in CCL19 gene expression. 
Our experiments reveal that expression of the CCL19 gene is regulated by a
combined action of several members of the NF-kappaB, IRF, and STAT family
transcription factors.

PMID: 17182562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Cancer Res. 2006 Nov 1;66(21):10576-85.

Distinct roles for IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF-7 in the activation of
antitumor properties of human macrophages.

Romieu-Mourez R(1), Solis M, Nardin A, Goubau D, Baron-Bodo V, Lin R, Massie B,
Salcedo M, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

When properly activated, macrophages can be tumoricidal, thus making them
attractive additions to standard cancer therapies. To this end, tolerance and
activity of human autologous IFN-gamma-activated macrophages, produced in large
scale for clinical use (MAK cells), have been assessed in pilot trials in cancer 
patients. In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that activation of IFN
regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF-7, with subsequent type I IFN production, may
be involved in the acquisition of new antitumor functions by macrophages.
Adenoviral vectors were generated for the delivery of constitutively active forms
of IRF-3 (Ad-IRF-3) or IRF-7 (Ad-IRF-7) into primary human macrophages. Cell
death was observed in Ad-IRF-3-transduced macrophages, whereas
Ad-IRF-7-transduced macrophages produced type I IFNs and displayed increased
expression of genes encoding tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand, interleukin (IL)-12, IL-15, and CD80, persisting for
at least 96 hours. Expression of iNOS, TNF-alpha, FasL, IL-1, and IL-6 genes was 
unaltered by Ad-IRF-7 transduction. Interestingly, Ad-IRF-3 or Ad-IRF-7
transduction negatively regulated the transcription of protumorigenic genes
encoding vascular endothelial growth factor and matrix metalloproteinase-2.
Furthermore, Ad-IRF-7-transduced macrophages exerted a cytostatic activity on
different cancer cell lines, including SK-BR-3, MCF-7, and COLO-205; the latter
cells were shown previously to be insensitive to MAK cells. In conclusion,
transduction of active forms of IRF-3 or IRF-7 differentially modulate the
apoptotic and antitumor properties of primary macrophages, with active IRF-7
leading to the acquisition of novel antitumor effector functions.

PMID: 17079482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Mol Biol. 2007 Jan 5;365(1):90-108. Epub 2006 Sep 16.

Gene expression analysis in blood cells in response to unmodified and 2'-modified
siRNAs reveals TLR-dependent and independent effects.

Cekaite L(1), Furset G, Hovig E, Sioud M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumour Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, The Norwegian
Radium Hospital, University of Oslo, Montebello, 310, Oslo, Norway.

Ribonucleic nucleic acid recognition by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) induces innate
immune responses. However, no comprehensive analysis of gene expression in human 
blood cells in response to unmodified and 2'-modified immunostimulatory RNAs has 
been reported. Using oligonucleotide microarrays, we show that around 400 genes
were significantly (P<0.001) altered in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC)
in response to either single-stranded (ss) or double-stranded (ds) small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs). Most of the upregulated genes encode proteins involved
in innate and adaptive immune responses, including proinflammatory cytokines,
interferons, chemokines and chemokine receptors. Genes encoding proteins involved
in lymphocyte activation (e.g. CD80, CD40, and CD69) and in regulation of the
immune responses (e.g. SOCS proteins) were upregulated. Also, genes encoding for 
antiviral proteins (Mx1, Mx2, TRIM proteins), and interferon regulatory factors
(e.g. IRF7) were upregulated. Around 90% of the genes (140 out of 160) affected
by R-848, a specific ligand for TLR7 and TLR8, were also affected by ss siRNAs or
ds siRNAs, indicating that the signaling pathways activated by R-848 are also
activated by immunostimulatory siRNAs. In addition to immunoactivation via TLRs, 
ss siRNAs and ds siRNAs induced TLR-independent gene alterations. Surprisingly,
replacement of only uridine bases with either 2'-fluoro or 2'-O-methyl modified
counterparts abrogated all the observed bystander effects. Collectively, these
microarray data offer for the first time an insight into human PMBC response to
immunostimulatory RNAs such as ss siRNAs and ds siRNAs. The data should help to
define strategies to either enhance or avoid the non-specific effects of siRNAs
in order to develop safe therapeutics.

PMID: 17054988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Sci STKE. 2006 Oct 17;2006(357):re13.

Regulation and function of IKK and IKK-related kinases.

Häcker H(1), Karin M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 
North Lauderdale Street, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. hans.haecker@stjude.org

Members of the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) family of dimeric transcription
factors (TFs) regulate expression of a large number of genes involved in immune
responses, inflammation, cell survival, and cancer. NF-kappaB TFs are rapidly
activated in response to various stimuli, including cytokines, infectious agents,
and radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks. In nonstimulated cells, some
NF-kappaB TFs are bound to inhibitory IkappaB proteins and are thereby
sequestered in the cytoplasm. Activation leads to phosphorylation of IkappaB
proteins and their subsequent recognition by ubiquitinating enzymes. The
resulting proteasomal degradation of IkappaB proteins liberates IkappaB-bound
NF-kappaB TFs, which translocate to the nucleus to drive expression of target
genes. Two protein kinases with a high degree of sequence similarity, IKKalpha
and IKKbeta, mediate phosphorylation of IkappaB proteins and represent a
convergence point for most signal transduction pathways leading to NF-kappaB
activation. Most of the IKKalpha and IKKbeta molecules in the cell are part of
IKK complexes that also contain a regulatory subunit called IKKgamma or NEMO.
Despite extensive sequence similarity, IKKalpha and IKKbeta have largely distinct
functions, due to their different substrate specificities and modes of
regulation. IKKbeta (and IKKgamma) are essential for rapid NF-kappaB activation
by proinflammatory signaling cascades, such as those triggered by tumor necrosis 
factor alpha (TNFalpha) or lipopolysaccharide (LPS). In contrast, IKKalpha
functions in the activation of a specific form of NF-kappaB in response to a
subset of TNF family members and may also serve to attenuate IKKbeta-driven
NF-kappaB activation. Moreover, IKKalpha is involved in keratinocyte
differentiation, but this function is independent of its kinase activity. Several
years ago, two protein kinases, one called IKKepsilon or IKK-i and one variously 
named TBK1 (TANK-binding kinase), NAK (NF-kappaB-activated kinase), or T2K
(TRAF2-associated kinase), were identified that exhibit structural similarity to 
IKKalpha and IKKbeta. These protein kinases are important for the activation of
interferon response factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF7, TFs that play key roles in the
induction of type I interferon (IFN-I). Together, the IKKs and IKK-related
kinases are instrumental for activation of the host defense system. This Review
focuses on the functions of IKK and IKK-related kinases and the molecular
mechanisms that regulate their activities.

PMID: 17047224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Nat Genet. 2006 Nov;38(11):1335-40. Epub 2006 Oct 15.

Abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial morphogenesis in mice deficient for
interferon regulatory factor 6 (Irf6).

Ingraham CR(1), Kinoshita A, Kondo S, Yang B, Sajan S, Trout KJ, Malik MI,
Dunnwald M, Goudy SL, Lovett M, Murray JC, Schutte BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Transcription factor paralogs may share a common role in staged or overlapping
expression in specific tissues, as in the Hox family. In other cases, family
members have distinct roles in a range of embryologic, differentiation or
response pathways (as in the Tbx and Pax families). For the interferon regulatory
factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, mice deficient in Irf1, Irf2, Irf3,
Irf4, Irf5, Irf7, Irf8 or Irf9 have defects in the immune response but show no
embryologic abnormalities. Mice deficient for Irf6 have not been reported, but in
humans, mutations in IRF6 cause two mendelian orofacial clefting syndromes, and
genetic variation in IRF6 confers risk for isolated cleft lip and palate. Here we
report that mice deficient for Irf6 have abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial
development. Histological and gene expression analyses indicate that the primary 
defect is in keratinocyte differentiation and proliferation. This study describes
a new role for an IRF family member in epidermal development.

PMCID: PMC2082114
PMID: 17041601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 10;103(41):15136-41. Epub 2006 Oct 3.

Evidence for licensing of IFN-gamma-induced IFN regulatory factor 1 transcription
factor by MyD88 in Toll-like receptor-dependent gene induction program.

Negishi H(1), Fujita Y, Yanai H, Sakaguchi S, Ouyang X, Shinohara M, Takayanagi
H, Ohba Y, Taniguchi T, Honda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The recognition of microbial components by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) initiates
signal transduction pathways, which trigger the expression of a series of target 
genes. It has been reported that TLR signaling is enhanced by cytokines such as
IFN-gamma, but the mechanisms underlying this enhancement remain unclear. The
MyD88 adaptor, which is essential for signaling by many TLRs, recruits members of
the IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, such as IRF5 and
IRF7, to evoke the activation of TLR target genes. In this study we demonstrate
that IRF1, which is induced by IFN-gamma, also interacts with and is activated by
MyD88 upon TLR activation. We provide evidence that MyD88-associated IRF1
migrates into the nucleus more efficiently than non-MyD88-associated IRF1 and
that this IRF1 selectively participates in the TLR-dependent gene induction
program. The critical role of MyD88-dependent "IRF1 licensing" is underscored by 
the observation that the induction of a specific gene subset downstream of the
TLR-MyD88 pathway, such as IFN-beta, inducible NO synthase, and IL-12p35, are
impaired in Irf1-deficient cells. Thus, our present study places IRF1 as an
additional member participating in MyD88 signaling and provides a mechanistic
insight into the enhancement of the TLR-dependent gene induction program by
IFN-gamma.

PMCID: PMC1586247
PMID: 17018642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nat Immunol. 2006 Oct;7(10):1074-81. Epub 2006 Sep 10.

The human adaptor SARM negatively regulates adaptor protein TRIF-dependent
Toll-like receptor signaling.

Carty M(1), Goodbody R, Schröder M, Stack J, Moynagh PN, Bowie AG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Oct;7(10):1023-5.

Toll-like receptors discriminate between different pathogen-associated molecules 
and activate signaling cascades that lead to immune responses. The specificity of
Toll-like receptor signaling occurs by means of adaptor proteins containing
Toll-interleukin 1 receptor (TIR) domains. Activating functions have been
assigned to four TIR adaptors: MyD88, Mal, TRIF and TRAM. Here we characterize a 
fifth TIR adaptor, SARM, as a negative regulator of TRIF-dependent Toll-like
receptor signaling. Expression of SARM blocked gene induction 'downstream' of
TRIF but not of MyD88. SARM associated with TRIF, and 'knockdown' of endogenous
SARM expression by interfering RNA led to enhanced TRIF-dependent cytokine and
chemokine induction. Thus, the fifth mammalian TIR adaptor SARM is a negative
regulator of Toll-like receptor signaling.

PMID: 16964262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Endotoxin Res. 2006;12(4):246-50.

The interferon response to bacterial and viral infections.

Pietras EM(1), Saha SK, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California Los Angeles, 90095, USA.

Type I interferons (IFNs) were first described several decades ago as soluble
factors that were capable of 'interfering' with viral replication when added to
infected cells. Type I IFNs have been shown to be induced by recognition of viral
DNA and RNA via three distinct pathways: (i) a TRIF-dependent pathway in
macrophages via TLRs 3 and 4; (ii) a MyD88-dependent pathway in plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (pDCs) via TLRs 7/8 and 9; and (iii) an intracellular recognition
pathway utilizing the cytoplasmic receptors RIG-I/MDA5. Interestingly, these
viral recognition pathways converge on TRAF3, which induces interferon through
the activation of IRF3 or IRF7 by the TBK-1 and IKKi complexes. While type I IFN 
has been traditionally associated with antiviral responses, recent studies have
demonstrated that many bacteria also induce type I interferon responses. The
mechanisms of type I IFN induction and its role in host defense, however, are
largely unclear. Studies with the Gram-positive intracellular bacterium Listeria 
monocytogenes indicated that it may trigger type I IFN induction through novel
TLR-independent intracellular receptors and type I IFN may play a detrimental
role to host response against listerial infection. In this article, we summarize 
some of these findings and discuss the functional differences of type I IFNs in
bacterial and viral infections.

PMID: 16953977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Comp Immunol. 2007;31(3):232-43. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

The innate immune response to grass carp hemorrhagic virus (GCHV) in cultured
Carassius auratus blastulae (CAB) cells.

Zhang YB(1), Jiang J, Chen YD, Zhu R, Shi Y, Zhang QY, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, PR China.

Virus infection of mammalian cells activates an innate antiviral immune response 
characterized by production of interferon (IFN) and the subsequent
transcriptional upregulation of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) by the JAK-STAT
signaling pathway. Here, we report that a fish cell line, crucian carp (Carassius
auratus L.) blastulae embryonic (CAB) cells, can produce IFN activity and then
form an antiviral state after infection with UV-inactivated grass carp
hemorrhagic virus (GCHV), a double-stranded (ds) RNA virus. From UV-inactivated
GCHV-infected CAB cells, 15 pivotal genes were cloned and sequenced, and all of
them were shown to be involved in IFN antiviral innate immune response. These IFN
system genes include the dsRNA signal sensing factor TLR3, IFN, IFN signal
transduction factor STAT1, IFN regulatory factor IRF7, putative IFN antiviral
effectors Mx1, Mx2, PKR-like, Viperin, IFI56, and other IFN stimulated genes
(ISGs) IFI58, ISG15-1, ISG15-2, USP18, Gig1 and Gig2. The identified fish IFN
system genes were highly induced by active GCHV, UV-inactivated GCHV, CAB IFN or 
poly(I).poly(C), and showed similar expression patterns to mammals. The data
indicate that an IFN antiviral innate immune response similar to that in mammals 
exists in the UV-inactivated GCHV-infected CAB cells, and the IFN response
contributes to the formation of an antiviral state probably through JAK-STAT
signaling pathway. This study provides strong evidence for existence of IFN
antiviral innate immune response in fish, and will assist in elucidating the
origin and evolution of vertebrate IFN system.

PMID: 16887185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Jul;64(7):1231-5.

[Role of IPS-1 in type I IFN induction].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawai T(1), Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Akira Innate Immunity Project, ERATO, JST.

Type I interferons (IFNalpha/beta) are central mediators for antiviral responses.
Using a functional cloning strategy, we have identified a molecule designated
IPS-1. IPS-1 overexpression caused antiviral responses by producing type I IFN
and IFN-inducible genes through activation of IRF3, IRF7 and NF-kappaB. TBK1 and 
IKKi protein kinases were required for the IPS-1-mediated IFN induction. IPS-1
contains an N-terminal caspase recruiting domain (CARD)-like structure that
mediates interaction with the CARD of RIG-I and Mda5, cytoplasmic RNA helicases
sensing RNA viruses. Reduction of IPS-1 by siRNA blocked IFN induction by virus
infection. Thus, IPS-1 is an adapter that mediates RIG-I- and Mda5-dependent
antiviral responses.

PMID: 16841392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Korean Med Sci. 2006 Jun;21(3):379-84.

Colocalization of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) with latent membrane
protein 1 (LMP1) of Epstein-Barr virus.

Kim IW(1), Park HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Microbiology, College of Natural Resources, Yeungnam
University, Daegu, Korea.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is one of the transcriptional factors for
the activation of type I Interferon (IFN) genes. It is known that IRF7 and the
latent membrane protein 1 (LMP1) of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) are highly expressed
in EBV type III latency cells, and LMP1 induces mRNA expression of IRF7. In this 
study, the expression pattern of endogenous IRF7 was observed in several B cell
lines with or without EBV infection by immunofluorescence staining. IRF7 was
localized in the cytoplasm of EBV-negative B cells and EBV type I latency B cell 
lines. However, IRF7 was located both in the cytoplasm and nucleus of EBV type
III latency cell lines. In the Jijoye cell (type III latency cell), IRF7 was
colocalized with LMP1 in the cytoplasm in a capping configuration, and their
interaction was confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation of LMP1 and IRF7. This
colocalization was confirmed by co-transfection of IRF7 and LMP1 plasmids in
EBV-negative B cells. These results suggest that the IRF7 and LMP1 interact with 
each other, and this may relate to the mechanism whereby LMP1 exerts functional
effects in B-lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC2729938
PMID: 16778376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 28;281(30):21013-21. Epub 2006 May 31.

TLR8-mediated NF-kappaB and JNK activation are TAK1-independent and
MEKK3-dependent.

Qin J(1), Yao J, Cui G, Xiao H, Kim TW, Fraczek J, Wightman P, Sato S, Akira S,
Puel A, Casanova JL, Su B, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA.

TLR8-mediated NF-kappaB and IRF7 activation are abolished in human IRAK-deficient
293 cells and IRAK4-deficient fibroblast cells. Both wild-type and
kinase-inactive mutants of IRAK and IRAK4, respectively, restored TLR8-mediated
NF-kappaB and IRF7 activation in the IRAK- and IRAK4-deficient cells, indicating 
that the kinase activity of IRAK and IRAK4 is probably redundant for
TLR8-mediated signaling. We recently found that TLR8 mediates a unique NF-kappaB 
activation pathway in human 293 cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts,
accompanied only by IkappaBalpha phosphorylation and not IkappaBalpha
degradation, whereas interleukin (IL)-1 stimulation causes both IkappaBalpha
phosphorylation and degradation. The intermediate signaling events mediated by
IL-1 (including IRAK modifications and degradation and TAK1 activation) were not 
detected in cells stimulated by TLR8 ligands. TLR8 ligands trigger similar levels
of IkappaBalpha phosphorylation and NF-kappaB and JNK activation in TAK1(-/-)
mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) as compared with wild-type MEFs, whereas lack of 
TAK1 results in reduced IL-1-mediated NF-kappaB activation and abolished
IL-1-induced JNK activation. The above results indicate that although
TLR8-mediated NF-kappaB and JNK activation are IRAK-dependent, they do not
require IRAK modification and are TAK1-independent. On the other hand,
TLR8-mediated IkappaBalpha phosphorylation, NF-kappaB, and JNK activation are
completely abolished in MEKK3(-/-) MEFs, whereas IL-1-mediated signaling was only
moderately reduced in these deficient MEFs as compared with wild-type cells. The 
differences between IL-1R- and TLR8-mediated NF-kappaB activation are also
reflected at the level of IkappaB kinase (IKK) complex. TLR8 ligands induced
IKKgamma phosphorylation, whereas IKKalpha/beta phosphorylation and IKKgamma
ubiquitination that can be induced by IL-1 were not detected in cells treated
with TLR8 ligands. We postulate that TLR8-mediated MEKK3-dependent IKKgamma
phosphorylation might play an important role in the activation of IKK complex,
leading to IkappaBalpha phosphorylation.

PMID: 16737960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Hepatol Res. 2006 Aug;35(4):256-62. Epub 2006 May 30.

Dynamics of interferon-specific gene expression in peripheral blood of interferon
alfa-naïve patients with genotype 1 chronic hepatitis C infection treated with
albumin-interferon alfa.

Bain VG(1), Yoshida EM, Kaita KD, Swain MG, Heathcote EJ, Garcia A, Moore PA, Yu 
R, McHutchison JG, Subramanian GM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Albumin-interferon alfa (alb-IFN) is a novel recombinant protein derived from
IFNalpha-2b genetically fused to human albumin, which combines in a single
polypeptide the antiviral properties of IFNalpha with the long serum half-life of
albumin. Interferon alfa (IFNalpha) mediated biological responses stem from the
engagement of IFNalpha with its target receptor and subsequent modulation of
interferon-specific gene (ISG) expression. The dynamics of ISG expression were
evaluated in a Phase 2a study conducted in IFNalpha naïve patients with genotype 
1 chronic hepatitis C (CHC) treated with alb-IFN. Whole blood was obtained
pre-dose and on days 7 and 28 from 47 patients enrolled to receive two
subcutaneous injections of alb-IFN 14 days apart in five dose cohorts ranging
from 200 to1200mug. Gene expression of nine candidate genes including four ISGs
was determined by a TaqMan Real-time PCR assay. There was sustained >5-fold
median induction on days 7 and 28 of the ISG's- OAS1, IRF7, IFI44 and IFI27.
While all subjects showed a molecular response to alb-IFN, individual variability
in pre-treatment gene expression levels and fold of modulation during treatment
was observed. At days 7 and 28, induction of OAS1, IFI44 and IRF7 showed
significant pair-wise correlation in individual patients (r>0.7 and P<0.001).
There was no correlation of baseline expression or induction of gene expression
with antiviral response. In conclusion, alb-IFN demonstrated robust induction of 
ISG that was consistent with the molecular response associated with an IFNalpha.

PMID: 16731032  [PubMed]


103. Genes Dev. 2006 Apr 15;20(8):1028-42.

Cross-regulation between Notch and p63 in keratinocyte commitment to
differentiation.

Nguyen BC(1), Lefort K, Mandinova A, Antonini D, Devgan V, Della Gatta G, Koster 
MI, Zhang Z, Wang J, Tommasi di Vignano A, Kitajewski J, Chiorino G, Roop DR,
Missero C, Dotto GP.

Author information: 
(1)Cutaneous Biology Research Center, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Charlestown, Massachusetts 02129, USA, and Department of Biochemistry, University
of Lausanne, Switzerland.

Notch signaling promotes commitment of keratinocytes to differentiation and
suppresses tumorigenesis. p63, a p53 family member, has been implicated in
establishment of the keratinocyte cell fate and/or maintenance of epithelial
self-renewal. Here we show that p63 expression is suppressed by Notch1 activation
in both mouse and human keratinocytes through a mechanism independent of cell
cycle withdrawal and requiring down-modulation of selected interferon-responsive 
genes, including IRF7 and/or IRF3. In turn, elevated p63 expression counteracts
the ability of Notch1 to restrict growth and promote differentiation. p63
functions as a selective modulator of Notch1-dependent transcription and
function, with the Hes-1 gene as one of its direct negative targets. Thus, a
complex cross-talk between Notch and p63 is involved in the balance between
keratinocyte self-renewal and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1472299
PMID: 16618808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nat Immunol. 2006 May;7(5):498-506. Epub 2006 Apr 9.

Osteopontin expression is essential for interferon-alpha production by
plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Shinohara ML(1), Lu L, Bu J, Werneck MB, Kobayashi KS, Glimcher LH, Cantor H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology & AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard 
School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 May;7(5):441-3.

The observation that the T-bet transcription factor allows tissue-specific
upregulation of intracellular osteopontin (Opn-i) in plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(pDCs) suggests that Opn might contribute to the expression of interferon-alpha
(IFN-alpha) in those cells. Here we show that Opn deficiency substantially
reduced Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9)-dependent IFN-alpha responses but spared
expression of transcription factor NF-kappaB-dependent proinflammatory cytokines.
Shortly after TLR9 engagement, colocalization of Opn-i and the adaptor molecule
MyD88 was associated with induction of transcription factor IRF7-dependent
IFN-alpha gene expression, whereas deficient expression of Opn-i was associated
with defective nuclear translocation of IRF7 in pDCs. The importance of the
Opn-IFN-alpha pathway was emphasized by its essential involvement in
cross-presentation in vitro and in anti-herpes simplex virus 1 IFN-alpha response
in vivo. The finding that Opn-i selectively coupled TLR9 signaling to expression 
of IFN-alpha but not to that of other proinflammatory cytokines provides new
molecular insight into the biology of pDCs.

PMCID: PMC3725256
PMID: 16604075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Pathol. 2006 Apr;168(4):1227-40.

Type I interferon production by tertiary lymphoid tissue developing in response
to 2,6,10,14-tetramethyl-pentadecane (pristane).

Nacionales DC(1), Kelly KM, Lee PY, Zhuang H, Li Y, Weinstein JS, Sobel E, Kuroda
Y, Akaogi J, Satoh M, Reeves WH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Clinical Immunology, University of Florida, PO
Box 100221, Gainesville, FL 32610-0221, USA.

Lymphoid neogenesis is associated with antibody-mediated autoimmune diseases such
as Sjogren's syndrome and rheumatoid arthritis. Although systemic lupus
erythematosus is the prototypical B-cell-mediated autoimmune disease, the role of
lymphoid neogenesis in its pathogenesis is unknown. Intraperitoneal injection of 
2,6,10,14-tetramethyl-pentadecane (TMPD, pristane) or mineral oil causes
lipogranuloma formation in mice, but only TMPD-treated mice develop lupus. We
report that lipogranulomas are a form of lymphoid neogenesis. Immunoperoxidase
staining of lipogranulomas revealed B cells, CD4(+) T cells, and dendritic cells 
and in some cases organization into T- and B-cell zones. Lipogranulomas also
expressed the lymphoid chemokines CCL21, CCL19, CXCL13, CXCL12, and CCL22.
Expression of the type I interferon (IFN-I)-inducible genes Mx1, IRF7, IP-10, and
ISG-15 was greatly increased in TMPD- versus mineral oil-induced lipogranulomas. 
Dendritic cells from TMPD lipogranulomas underwent activation/maturation with
high CD86 and interleukin-12 expression. Magnetic bead depletion of dendritic
cells markedly diminished IFN-inducible gene (Mx1) expression. We conclude that
TMPD-induced lupus is associated with the formation of ectopic lymphoid tissue
containing activated dendritic cells producing IFN-I and interleukin-12. In view 
of the increased IFN-I production in systemic lupus erythematosus, these studies 
suggest that IFN-I from ectopic lymphoid tissue could play a role in the
pathogenesis of experimental lupus in mice.

PMCID: PMC1606560
PMID: 16565497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Virol. 2006 Apr;80(7):3515-22.

Tumor necrosis factor alpha enhances influenza A virus-induced expression of
antiviral cytokines by activating RIG-I gene expression.

Matikainen S(1), Sirén J, Tissari J, Veckman V, Pirhonen J, Severa M, Sun Q, Lin 
R, Meri S, Uzé G, Hiscott J, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland. sampsa.matikainen@ttl.fi

Epithelial cells of the lung are the primary targets for respiratory viruses.
Virus-carried single-stranded RNA (ssRNA) can activate Toll-like receptors (TLRs)
7 and 8, whereas dsRNA is bound by TLR3 and a cytoplasmic RNA helicase, retinoic 
acid-inducible protein I (RIG-I). This recognition leads to the activation of
host cell cytokine gene expression. Here we have studied the regulation of
influenza A and Sendai virus-induced alpha interferon (IFN-alpha), IFN-beta,
interleukin-28 (IL-28), and IL-29 gene expression in human lung A549 epithelial
cells. Sendai virus infection readily activated the expression of the IFN-alpha, 
IFN-beta, IL-28, and IL-29 genes, whereas influenza A virus-induced activation of
these genes was mainly dependent on pretreatment of A549 cells with IFN-alpha or 
tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha). IFN-alpha and TNF-alpha induced the
expression of the RIG-I, TLR3, MyD88, TRIF, and IRF7 genes, whereas no detectable
TLR7 and TLR8 was seen in A549 cells. TNF-alpha also strongly enhanced IKK
epsilon mRNA and protein expression. Ectopic expression of a constitutively
active form of RIG-I (deltaRIG-I) or IKK epsilon, but not that of TLR3, enhanced 
the expression of the IFN-beta, IL-28, and IL-29 genes. Furthermore, a
dominant-negative form of RIG-I inhibited influenza A virus-induced IFN-beta
promoter activity in TNF-alpha-pretreated cells. In conclusion, IFN-alpha and
TNF-alpha enhanced the expression of the components of TLR and RIG-I signaling
pathways, but RIG-I was identified as the central regulator of influenza A
virus-induced expression of antiviral cytokines in human lung epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC1440408
PMID: 16537619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell Res. 2006 Feb;16(2):141-7.

Antiviral innate immunity pathways.

Seth RB(1), Sun L, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Recent studies have uncovered two signaling pathways that activate the host
innate immunity against viral infection. One of the pathways utilizes members of 
the Toll-like receptor (TLR) family to detect viruses that enter the endosome
through endocytosis. The TLR pathway induces interferon production through
several signaling proteins that ultimately lead to the activation of the
transcription factors NF-kappaB, IRF3 and IRF7. The other antiviral pathway uses 
the RNA helicase RIG-I as the receptor for intracellular viral double-stranded
RNA. RIG-I activates NF-kappaB and IRFs through the recently identified adaptor
protein MAVS, a CARD domain containing protein that resides in the mitochondrial 
membrane. MAVS is essential for antiviral innate immunity, but it also serves as 
a target of Hepatitis C virus (HCV), which employs a viral protease to cleave
MAVS off the mitochondria, thereby allowing HCV to escape the host immune system.

PMID: 16474426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Mar 31;342(1):50-6. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Regulation of IRF7 through cell type-specific protein stability.

Prakash A(1), Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, NYU Cancer Institute, New York University School of
Medicine, 550 1(st) Ave MSB548, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a key component of the cellular response
to virus infection that culminates in physiologically relevant IFNalpha
production. We studied molecular mechanisms governing responses to respiratory
viral infection that are characterized by transient induction and subsequent
shut-off of interferon (IFN) gene expression. We asked whether alterations in
IRF7 protein stability occurred during virus infection that might contribute to
this regulation. To this end, we measured IRF7 half-life in various cell types
and found it to be short-lived, in marked contrast to the pronounced stability of
the related transcription factor, IRF3. Furthermore, virus infection accelerated 
IRF7 degradation in a proteosome-dependent manner in most cell types. However,
plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDC), which constitute the major circulating IFN
producing cell type, displayed a distinct pattern of regulation. Infection of
lymphoid tissues, where the majority of IRF7 is expressed in pDC, attenuated the 
normal proteosome-mediated degradation of IRF7, resulting in a long-lived
protein. Stabilization was partially stimulated by autocrine IFN as a positive
feedback mechanism, but was partially IFN independent. Thus, two distinct
posttranslational mechanisms regulate IRF7 activity in response to viral
infection, with protein turnover attenuating responses postinfection in most cell
types while infection-induced protein stabilization contributes to the heightened
IFN production characteristic of pDC.

PMCID: PMC1647301
PMID: 16472772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Hum Genet. 2006;51(4):368-74. Epub 2006 Jan 25.

Microarray analysis of promoter methylation in lung cancers.

Fukasawa M(1), Kimura M, Morita S, Matsubara K, Yamanaka S, Endo C, Sakurada A,
Sato M, Kondo T, Horii A, Sasaki H, Hatada I.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Science, Biosignal Genome Resource Center, Department of 
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Gunma University, 3-39-15 Showa-machi, Maebashi
371-8512, Japan.

Aberrant DNA methylation is an important event in carcinogenesis. Of the various 
regions of a gene that can be methylated in cancers, the promoter is the most
important for the regulation of gene expression. Here, we describe a microarray
analysis of DNA methylation in the promoter regions of genes using a newly
developed promoter-associated methylated DNA amplification DNA chip (PMAD). For
each sample, methylated Hpa II-resistant DNA fragments and Msp I-cleaved
(unmethylated+methylated) DNA fragments were amplified and labeled with Cy3 and
Cy5 respectively, then hybridized to a microarray containing the promoters of 288
cancer-related genes. Signals from Hpa II-resistant (methylated) DNA (Cy3) were
normalized to signals from Msp I-cleaved (unmethylated+methylated) DNA fragments 
(Cy5). Normalized signals from lung cancer cell lines were compared to signals
from normal lung cells. About 10.9% of the cancer-related genes were
hypermethylated in lung cancer cell lines. Notably, HIC1, IRF7, ASC, RIPK3,
RASSF1A, FABP3, PRKCDBP, and PAX3 genes were hypermethylated in most lung cancer 
cell lines examined. The expression profiles of these genes correlated to the
methylation profiles of the genes, indicating that the microarray analysis of DNA
methylation in the promoter region of the genes is convenient for epigenetic
study. Further analysis of primary tumors indicated that the frequency of
hypermethylation was high for ASC (82%) and PAX3 (86%) in all tumor types, and
high for RIPK3 in small cell carcinoma (57%). This demonstrates that our PMAD
method is effective at finding epigenetic changes during cancer.

PMID: 16435073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2006 Mar 15;173(6):653-8. Epub 2005 Dec 30.

Computational identification of key biological modules and transcription factors 
in acute lung injury.

Gharib SA(1), Liles WC, Matute-Bello G, Glenny RW, Martin TR, Altemeier WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
sagharib@u.washington.edu

RATIONALE: Mechanical ventilation augments the acute lung injury (ALI) caused by 
bacterial products. The molecular pathogenesis of this synergistic interaction
remains incompletely understood.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to develop a computational framework to systematically
identify gene regulatory networks activated in ALI.
METHODS: We have developed a mouse model in which the combination of mechanical
ventilation and intratracheal LPS produces significantly more injury to the lung 
than either insult alone. We used global gene ontology analysis to determine
overrepresented biological modules and computational transcription factor
analysis to identify putative regulatory factors involved in this model of ALI.
RESULTS: By integrating expression profiling with gene ontology and promoter
analysis, we constructed a large-scale regulatory modular map of the important
processes activated in ALI. This map assigned differentially expressed genes to
highly overrepresented biological modules, including "defense response," "immune 
response," and "oxidoreductase activity." These modules were then systematically 
incorporated into a gene regulatory network that consisted of putative
transcription factors, such as IFN-stimulated response element, IRF7, and Sp1,
that may regulate critical processes involved in the pathogenesis of ALI.
CONCLUSIONS: We present a novel, unbiased, and powerful computational approach to
investigate the synergistic effects of mechanical ventilation and LPS in
promoting ALI. Our methodology is applicable to any expression profiling
experiment involving eukaryotic organisms.

PMID: 16387799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Curr Opin Immunol. 2006 Feb;18(1):3-9. Epub 2005 Dec 15.

How Toll-like receptors signal: what we know and what we don't know.

O'Neill LA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biochemistry and Immunology, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland.
laoneill@tcd.ie

Signal transduction pathways activated by Toll-like receptors (TLRs) have
continued to be a major focus of research for investigators interested in the
initiation of innate immune responses and the induction of pro-inflammatory
cytokines and type I interferons during infection. Biochemical details of the
major signalling pathways have now been obtained, and the specific signalling
pathways activated by different TLRs are being elucidated. New insights into the 
activation of IRF family members, notably IRF3, IRF5 and IRF7, have been
obtained, and interesting spatiotemporal aspects of signalling by MyD88 leading
to IRF7 activation revealed. Adapters in TLR signalling are targets for
inhibition, both by endogenous regulators and by virally derived proteins.
Selective targeting of pathways by anti-inflammatory glucocorticoids also
indicates the potential for modulating TLR signalling therapeutically.

PMID: 16343886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nature. 2006 Jan 12;439(7073):208-11. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Critical role of TRAF3 in the Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent
antiviral response.

Oganesyan G(1), Saha SK, Guo B, He JQ, Shahangian A, Zarnegar B, Perry A, Cheng
G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California, Los Angeles, 609 Charles E. Young Dr. East, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

Type I interferon (IFN) production is a critical component of the innate defence 
against viral infections. Viral products induce strong type I IFN responses
through the activation of Toll-like receptors (TLRs) and intracellular
cytoplasmic receptors such as protein kinase R (PKR). Here we demonstrate that
cells lacking TRAF3, a member of the TNF receptor-associated factor family, are
defective in type I IFN responses activated by several different TLRs.
Furthermore, we show that TRAF3 associates with the TLR adaptors TRIF and IRAK1, 
as well as downstream IRF3/7 kinases TBK1 and IKK-epsilon, suggesting that TRAF3 
serves as a critical link between TLR adaptors and downstream regulatory kinases 
important for IRF activation. In addition to TLR stimulation, we also show that
TRAF3-deficient fibroblasts are defective in their type I IFN response to direct 
infection with vesicular stomatitis virus, indicating that TRAF3 is also an
important component of TLR-independent viral recognition pathways. Our data
demonstrate that TRAF3 is a major regulator of type I IFN production and the
innate antiviral response.

PMID: 16306936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 27;281(4):2095-103. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Negative regulation of the retinoic acid-inducible gene I-induced antiviral state
by the ubiquitin-editing protein A20.

Lin R(1), Yang L, Nakhaei P, Sun Q, Sharif-Askari E, Julkunen I, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
and Department of Microbiology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3T 1E2,
Canada. rongtuan.lin@mcgill.ca

Activation of the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 3 and 7 transcription
factors is essential for the induction of type I interferon (IFN) and development
of the innate antiviral response. Retinoic acid-inducible gene I has been shown
to contribute to virus-induced IFN production independent of the Toll-like
receptor pathways in response to a variety of RNA viruses and double-stranded
RNA. In the present study, we demonstrate that the NF-kappaB-inducible,
anti-apoptotic protein A20 efficiently blocks RIG-I-mediated activation of
NF-kappaB-, IRF-3-, and IRF-7-dependent promoters but only weakly interferes with
TRIF-TLR-3-mediated IFN activation. Expression of A20 completely blocked CARD
domain containing DeltaRIG-I-induced IRF-3 Ser-396 phosphorylation,
homodimerization, and DNA binding. The level of A20 inhibition was upstream of
the TBK1/IKKepsilon kinases that phosphorylate IRF3 and IRF7 and paradoxically,
A20 selectively degraded the TRIF protein but not RIG-I. A20 possesses two
ubiquitin-editing domains, an N-terminal deubiquitination domain and a C-terminal
ubiquitin ligase domain consisting of seven zinc finger domains. Deletion of the 
N-terminal de-ubiquitination domain had no significant effect on the inhibitory
effect of A20, whereas deletion or mutation of zinc finger motif 7 ablated the
inhibitory function of A20 on IRF- or NF-kappaB-mediated gene expression.
Furthermore, cells stably expressing the active form of RIG-I induced an
antiviral state that interfered with replication of vesicular stomatitis virus,
an effect that was reversed by stable co-expression of A20. These results suggest
that the virus-inducible, NF-kappaB-dependent activation of A20 functions as a
negative regulator of RIG-I-mediated induction of the antiviral state.

PMID: 16306043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Exp Med. 2005 Nov 21;202(10):1333-9.

Toll-like receptor-independent gene induction program activated by mammalian DNA 
escaped from apoptotic DNA degradation.

Okabe Y(1), Kawane K, Akira S, Taniguchi T, Nagata S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

Deoxyribonuclease (DNase) II in macrophages cleaves the DNA of engulfed apoptotic
cells and of nuclei expelled from erythroid precursor cells. DNase II-deficient
mouse embryos accumulate undigested DNA in macrophages, and die in feto because
of the activation of the interferon beta (IFNbeta) gene. Here, we found that the 
F4/80-positive macrophages in DNase II(-/-) fetal liver specifically produce a
set of cytokines such as IFNbeta, TNFalpha, and CXCL10. Whereas, IFN-inducible
genes (2'5'-oligo(A) synthetase, IRF7, and ISG15) were expressed not only in
macrophages but also in other F4/80-negative cells. When DNase II(-/-)
macrophages or embryonal fibroblasts engulfed apoptotic cells, they expressed the
IFNbeta and CXCL10 genes. The ablation of Toll-like receptor (TLR) 3 and 9, or
their adaptor molecules (MyD88 and TRIF), had no effect on the lethality of the
DNase II(-/-) mice. These results indicate that there is a TLR-independent
sensing mechanism to activate the innate immunity for the endogenous DNA escaping
lysosomal degradation.

PMCID: PMC2212973
PMID: 16301743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Virology. 2006 Feb 5;345(1):96-104. Epub 2005 Oct 25.

TNF-alpha and IFN-alpha enhance influenza-A-virus-induced chemokine gene
expression in human A549 lung epithelial cells.

Veckman V(1), Osterlund P, Fagerlund R, Melén K, Matikainen S, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Mannerheimintie 166, FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland. ville.veckman@ktl.fi

Lung epithelial cells are the primary cellular targets for respiratory virus
pathogens such as influenza and parainfluenza viruses. Here, we have analyzed
influenza A, influenza B and Sendai virus-induced chemokine response in human
A549 lung epithelial cells. Influenza virus infection resulted in low CCL2/MCP-1,
CCL5/RANTES, CXCL8/IL-8 and CXCL10/IP-10 production at late times of infection.
However, when cells were pretreated with TNF-alpha or IFN-alpha,
influenza-A-virus-induced chemokine production was greatly enhanced. Cytokine
pretreatment resulted in enhanced expression of RIG-I, IKKepsilon, interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)1, IRF7 and p50 proteins. Most importantly,
influenza-A-virus-induced DNA binding of IRF1, IRF3, IRF7 and NF-kappaB onto
CXCL10 ISRE and NF-kappaB elements, respectively, was markedly enhanced in
cytokine-pretreated cells. Our results suggest that IFN-alpha and TNF-alpha have 
a significant role in priming epithelial cells for higher cytokine and chemokine 
production in influenza A virus infection.

PMID: 16253303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Gen Virol. 2005 Oct;86(Pt 10):2697-702.

The Bovine herpesvirus 1 gene encoding infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) can
inhibit interferon-dependent transcription in the absence of other viral genes.

Henderson G(1), Zhang Y, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Biomedical Sciences, Nebraska Center for
Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68503, USA.

The infected cell protein 0 (bICP0) encoded by Bovine herpesvirus 1 (BHV-1)
stimulates viral gene expression and productive infection. As bICP0 is expressed 
constitutively during productive infection, it is considered to be the major
viral regulatory protein. Like other alphaherpesvirus ICP0 homologues, bICP0
contains a zinc RING finger near its N terminus that activates transcription and 
regulates subcellular localization. In this study, evidence is provided that
bICP0 represses the human beta interferon (IFN-beta) promoter and a simple
promoter with consensus IFN-stimulated response elements following stimulation
with double-stranded RNA (polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid), IFN regulatory factor
3 (IRF3) or IRF7. bICP0 also inhibits the ability of two protein kinases (TBK1
and IKK epsilon) to activate IFN-beta promoter activity. The zinc RING finger is 
necessary for inhibiting IFN-dependent transcription in certain cell types.
Collectively, these studies suggest that bICP0 activates productive infection by 
stimulating viral gene expression and inhibiting IFN-dependent transcription.

PMID: 16186222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Hepatology. 2005 Oct;42(4):819-27.

Hepatitis C virus inhibits intracellular interferon alpha expression in human
hepatic cell lines.

Zhang T(1), Lin RT, Li Y, Douglas SD, Maxcey C, Ho C, Lai JP, Wang YJ, Wan Q, Ho 
WZ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergy & Immunology, Joseph Stokes Jr. Research Institute at The 
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The chronicity of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection raises the question of how
HCV is able to persist in hepatic cells. We show that human primary hepatocytes
and human hepatic cell lines (Huh7 and HepG2) spontaneously produce interferon
(IFN)-alpha that is inhibited in the HCV replicon cells (Huh.8 and FCA-1).
Silencing IFN-alpha gene expression by IFN-alpha small interfering RNA (siRNA) in
the HCV replicon cells resulted in increased HCV replicon expression. The
activation of IFN-alpha expression by interferon regulatory factor (IRF-7) led to
the inhibition of HCV replicon expression, whereas the anti-IFN-alpha receptor
antibody could partially block IRF-7-mediated HCV replicon inhibition. In
addition, the blockade of IFN-alpha receptor by anti-IFN-alpha receptor antibody 
on the replicon cells increased HCV replicon expression. Among the HCV
nonstructural (NS) proteins tested, NS5A is the most potent inhibitor of
IFN-alpha expression by the hepatic cells. Investigation of the mechanism of HCV 
action on IFN-alpha showed that IRF-7-induced IFN-alpha promoter activation was
inhibited in the HCV replicon cells. Furthermore, IRF-7 expression was restricted
in the HCV replicon cells. In conclusion, we provide direct evidence that HCV
undermines the intracellular innate immunity of the target cells, which may
account for HCV persistence in hepatic cells.

PMID: 16175599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Mol Cell Probes. 2005 Oct;19(5):341-8.

Identification of novel genes in the memory response to Brucella infection by
cDNA arrays.

Paranavitana CM(1), Zelazowska E, Das R, Izadjoo M, Jett M, Hoover D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacterial Diseases, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research,
Building 503, Forest Glen, Silver Spring, MD 20910, USA.
chrysanthi.paranvitana@na.amedd.army.mil

This study investigated memory responses in immune mice spleen cells to
brucellosis by gene expression utilizing cDNA micro arrays. Out of a total of
1176 cDNA's 21 genes were differentially regulated in three independent
experiments, and generally supported a Th1 type immune response. 10 genes were
validated by real time PCR, and 3 genes (CD 86, CD 40 L and CD 132) were also
analyzed by Flow Cytometry for surface protein expression. We extended these
findings by studying the expression of five selected genes (IRF 1, SOCS 1, IL 2
R, IRF 7, and CXCR 4) in two independent groups of Brucella immunized mice. In
this study we show the potential application of utilizing gene arrays to identify
and establish new correlates of protection against a cell mediated immune
response.

PMID: 16146685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cell. 2005 Sep 9;122(5):707-21.

Molecular determinants of crosstalk between nuclear receptors and toll-like
receptors.

Ogawa S(1), Lozach J, Benner C, Pascual G, Tangirala RK, Westin S, Hoffmann A,
Subramaniam S, David M, Rosenfeld MG, Glass CK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

Nuclear receptors (NRs) repress transcriptional responses to diverse signaling
pathways as an essential aspect of their biological activities, but mechanisms
determining the specificity and functional consequences of transrepression remain
poorly understood. Here, we report signal- and gene-specific repression of
transcriptional responses initiated by engagement of toll-like receptors (TLR) 3,
4, and 9 in macrophages. The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) represses a large set
of functionally related inflammatory response genes by disrupting p65/interferon 
regulatory factor (IRF) complexes required for TLR4- or TLR9-dependent, but not
TLR3-dependent, transcriptional activation. This mechanism requires signaling
through MyD88 and enables the GR to differentially regulate pathogen-specific
programs of gene expression. PPARgamma and LXRs repress overlapping
transcriptional targets by p65/IRF3-independent mechanisms and cooperate with the
GR to synergistically transrepress distinct subsets of TLR-responsive genes.
These findings reveal combinatorial control of homeostasis and immune responses
by nuclear receptors and suggest new approaches for treatment of inflammatory
diseases.

PMCID: PMC1430687
PMID: 16143103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Virol. 2005 Sep;79(18):11671-6.

Interferon regulatory factor 5 represses expression of the Epstein-Barr virus
oncoprotein LMP1: braking of the IRF7/LMP1 regulatory circuit.

Ning S(1), Huye LE, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, School
of Medicine, Campus Box 7295, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

We have reported evidence for a positive regulatory circuit between interferon
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) and the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) oncoprotein 1 (LMP1) 
(S. Ning, A. M. Hahn, and J. S. Pagano, J. Virol. 77:9359-9368, 2003). To explore
a possible braking mechanism for this circuit, several type II EBV-infected cell 
lines that express different levels of LMP1 and IRF7 proteins and therefore are
convenient for studying modulation of expression of LMP1 were analyzed.
Endogenous levels of IRF7 and LMP1 were directly correlated. Transient expression
of an IRF7 dominant-negative mutant decreased LMP1 levels. Endogenous IRF5 and
IRF7 proteins were shown to physically associate in EBV-positive cells. Transient
expression of IRF5 decreased activation of the LMP1 promoter by IRF7 in a
dose-dependent manner. Finally, transfection of either an IRF5 dominant-negative 
construct or IRF5 small interfering RNA in these cells resulted in increases in
endogenous levels of LMP1. These results indicate that IRF5 can downregulate
IRF7's induction of expression of LMP1 most likely by interacting with IRF7 and
provide a means of modulating a regulatory circuit between IRF7 and LMP1.

PMCID: PMC1212628
PMID: 16140744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nat Immunol. 2005 Oct;6(10):981-8. Epub 2005 Aug 28.

IPS-1, an adaptor triggering RIG-I- and Mda5-mediated type I interferon
induction.

Kawai T(1), Takahashi K, Sato S, Coban C, Kumar H, Kato H, Ishii KJ, Takeuchi O, 
Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Exploratory Research for Advanced Technology, Japan Science and Technology
Agency.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2005 Nov;6(11):1074-6.

Type I interferons are central mediators for antiviral responses. Using
high-throughput functional screening of interferon inducers, we have identified
here a molecule we call interferon-beta promoter stimulator 1 (IPS-1).
Overexpression of IPS-1 induced type I interferon and interferon-inducible genes 
through activation of IRF3, IRF7 and NF-kappaB transcription factors. TBK1 and
IKKi protein kinases were required for the IPS-1-mediated interferon induction.
IPS-1 contained an N-terminal CARD-like structure that mediated interaction with 
the CARD of RIG-I and Mda5, which are cytoplasmic RNA helicases that sense viral 
infection. 'Knockdown' of IPS-1 by small interfering RNA blocked interferon
induction by virus infection. Thus, IPS-1 is an adaptor involved in RIG-I- and
Mda5-mediated antiviral immune responses.

PMID: 16127453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cell. 2005 Sep 9;122(5):669-82.

Identification and characterization of MAVS, a mitochondrial antiviral signaling 
protein that activates NF-kappaB and IRF 3.

Seth RB(1), Sun L, Ea CK, Chen ZJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Biology, University
of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2005 Sep 9;122(5):645-7.

Viral infection triggers host innate immune responses through activation of the
transcription factors NF-kappaB and IRF 3, which coordinately regulate the
expression of type-I interferons such as interferon-beta (IFN-beta). Herein, we
report the identification of a novel protein termed MAVS (mitochondrial antiviral
signaling), which mediates the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF 3 in response to
viral infection. Silencing of MAVS expression through RNA interference abolishes 
the activation of NF-kappaB and IRF 3 by viruses, thereby permitting viral
replication. Conversely, overexpression of MAVS induces the expression of
IFN-beta through activation of NF-kappaB and IRF 3, thus boosting antiviral
immunity. Epistasis experiments show that MAVS is required for the
phosphorylation of IRF 3 and IkappaB and functions downstream of RIG-I, an
intracellular receptor for viral RNA. MAVS contains an N-terminal CARD-like
domain and a C-terminal transmembrane domain, both of which are essential for
MAVS signaling. The transmembrane domain targets MAVS to the mitochondria,
implicating a new role of mitochondria in innate immunity.

PMID: 16125763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Gastroenterology. 2005 Aug;129(2):713-7.

Analysis of the biliary transcriptome in experimental biliary atresia.

Carvalho E(1), Liu C, Shivakumar P, Sabla G, Aronow B, Bezerra JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and Department of Pediatrics,
University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Discovery of the pathogenic mechanisms of biliary atresia has 
been limited by the inability to study extrahepatic biliary tissues from patients
at early phases of disease. Here, we used a rotavirus-induced model of biliary
atresia to investigate the entire biliary transcriptome for molecular networks
activated at the onset and different phases of progression to duct obstruction.
METHODS: We injected Balb/c mice with saline or rotavirus intraperitoneally
within 24 hours of birth, microdissected the gallbladder and extrahepatic bile
ducts en bloc 3, 7, and 14 days later, generated biotinylated RNA pools, and
hybridized them against microarrays containing 45,101 gene products.
RESULTS: Data filtering, cluster analysis, and functional assignment of the gene 
expression platform revealed 2 unique patterns of expression. The first was an
overarching expression of genes regulating immunity, enzymes, and structural
proteins at all phases of atresia. Within this pattern, the sequential expression
of the interferon inducers Irf7 and Irf9 at the onset of injury, and
interferon-gamma and interferon-gamma-activated genes (Stat1, Igtp, Cxcl9,
Cxcl10) at the time of duct obstruction, pointed to a prominent proinflammatory
circuit. The second was the time-restricted expression of genes regulating
biological networks previously unrecognized in biliary atresia, such as the
complement components C3ar-1 and C1q-alpha/beta.
CONCLUSIONS: The coordinate expression of functionally related genes in the
biliary transcriptome underscores a predominant proinflammatory footprint and
provides a basis for identification of gene groups that may play regulatory roles
in the pathogenesis of duct injury and obstruction in experimental biliary
atresia.

PMID: 16083724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2005 Aug 3;97(15):1143-53.

Disease-independent skin recruitment and activation of plasmacytoid predendritic 
cells following imiquimod treatment.

Urosevic M(1), Dummer R, Conrad C, Beyeler M, Laine E, Burg G, Gilliet M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Gloriastrasse 31, 8091 
Zurich, Switzerland. Mirjana.Urosevic@usz.ch

BACKGROUND: Imiquimod, an immune response modifier that is used topically to
treat different types of skin cancer, induces the production of proinflammatory
cytokines that stimulate an antitumor immune response. We assessed
characteristics of the imiquimod-induced immune activation in epithelial and
lymphoproliferative neoplasias of human skin. We focused on plasmacytoid
predendritic cells (PDCs), the primary producer of interferon alpha (IFN-alpha)
after imiquimod activation in vitro.
METHODS: We used Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays to compare gene expression
profiles from tumors from 16 patients, 10 with superficial basal cell carcinomas 
(sBCCs), five with cutaneous T-cell lymphomas (CTCLs), and one with Bowen's
disease, before and after topical imiquimod treatment. We used quantitative
immunohistochemistry with PDC-specific antibodies against BDCA-2 and CD123 to
characterize the PDC population before and after imiquimod treatment in these
specimens. Activation status of PDCs from four sBCC patients was assessed by
intracellular IFN-alpha staining and flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Expression of various IFN-alpha-inducible genes (e.g., CIG5, G1P2, OASL,
IFIT1, STAT1, IFI35, OAS1, ISG20, MxA, and IRF7), the so-called IFN-alpha
signature, was increased similarly in both sBCC and CTCL lesions after imiquimod 
treatment. PDCs were recruited and activated in both lesion types, and they
produced IFN-alpha after imiquimod treatment in vivo (mean percentage of PDCs
producing IFN-alpha = 14.5%, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 4.9% to 24%; range = 
3.3%-27%, n = 4 lesions). Imiquimod induced similar immune activation patterns in
all three diseases, and these patterns were associated with the number of PDCs
recruited to the treatment site. Two imiquimod-treated sBCC patients who did not 
mount an inflammatory response to imiquimod and whose lesions lacked the
IFN-alpha signature after treatment had fewer PDCs in treated lesions compared
with other treated patients with such a response.
CONCLUSIONS: Imiquimod induces immune activation patterns that relate to the
number of the PDCs recruited to the treatment site, thus supporting the role of
PDC in responsiveness to imiquimod in humans.

PMID: 16077073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Virol. 2005 Aug;79(15):9608-17.

Gene expression and antiviral activity of alpha/beta interferons and
interleukin-29 in virus-infected human myeloid dendritic cells.

Osterlund P(1), Veckman V, Sirén J, Klucher KM, Hiscott J, Matikainen S, Julkunen
I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland.

Dendritic cells (DCs) respond to microbial infections by undergoing phenotypic
maturation and by producing multiple cytokines. In the present study, we analyzed
the ability of influenza A and Sendai viruses to induce DC maturation and
activate tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha), alpha/beta interferon
(IFN-alpha/beta), and IFN-like interleukin-28A/B (IFN-lambda2/3) and IL-29
(IFN-lambda1) gene expression in human monocyte-derived myeloid DCs (mDC). The
ability of influenza A virus to induce mDC maturation or enhance the expression
of TNF-alpha, IFN-alpha/beta, interleukin-28 (IL-28), and IL-29 genes was
limited, whereas Sendai virus efficiently induced mDC maturation and enhanced
cytokine gene expression. Influenza A virus-induced expression of TNF-alpha,
IFN-alpha, IFN-beta, IL-28, and IL-29 genes was, however, dramatically enhanced
when cells were pretreated with IFN-alpha. IFN-alpha priming led to increased
expression of Toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3), TLR7, TLR8, MyD88, TRIF, and IFN
regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) genes and enhanced influenza-induced phosphorylation
and DNA binding of IRF3. Influenza A virus also enhanced the binding of NF-kappaB
to the respective NF-kappaB elements of the promoters of IFN-beta and IL-29
genes. In mDC IL-29 induced MxA protein expression and possessed antiviral
activity against influenza A virus, although this activity was lower than that of
IFN-alpha or IFN-beta. Our results show that in human mDCs viruses can readily
induce the expression of IL-28 and IL-29 genes whose gene products are likely to 
contribute to the host antiviral response.

PMCID: PMC1181545
PMID: 16014923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Immunol. 2005 Jul 15;175(2):806-12.

Nitric oxide inhibits IFN-alpha production of human plasmacytoid dendritic cells 
partly via a guanosine 3',5'-cyclic monophosphate-dependent pathway.

Morita R(1), Uchiyama T, Hori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, 50 Shogoin Kawara-cho, Sayko-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

NO, a free radical gas, is known to be critically involved not only in vascular
relaxation but also in host defense. Besides direct bactericidal effects, NO has 
been shown to inhibit Th1 responses and modulate immune responses in vivo,
although the precise mechanism is unclear. In this study, we examined the effect 
of NO on human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) to explore the possibility
that NO might affect innate as well as adaptive immunity through pDCs. We found
that NO suppressed IFN-alpha production of pDCs partly via a cGMP-dependent
mechanism, which was accompanied by down-regulation of IFN regulatory factor 7
expression. Furthermore, treatment of pDCs with NO decreased production of IL-6
and TNF-alpha and up-regulated OX40 ligand expression. In accordance with these
changes, pDCs treated with NO plus CpG-oligodeoxynucleotide AAC-30 promoted
differentiation of naive CD4(+) T cells into a Th2 phenotype. Moreover, pDCs did 
not express inducible NO synthase even after treatment with AAC-30, LPS, and
several cytokines. These results suggest that exogenous NO and its second
messenger, cGMP, alter innate as well as adaptive immune response through
modulating the functions of pDCs and may be involved in the pathogenesis of
certain Th2-dominant allergic diseases.

PMID: 16002677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cell Res. 2005 Jun;15(6):407-22.

The host type I interferon response to viral and bacterial infections.

Perry AK(1), Chen G, Zheng D, Tang H, Cheng G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Type I interferons (IFN) are well studied cytokines with anti-viral and
immune-modulating functions. Type I IFNs are produced following viral infections,
but until recently, the mechanisms of viral recognition leading to IFN production
were largely unknown. Toll like receptors (TLRs) have emerged as key transducers 
of type I IFN during viral infections by recognizing various viral components.
Furthermore, much progress has been made in defining the signaling pathways
downstream of TLRs for type I IFN production. TLR7 and TLR9 have become apparent 
as universally important in inducing type I IFN during infection with most
viruses, particularly by plasmacytoid dendritic cells. New intracellular viral
pattern recognition receptors leading to type I IFN production have been
identified. Many bacteria can also induce the up-regulation of these cytokines.
Interestingly, recent studies have found a detrimental effect on host cells if
type I IFN is produced during infection with the intracellular gram-positive
bacterial pathogen, Listeria monocytogenes. This review will discuss the recent
advances made in defining the signaling pathways leading to type I IFN
production.

PMID: 15987599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Virol. 2005 Jun;79(12):7514-27.

Differential regulation of interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-7 and IRF-9 gene
expression in the central nervous system during viral infection.

Ousman SS(1), Wang J, Campbell IL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, G08 Maze Crescent, University
of Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are a family of transcription factors
involved in the regulation of the interferons (IFNs) and other genes that may
have an essential role in antiviral defense in the central nervous system,
although this is currently not well defined. Therefore, we examined the
regulation of IRF gene expression in the brain during viral infection. Several
IRF genes (IRF-2, -3, -5, -7, and -9) were expressed at low levels in the brain
of uninfected mice. Following intracranial infection with lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV), expression of the IRF-7 and IRF-9 genes increased 
significantly by day 2. IRF-7 and IRF-9 gene expression in the brain was
widespread at sites of LCMV infection, with the highest levels in infiltrating
mononuclear cells, microglia/macrophages, and neurons. IRF-7 and IRF-9 gene
expression was increased in LCMV-infected brain from IFN-gamma knockout (KO) but 
not IFN-alpha/betaR KO animals. In the brain, spleen, and liver or cultured glial
and spleen cells, IRF-7 but not IRF-9 gene expression increased with delayed
kinetics in the absence of STAT1 but not STAT2 following LCMV infection or
IFN-alpha treatment, respectively. The stimulation of IRF-7 gene expression by
IFN-alpha in glial cell culture was prevented by cycloheximide. Thus, (i) many of
the IRF genes were expressed constitutively in the mouse brain; (ii) the IRF-7
and IRF-9 genes were upregulated during viral infection, a process dependent on
IFN-alpha/beta but not IFN-gamma; and (iii) IRF-7 but not IRF-9 gene expression
can be stimulated in a STAT1-independent but STAT2-dependent fashion via
unidentified indirect pathways coupled to the activation of the IFN-alpha/beta
receptor.

PMCID: PMC1143633
PMID: 15919906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Arthritis Rheum. 2005 May;52(5):1504-16.

Ultraviolet radiation-induced injury, chemokines, and leukocyte recruitment: An
amplification cycle triggering cutaneous lupus erythematosus.

Meller S(1), Winterberg F, Gilliet M, Müller A, Lauceviciute I, Rieker J, Neumann
NJ, Kubitza R, Gombert M, Bünemann E, Wiesner U, Franken-Kunkel P, Kanzler H,
Dieu-Nosjean MC, Amara A, Ruzicka T, Lehmann P, Zlotnik A, Homey B.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Heine University, Dusseldorf, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the activation and recruitment pathways of relevant
leukocyte subsets during the initiation and amplification of cutaneous lupus
erythematosus (LE).
METHODS: Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was used to perform a
comprehensive analysis of all known chemokines and their receptors in cutaneous
LE lesions, and the cellular origin of these chemokines and receptors was
determined using immunohistochemistry. Furthermore, cytokine- and ultraviolet
(UV) light-mediated activation pathways of relevant chemokines were investigated 
in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: In the present study, we identified the CXCR3 ligands CXCL9
(interferon-gamma [IFNgamma]-induced monokine), CXCL10 (IFNgamma-inducible
protein 10), and CXCL11 (IFN-inducible T cell alpha chemoattractant) as being the
most abundantly expressed chemokine family members in cutaneous LE. Expression of
these ligands corresponded with the presence of a marked inflammatory infiltrate 
consisting of mainly CXCR3-expressing cells, including skin-homing lymphocytes
and blood dendritic cell antigen 2-positive plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDCs). 
Within cutaneous LE lesions, PDCs accumulated within the dermis and were
activated to produce type I IFN, as detected by the expression of the
IFNalpha-inducible genes IRF7 and MxA. IFNalpha, in turn, was a potent and rapid 
inducer of CXCR3 ligands in cellular constituents of the skin. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that the inflammatory CXCR3 ligands cooperate with the homeostatic
chemokine CXCL12 (stromal cell-derived factor 1) during the recruitment of
pathogenically relevant leukocyte subsets. Moreover, we showed that UVB
irradiation induces the release of CCL27 (cutaneous T cell-attracting chemokine) 
from epidermal compartments into dermal compartments and up-regulates the
expression of a distinct set of chemokines in keratinocytes.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our data suggest an amplification cycle in which UV
light-induced injury induces apoptosis, necrosis, and chemokine production. These
mechanisms, in turn, mediate the recruitment and activation of autoimmune T cells
and IFNalpha-producing PDCs, which subsequently release more effector cytokines, 
thus amplifying chemokine production and leukocyte recruitment, finally leading
to the development of a cutaneous LE phenotype.

PMID: 15880822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Nat Cell Biol. 2005 May;7(5):459.

IRF-7 triggers the interferon alarm.

Raftopoulou M.

PMID: 15867932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Exp Med. 2005 May 2;201(9):1435-46. Epub 2005 Apr 25.

A type I interferon autocrine-paracrine loop is involved in Toll-like
receptor-induced interleukin-12p70 secretion by dendritic cells.

Gautier G(1), Humbert M, Deauvieau F, Scuiller M, Hiscott J, Bates EE, Trinchieri
G, Caux C, Garrone P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immunological Research, Schering-Plough, 69571 Dardilly,
France.

Dendritic cells (DC) produce interleukin-12 (IL-12) in response to Toll-like
receptor (TLR) activation. Two major TLR signaling pathways participate in the
response to pathogens: the nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)-dependent pathway
leading to inflammatory cytokine secretion including IL-12 and the interferon
(IFN)-dependent pathway inducing type I IFN and IFN-regulated genes. Here we show
that the two pathways cooperate and are likely both necessary for inducing an
optimal response to pathogens. R-848/Resiquimod (TLR7 ligand in the mouse and
TLR7/8 ligand in human) synergized with poly(I:C) (TLR3 ligand) or
lipopolysaccharide (LPS; TLR4 ligand) in inducing high levels of bioactive
IL-12p70 secretion and IFN-beta mRNA accumulation by mouse bone marrow-derived DC
(BM-DC). Strikingly, IL-12p70 but not IL-12p40 secretion was strongly reduced in 
BM-DC from STAT1(-/-) and IFNAR(-/-) mice. STAT1 tyrosine-phosphorylation,
IL-12p35, and IFN-beta mRNA accumulation were strongly inhibited in IFNAR(-/-)
BM-DC activated with the TLR ligand combinations. Similar observation were
obtained in human TLR8-expressing monocyte-derived DC (moDC) using neutralizing
anti-IFNAR2 antibodies, although results also pointed to a possible involvement
of IFN-lambda1 (also known as IL-29). This suggests that TLR engagement on DC
induces endogenous IFNs that further synergize with the NF-kappaB pathway for
optimal IL-12p70 secretion. Moreover, analysis of interferon regulatory factors
(IRF) regulation in moDC suggests a role for IRF7/8 in mediating IRF3-independent
type I IFN and possibly IL-12p35 synthesis in response to TLR7/8.

PMCID: PMC2213193
PMID: 15851485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Thromb Haemost. 2005 Apr;3(4):799-800.

Inhibitor to factor VII in severe factor VII deficiency: detection and course of 
the inhibitory response.

Ingerslev J, Christiansen K, Sørensen B; International Registry on Factor VII
Deficiency (IRF7) Steering Committee.

PMID: 15842376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Virol. 2005 May;79(9):5241-8.

Transcriptional activation of alpha/beta interferon genes: interference by
nonsegmented negative-strand RNA viruses.

Conzelmann KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max-von-Pettenkofer Institute and Gene Center, Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25, D-81377
Munich, Germany. conzelma@lmb.uni-muenchen.de

PMCID: PMC1082782
PMID: 15827138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Nature. 2005 Apr 21;434(7036):1035-40. Epub 2005 Apr 6.

Spatiotemporal regulation of MyD88-IRF-7 signalling for robust type-I interferon 
induction.

Honda K(1), Ohba Y, Yanai H, Negishi H, Mizutani T, Takaoka A, Taya C, Taniguchi 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Robust type-I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) induction in plasmacytoid dendritic
cells, through the activation of Toll-like receptor 9 (TLR9), constitutes a
critical aspect of immunity. It is absolutely dependent on the transcription
factor IRF-7, which interacts with and is activated by the adaptor MyD88. How
plasmacytoid dendritic cells, but not other cell types (such as conventional
dendritic cells), are able to activate the MyD88-IRF-7-dependent IFN induction
pathway remains unknown. Here we show that the spatiotemporal regulation of
MyD88-IRF-7 signalling is critical for a high-level IFN induction in response to 
TLR9 activation. The IFN-inducing TLR9 ligand, A/D-type CpG oligodeoxynucleotide 
(CpG-A), is retained for long periods in the endosomal vesicles of plasmacytoid
dendritic cells, together with the MyD88-IRF-7 complex. However, in conventional 
dendritic cells, CpG-A is rapidly transferred to lysosomal vesicles. We further
show that conventional dendritic cells can also mount a robust IFN induction if
CpG-A is manipulated for endosomal retention using a cationic lipid. This
strategy also allows us to demonstrate endosomal activation of the IFN pathway by
the otherwise inactive TLR9 ligand B/K-type oligodeoxynucleotide (CpG-B). Thus,
our study offers insights into the regulation of TLR9 signalling in space,
potentially suggesting a new avenue for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 15815647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Nature. 2005 Apr 7;434(7034):772-7. Epub 2005 Mar 30.

IRF-7 is the master regulator of type-I interferon-dependent immune responses.

Honda K(1), Yanai H, Negishi H, Asagiri M, Sato M, Mizutani T, Shimada N, Ohba Y,
Takaoka A, Yoshida N, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The type-I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) response is critical to immunity against
viruses and can be triggered in many cell types by cytosolic detection of viral
infection, or in differentiated plasmacytoid dendritic cells by the Toll-like
receptor 9 (TLR9) subfamily, which generates signals via the adaptor MyD88 to
elicit robust IFN induction. Using mice deficient in the Irf7 gene (Irf7-/-
mice), we show that the transcription factor IRF-7 is essential for the induction
of IFN-alpha/beta genes via the virus-activated, MyD88-independent pathway and
the TLR-activated, MyD88-dependent pathway. Viral induction of MyD88-independent 
IFN-alpha/beta genes is severely impaired in Irf7-/- fibroblasts. Consistently,
Irf7-/- mice are more vulnerable than Myd88-/- mice to viral infection, and this 
correlates with a marked decrease in serum IFN levels, indicating the importance 
of the IRF-7-dependent induction of systemic IFN responses for innate antiviral
immunity. Furthermore, robust induction of IFN production by activation of the
TLR9 subfamily in plasmacytoid dendritic cells is entirely dependent on IRF-7,
and this MyD88-IRF-7 pathway governs the induction of CD8+ T-cell responses.
Thus, all elements of IFN responses, whether the systemic production of IFN in
innate immunity or the local action of IFN from plasmacytoid dendritic cells in
adaptive immunity, are under the control of IRF-7.

PMID: 15800576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Exp Med. 2005 Mar 21;201(6):915-23. Epub 2005 Mar 14.

Interleukin-1 receptor-associated kinase-1 plays an essential role for Toll-like 
receptor (TLR)7- and TLR9-mediated interferon-{alpha} induction.

Uematsu S(1), Sato S, Yamamoto M, Hirotani T, Kato H, Takeshita F, Matsuda M,
Coban C, Ishii KJ, Kawai T, Takeuchi O, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University, Suita Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) recognize microbial pathogens and trigger innate
immune responses. Among TLR family members, TLR7, TLR8, and TLR9 induce
interferon (IFN)-alpha in plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs). This induction
requires the formation of a complex consisting of the adaptor MyD88, tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) receptor-associated factor 6 (TRAF6) and IFN regulatory
factor (IRF) 7. Here we show an essential role of IL-1 receptor-associated kinase
(IRAK)-1 in TLR7- and TLR9-mediated IRF7 signaling pathway. IRAK-1 directly bound
and phosphorylated IRF7 in vitro. The kinase activity of IRAK-1 was necessary for
transcriptional activation of IRF7. TLR7- and TLR9-mediated IFN-alpha production 
was abolished in Irak-1-deficient mice, whereas inflammatory cytokine production 
was not impaired. Despite normal activation of NF-kappaB and mitogen-activated
protein kinases, IRF7 was not activated by a TLR9 ligand in Irak-1-deficient
pDCs. These results indicated that IRAK-1 is a specific regulator for TLR7- and
TLR9-mediated IFN-alpha induction in pDCs.

PMCID: PMC2213113
PMID: 15767370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 13;280(19):18651-7. Epub 2005 Mar 14.

Tissue-specific positive feedback requirements for production of type I
interferon following virus infection.

Prakash A(1), Smith E, Lee CK, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and New York University Cancer Institute, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Type I interferon (IFN) is synthesized by most nucleated cells following viral
infection. Robust IFN production in cell culture requires positive feedback
expression of inducible signaling components, such as the transcription factor
IRF7. However, the role of positive feedback and IRF7 in vivo may be more
complex. We found that IFN produced locally in the respiratory tract of influenza
virus-infected mice displayed characteristics of positive feedback, including
Stat1-dependent induction of IRF7 and IFN gene expression. IRF7 expression was
similarly stimulus-dependent in most tissues. However, lymphoid tissue
constitutively expressed high levels of IRF7 in the absence of induction or
positive feedback, and this expression was largely confined to plasmacytoid
dendritic cells (DC). These cells rapidly produced large quantities of multiple
IFN alpha species following viral infection without positive feedback, whereas
other hematopoietic cells, including other DC subtypes, expressed little IRF7 and
were poor IFN producers in the absence of positive feedback. These data reveal a 
dual mechanism for the regulation of IFN production by differential expression of
IRF7, involving positive feedback at local sites of infection combined with
robust systemic production by IRF7-expressing plasmacytoid DC.

PMCID: PMC1167601
PMID: 15767254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Immunol. 2005 Mar 15;174(6):3719-26.

The cytokine IL-1beta activates IFN response factor 3 in human fetal astrocytes
in culture.

Rivieccio MA(1), John GR, Song X, Suh HS, Zhao Y, Lee SC, Brosnan CF.

Author information: 
(1)Sue Golding Graduate Division, Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. mriviecc@aecom.yu.edu

The cytokine IL-1beta is a major activator of primary human fetal astrocytes in
culture, leading to the production of a wide range of cytokines and chemokines
important in the host defense against pathogens. IL-1beta, like TLR4, signals via
the MyD88/IL-1betaR-associated kinase-1 pathway linked to activation of NF-kappaB
and AP-1. Recent studies have shown that TLR4 also signals independently of
MyD88, resulting in the activation of IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3), a
transcription factor required for the production of primary antiviral response
genes such as IFN-beta. Using a functional genomics approach, we observed that
IL-1beta induced in astrocytes a group of genes considered to be IFN-stimulated
genes (ISG), suggesting that IL-1beta may also signal via IRF3 in these cells. We
now show, using real-time PCR, that in astrocytes IL-1beta induces the expression
of IFN-beta, IRF7, CXCL10/IFN-gamma-inducible protein-10, and CCL5/RANTES.
Chemokine expression was confirmed by ELISA. We also show that IL-1beta induces
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF3 and delayed phosphorylation of 
STAT1. The dependency of IFN-beta, IRF7, and CXCL10/IFN-gamma-inducible
protein-10 gene expression on IRF3 was confirmed using a dominant negative
IRF3-expressing adenovirus. The robust induction by IL-1beta of additional ISG
noted on the microarrays, such as STAT1, 2'5'-oligoadenylate synthetase 2, and
ISG15, also supports an active signaling role for IL-1beta via this pathway in
human fetal astrocytes. These data are the first to show that IL-1beta, in
addition to TLRs, can stimulate IRF3, implicating this cytokine as an activator
of genes involved in innate antiviral responses in astrocytes.

PMID: 15749911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 6;280(18):17671-7. Epub 2005 Mar 2.

Regulatory serine residues mediate phosphorylation-dependent and
phosphorylation-independent activation of interferon regulatory factor 7.

Caillaud A(1), Hovanessian AG, Levy DE, Marié IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Cellulaire, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris,
France.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)7 is a key transcription factor required for
establishment of antiviral resistance. In response to infection, IRF7 is
activated by phosphorylation through the action of the non-canonical IkappaB
kinases, IkappaB kinase-epsilon and TANK-binding kinase 1. Activation leads to
nuclear retention, DNA binding, and derepression of transactivation ability.
Clusters of serine residues located in the carboxyl-terminal regulatory domain of
IRF7 are putative targets of virus-activated kinases. However, the exact sites of
phosphorylation have not yet been established. Here, we report a comprehensive
structure-activity examination of potential IRF7 phosphorylation sites through
analysis of mutant proteins in which specific serine residues were altered to
alanine or aspartate. Phosphorylation patterns of these mutants were analyzed by 
two-dimensional gel electrophoresis, and their transcriptional activity was
monitored by reporter assays. Essential phosphorylation events were mapped to
amino acids 437-438 and a redundant set of sites at either amino acids 429-431 or
441. IRF7 recovered from infected cells was heterogeneously phosphorylated at
these sites, and greater phosphorylation correlated with increased
transactivation. Interestingly, a distinct serine cluster conserved in the
related protein IRF3 was also essential for IRF7 activation and distal
phosphorylation. However, the essential role of this motif did not appear to be
fulfilled by phosphorylation. Rather, these serine residues and an adjacent
leucine were required for phosphorylation at distal sites and may determine a
conformational element required for function.

PMCID: PMC1224706
PMID: 15743772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Virol. 2005 Mar;79(5):2979-87.

Basal and reovirus-induced beta interferon (IFN-beta) and IFN-beta-stimulated
gene expression are cell type specific in the cardiac protective response.

Stewart MJ(1), Smoak K, Blum MA, Sherry B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27606, USA.

Viral myocarditis is an important human disease, with a wide variety of viruses
implicated. Cardiac myocytes are not replenished yet are critical for host
survival and thus may have a unique response to infection. Previously, we
determined that the extent of reovirus induction of beta interferon (IFN-beta)
and IFN-beta-mediated protection in primary cardiac myocyte cultures was
inversely correlated with the extent of reovirus-induced cardiac damage in a
mouse model. Surprisingly, and in contrast, the IFN-beta response did not
determine reovirus replication in skeletal muscle cells. Here we compared the
IFN-beta response in cardiac myocytes to that in primary cardiac fibroblast
cultures, a readily replenished cardiac cell type. We compared basal and
reovirus-induced expression of IFN-beta, IRF-7 (an interferon-stimulated gene
[ISG] that further induces IFN-beta), and another ISG (561) in the two cell types
by using real-time reverse transcription-PCR. Basal IFN-beta, IRF-7, and 561
expression was higher in cardiac myocytes than in cardiac fibroblasts. Reovirus
T3D induced greater expression of IFN-beta in cardiac myocytes than in cardiac
fibroblasts but equivalent expression of IRF-7 and 561 in the two cell types
(though fold induction for IRF-7 and 561 was higher in fibroblasts than in
myocytes because of the differences in basal expression). Interestingly, while
reovirus replicated to equivalent titers in cardiac myocytes and cardiac
fibroblasts, removal of IFN-beta resulted in 10-fold-greater reovirus replication
in the fibroblasts than in the myocytes. Together the data suggest that the
IFN-beta response controls reovirus replication equivalently in the two cell
types. In the absence of reovirus-induced IFN-beta, however, reovirus replicates 
to higher titers in cardiac fibroblasts than in cardiac myocytes, suggesting that
the higher basal IFN-beta and ISG expression in myocytes may play an important
protective role.

PMCID: PMC548428
PMID: 15709018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):17005-12. Epub 2005 Jan 28.

The interferon regulatory factor, IRF5, is a central mediator of toll-like
receptor 7 signaling.

Schoenemeyer A(1), Barnes BJ, Mancl ME, Latz E, Goutagny N, Pitha PM, Fitzgerald 
KA, Golenbock DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Diseases and Immunology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are critical components of virus-induced
immune activation and type I interferon regulation. IRF3 and IRF7 are activated
in response to a variety of viruses or after engagement of Toll-like receptor
(TLR) 3 and TLR4 by double-stranded RNA and lipopolysaccharide, respectively. The
activation of IRF5, is much more restricted. Here we show that in contrast to
IRF3 and IRF7, IRF5 is not a target of the TLR3 signaling pathway but is
activated by TLR7 or TLR8 signaling. We also demonstrate that MyD88, interleukin 
1 receptor-associated kinase 1, and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated
factor 6 are required for the activation of IRF5 and IRF7 in the TLR7 signaling
pathway. Moreover, ectopic expression of IRF5 enabled type I interferon
production in response to TLR7 signaling, whereas knockdown of IRF5 by small
interfering RNA reduced type I interferon induction in response to the TLR7
ligand, R-848. IRF5 and IRF7, therefore, emerge from these studies as critical
mediators of TLR7 signaling.

PMID: 15695821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Virol. 2005 Feb;79(4):2420-31.

Modulation of human herpesvirus 8/Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus
replication and transcription activator transactivation by interferon regulatory 
factor 7.

Wang J(1), Zhang J, Zhang L, Harrington W Jr, West JT, Wood C.

Author information: 
(1)Nebraska Center for Virology and School of Biological Sciences, University of 
Nebraska--Lincoln, 1901 Vine St., Lincoln, NE 68588-0666, USA.

Human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8)/Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus infection
goes through lytic and latent phases that are regulated by viral gene products,
but very little is known about the involvement of host proteins. The replication 
and transcription activator (RTA) is a viral protein sufficient to initiate lytic
replication by activating downstream genes, including the viral early gene open
reading frame 57 (ORF 57), which codes for a posttranscriptional activator. In
this study, we demonstrate that cellular interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7)
negatively regulates this process by competing with RTA for binding to the RTA
response element in the ORF 57 promoter to down-regulate RTA-induced gene
expression. We also show that alpha interferon represses RTA-mediated
transactivation and that repression involves IRF-7. Our study indicates that upon
HHV-8 infection, the host responds by suppression of lytic gene expression
through binding of IRF-7 to the lytic viral gene promoter. These findings suggest
that HHV-8 has developed a novel mechanism to induce but then subvert the innate 
antiviral response, specifically the interferon-signaling pathway, to regulate
RTA activity and ultimately the viral latent/lytic replicative cycle.

PMCID: PMC546578
PMID: 15681443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12262-70. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

Regulation of the transcriptional activity of the IRF7 promoter by a pathway
independent of interferon signaling.

Ning S(1), Huye LE, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Genes containing an interferon (IFN)-stimulated response element (ISRE) can be
divided into two groups according to their inducibility by IFN and virus
infection: one induced only by IFN and the other induced by both IFN and virus
infection. Although it is now clear that IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a
multifunctional gene essential for induction of type I IFNs, regulation of the
IRF7 promoter (IRF7p) is poorly understood. The IRF7 gene includes two IFN
responsive elements, an IRF-binding element (IRFE) in the promoter region and an 
ISRE in the first intron, and is induced by the IFN-triggered Jak-STAT pathway by
binding of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) complex to the ISRE. In this 
study, we demonstrate that IRF3 and IRF7, which with the coactivators
CREB-binding protein and P300 form the virus-activated factor (VAF) complex upon 
Sendai virus infection, bind to the IRF7 ISRE and IRFE and can directly activate 
IRF7 transcription. Promoter reporter assays show that both the ISRE and IRFE are
responsive to activation by IRF7 and IRF3. In cells transiently expressing IRF7
or/and IRF3, the VAF level and binding of VAF are clearly increased after Sendai 
virus infection. Studies with Jak1 kinase inactive 293 cells that were stably
transfected with a Jak1 kinase dead dominant negative construct, and the mutant
cell lines SAN (IFNalpha-/beta-), U2A (IRF9-), U4A (Jak1-), and DKO (IRF1-/IRF2-)
show that the IRF7 transcription activated directly by VAF is distinct from and
independent of the IFN signaling pathway. Thus, IRF7 transcription is
autoregulated by binding of the IRF7-containing VAF to its own ISRE and IRFE. The
results show two distinct mechanisms for the activation of the IRF7 promoter, by 
IFN and by virus infection. A regulatory network between type I IFNs and IRF7 is 
proposed. The distinct pathways may reflect special roles for an efficient
antiviral response at different stages of virus infection.

PMID: 15664995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Immunity. 2005 Jan;22(1):59-70.

The KSHV immediate-early transcription factor RTA encodes ubiquitin E3 ligase
activity that targets IRF7 for proteosome-mediated degradation.

Yu Y(1), Wang SE, Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Laboratories, Viral Oncology Program, The Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1650
Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 2123, USA.

Many viruses encode proteins that counteract the development of the interferon
(IFN)-mediated antiviral state. Here, we report that interferon regulatory factor
7 (IRF7), a key mediator of type I IFN induction, is targeted for degradation by 
binding to the RTA immediate-early nuclear transcription factor encoded by
Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV or HHV8). Cotransfection with RTA
blocked IRF7-mediated IFNalpha and IFNbeta mRNA production and promoted the
ubiquitination and degradation of IRF7 protein in a proteasome-dependent fashion.
Addition of RTA also promoted polyubiquitination of IRF7 in an in vitro cell free
assay, demonstrating that RTA itself acts as a ubiquitin E3 ligase. RTA also
autoregulated its own polyubiquitination and stability, and both activities were 
abolished by point mutations in a Cys plus His-rich N-terminal domain. Therefore,
manipulation of the stability and function of IRF7 by the KSHV RTA transcription 
factor provides an unexpected regulatory strategy for circumventing the innate
immune defence system.

PMID: 15664159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Virol. 2005 Feb;79(3):1724-33.

Regulation of expression of the Epstein-Barr virus BamHI-A rightward transcripts.

Chen H(1), Huang J, Wu FY, Liao G, Hutt-Fletcher L, Hayward SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong.

The Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) BamHI-A rightward transcripts, or BARTs, are a
family of mRNAs expressed in all EBV latency programs, including EBV-infected B
cells in healthy carriers. Despite their ubiquitous expression, the regulation
and biological function of BARTs are still unclear. In this study, the BART 5'
termini were characterized by using a procedure that selects capped, full-length 
mRNAs. Two TATA-less promoter regions, designated P1 and P2, were mapped. P1 had 
relatively high basal activity in both epithelial and B cells, whereas P2
exhibited higher activity in epithelial cells. Upon EBV infection of B cells,
transcription from P1 was detected soon after infection, while expression from P2
was delayed. Promoter-reporter assays in transiently transfected cells revealed
that P1 and P2 were differentially regulated. Interferon regulatory factor 7
(IRF7) and IRF5 negatively regulated P1 activity. c-Myc and C/EBP family members 
positively regulated P2. Regulation of P2 by C/EBPs was characterized by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and reporter
assays. More-abundant BART expression in epithelial cells correlated with the
relative expression of positive and negative regulators in these cells.

PMCID: PMC544122
PMID: 15650197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Mol Ther. 2005 Jan;11(1):112-9.

Induction of IFN-regulated factors and antitumoral surveillance by transfected
placebo plasmid DNA.

Li S(1), Wilkinson M, Xia X, David M, Xu L, Purkel-Sutton A, Bhardwaj A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of CBS, SVM, Louisiana State University, Skip Bertman Drive, Baton 
Rouge, LA 70803, USA. sli@vetmed.lsu.edu

Delivery of DNA encoding therapeutic genes in vivo has great potential for
treating malignancy as well as genetic diseases. Delivery of placebo DNA without 
a transgene is used as a control in gene therapy studies. It is tacitly assumed
by most investigators that the protein expressed from the transfected DNA has
phenotypic consequences, but that the consequences are not from the DNA itself.
Here, we demonstrate that transfection of control plasmid DNA (that does not
express a gene product) into tumor cell lines induces a dramatic (>10-fold)
increase in the expression of the interferon (IFN)-regulated genes IRF7, STAT1,
MIG (approved gene symbol CXCL9), MHCI (MICA), and CD11a (ITGAL) in tumor cell
lines. Induction of these genes inhibits tumor development and tumor growth in
immunocompetent mice that are immunized with apoptotic tumor cells. The antibody 
depletion study indicates that the underlying mechanism by which transfection of 
control DNA induces IFN-regulated genes is the induction of a secreting factor(s)
such as IFN-beta. Three lines of evidence indicate that DNA transfection-mediated
induction of IFN-regulatory genes is independent of TLR9. The three lines of
evidence are: (1) TLR9 is not expressed in either SCCVII or 4T1 cell line, (2)
activation of TLR9 downstream signaling molecules is not associated with the
induction of gene expression, and (3) the secretion factor(s) obtained from the
conditioned medium of DNA-transfected SCCVII tumor cells induces the same type of
gene expression in the 4T1 tumor cell line, which is refractory to the gene
induction by DNA transfection. Our finding indicates that the 4T1 tumor cell
line, which is resistant to the DNA transfection-mediated induction of
IFN-regulated genes, can be used to determine the real therapeutic gene function.

PMID: 15585412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. J Virol. 2004 Dec;78(23):12987-95.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 is associated with Epstein-Barr virus-transformed 
central nervous system lymphoma and has oncogenic properties.

Zhang L(1), Zhang J, Lambert Q, Der CJ, Del Valle L, Miklossy J, Khalili K, Zhou 
Y, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)NE Center for Virology, School of Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska,
1901 Vine St., Lincoln, NE 68588, USA. lzhang2@unlnotes.unl.edu

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7) is implicated in the regulation of
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latency. EBV transforms primary B cells, and the major
EBV oncoprotein, latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1), is required for the process. 
LMP-1 both induces the expression of IRF-7 and activates the IRF-7 protein by
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. Here we report that the expression of 
IRF-7 is increased in EBV-immortalized B lymphocytes compared with that in
primary B cells. IRF-7 was phosphorylated and predominantly localized in the
nucleus in the immortalized cells. The expression of IRF-7 was detected in 19 of 
27 specimens of primary lymphomas of the human central nervous system by
immunohistochemical analysis. The association between LMP-1 and IRF-7 was
statistically highly significant for these specimens. An appreciable amount of
the IRF-7 expressed in lymphoma cells was localized in the nucleus. Furthermore, 
IRF-7 promoted the anchorage-independent growth of NIH 3T3 cells. LMP-1 and IRF-7
showed additive effects on the growth transformation of NIH 3T3 cells.
IRF-7-expressing NIH 3T3 cells formed tumors in athymic mice. Thus, IRF-7 has
oncogenic properties and, along with LMP-1, may mediate or potentiate the EBV
transformation process in the pathogenesis of EBV-associated lymphomas.

PMCID: PMC524977
PMID: 15542650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Cancer Res. 2004 Oct 15;64(20):7513-25.

Modulation of gene expression in human central nervous system tumors under
methionine deprivation-induced stress.

Kokkinakis DM(1), Liu X, Chada S, Ahmed MM, Shareef MM, Singha UK, Yang S, Luo J.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute and the Department of Pathology,
Hillman Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

Methionine deprivation imposes a metabolic stress, termed methionine stress, that
inhibits mitosis and induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. The
methionine-dependent central nervous system tumor cell lines DAOY
(medulloblastoma), SWB61 (anaplastic oligodendroglioma), SWB40 (anaplastic
astrocytoma), and SWB39 (glioblastoma multiforme) were compared with
methionine-stress resistant SWB77 (glioblastoma multiforme). The cDNA-oligoarray 
analysis and reverse transcription-PCR verification indicated common changes in
gene expression in methionine-dependent cell lines to include
up-regulation/induction of cyclin D1, mitotic arrest deficient (MAD)1, p21,
growth arrest and DNA-damage-inducible (GADD)45 alpha, GADD45 gamma, GADD34,
breast cancer (BRCA)1, 14-3-3sigma, B-cell CLL/lymphoma (BCL)1, transforming
growth factor (TGF)-beta, TGF-beta-induced early response (TIEG), SMAD5, SMAD7,
SMAD2, insulin-like growth factor binding protein (IGFBP7), IGF-R2, vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), 
TNF-alpha converting enzyme (TACE), TRAIL receptor (TRAIL-R)2, TNFR-related death
receptor (DR)6, TRAF interacting protein (I-TRAF), IL-6, MDA7, IL-1B convertase
(ICE)-gamma, delta and epsilon, IRF1, IRF5, IRF7, interferon (IFN)-gamma and
receptor components, ISG15, p65-NF-kappaB, JUN-B, positive cofactor (PC)4,
C/ERB-beta, inositol triphosphate receptor I, and methionine adenosyltransferase 
II. On the other hand, cyclins A1, A2, B1 and B2, cell division cycle (CDC)2 and 
its kinase, CDC25 A and B, budding uninhibited by benzimidazoles (BUB)1 and 3,
MAD2, CDC28 protein kinase (CKS)1 and 2, neuroepithelial cell transforming gene
(NET)1, activator of S-phase kinase (ASK), CDC14B phosphatase, BCL2, TGF-beta
activated kinase (TAK)1, TAB1, c-FOS, DNA topoisomerase II, DNA polymerase alpha,
dihydrofolate reductase, thymidine kinase, stathmin, and MAP4 were
down-regulated. In the methionine stress-resistant SWB77, only 20% of the above
genes were affected, and then only to a lesser extent. In addition, some of the
changes observed in SWB77 were opposite to those seen in methionine-dependent
tumors, including expression of p21, TRAIL-R2, and TIEG. Despite similarities,
differences between methionine-dependent tumors were substantial, especially in
regard to regulation of cytokine expression. Western blot analysis confirmed that
methionine stress caused the following: (a) a marked increase of GADD45alpha and 
gamma in the wt-p53 cell lines SWB61 and 40; (b) an increase in GADD34 and p21
protein in all of the methionine-dependent lines; and (c) the induction of MDA7
and phospho-p38 in DAOY and SWB39, consistent with marked transcriptional
activation of the former under methionine stress. It was additionally shown that 
methionine stress down-regulated the highly active phosphatidylinositol 3'-kinase
pathway by reducing AKT phosphorylation, especially in DAOY and SWB77, and also
reduced the levels of retinoblastoma (Rb) and pRb (P-ser780, P-ser795, and
P-ser807/811), resulting in a shift in favor of unphosphorylated species in all
of the methionine-dependent lines. Immunohistochemical analysis showed marked
inhibition of nuclear translocation of nuclear factor kappaB under methionine
stress in methionine-dependent lines. In this study we show for the first time
that methionine stress mobilizes several defined cell cycle checkpoints and
proapoptotic pathways while coordinately inhibiting prosurvival mechanisms in
central nervous system tumors. It is clear that methionine stress-induced
cytotoxicity is not restricted by the p53 mutational status.

PMID: 15492278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Oct 26;101(43):15416-21. Epub 2004 Oct 18.

Role of a transductional-transcriptional processor complex involving MyD88 and
IRF-7 in Toll-like receptor signaling.

Honda K(1), Yanai H, Mizutani T, Negishi H, Shimada N, Suzuki N, Ohba Y, Takaoka 
A, Yeh WC, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Toll-like receptor (TLR) activation is central to immunity, wherein the
activation of the TLR9 subfamily members TLR9 and TLR7 results in the robust
induction of type I IFNs (IFN-alpha/beta) by means of the MyD88 adaptor protein. 
However, it remains unknown how the TLR signal "input" can be processed through
MyD88 to "output" the induction of the IFN genes. Here, we demonstrate that the
transcription factor IRF-7 interacts with MyD88 to form a complex in the
cytoplasm. We provide evidence that this complex also involves IRAK4 and TRAF6
and provides the foundation for the TLR9-dependent activation of the IFN genes.
The complex defined in this study represents an example of how the coupling of
the signaling adaptor and effector kinase molecules together with the
transcription factor regulate the processing of an extracellular signal to evoke 
its versatile downstream transcriptional events in a cell. Thus, we propose that 
this molecular complex may function as a cytoplasmic
transductional-transcriptional processor.

PMCID: PMC523464
PMID: 15492225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Haematologica. 2004 Sep;89(9):1046-53.

Genes transcriptionally modulated by interferon alpha2a correlate with the
cytokine activity.

Iolascon A(1), Volinia S, Borriello A, Giordani L, Moretti A, Servedio V,
Maiorano N, Cucciolla V, Criniti V, Gasparini P, Indaco S, Della Ragione F.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics University Federico II, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Interferon alpha2a (IFNalpha2a) mediates important
antiviral, antiproliferative and immunomodulatory responses and is employed in
the treatment of human diseases, including chronic myelogenous leukemia. Here, we
report the IFNalpha2a-dependent expression profiles of three malignant cell lines
derived from liver, lymphocytes and muscle.
DESIGN AND METHODS: The experiments were performed in the presence of
cycloheximide, thus our results exclusively reflect direct transcriptional
modulation. The short exposure time i.e. 5 hours evidences only the early events,
excluding the effects of complex phenotypic changes on the expression.
RESULTS: Our findings indicate that IFNalpha2a rapidly up-regulates the
expression of STAT1, STAT2 and ISGF3G genes. This activity should result in the
amplification of the cellular response to the cytokine. Moreover, IFNalpha2a
directly modulates the expression of: (i) important transcriptional factors, e.g.
IRF1 and IRF7 which control pivotal cellular events, and (ii) enzymes involved in
the IFNalpha2a-dependent antiviral and apoptotic response. Interestingly, we
showed that the cytokine induces transcriptional expression of Sjögren's syndrome
antigen A1, a protein involved in several autoimmune diseases.
INTERPRETATION AND CONCLUSIONS: The observed changes induced by IFNalpha2a could 
be related to the development of autoimmune syndromes observed during IFNalpha2a 
treatment. A number of genes transcriptionally regulated by the cytokine have
been identified for the first time; these might represent additional effectors of
IFNalpha2a activity.

PMID: 15377465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Virol. 2004 Oct;78(19):10636-49.

Activation of TBK1 and IKKvarepsilon kinases by vesicular stomatitis virus
infection and the role of viral ribonucleoprotein in the development of
interferon antiviral immunity.

tenOever BR(1), Sharma S, Zou W, Sun Q, Grandvaux N, Julkunen I, Hemmi H,
Yamamoto M, Akira S, Yeh WC, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, 3755 Cote Ste. Catherine, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2.

Mounting an immune response to a viral pathogen involves the initial recognition 
of viral antigens through Toll-like receptor-dependent and -independent pathways 
and the subsequent triggering of signal transduction cascades. Among the many
cellular kinases stimulated in response to virus infection, the noncanonical
IKK-related kinases TBK1 and IKKepsilon have been shown to phosphorylate and
activate interferon regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and IRF-7, leading to the
production of alpha/beta interferons and the development of a cellular antiviral 
state. In the present study, we examine the activation of TBK1 and IKKepsilon
kinases by vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) infection in human lung epithelial
A549 cells. We demonstrate that replication-competent VSV is required to induce
activation of the IKK-related kinases and provide evidence that ribonucleoprotein
(RNP) complex of VSV generated intracellularly during virus replication can
activate TBK1 and IKKepsilon activity. In TBK1-deficient cells, IRF-3 and IRF-7
activation is significantly reduced, although transcriptional upregulation of
IKKepsilon following treatment with VSV, double-stranded RNA, or RNP partially
compensates for the loss of TBK1. Biochemical analyses with purified TBK1 and
IKKepsilon kinases in vitro demonstrate that the two kinases exhibit similar
specificities with respect to IRF-3 and IRF-7 substrates and both kinases target 
serine residues that are important for full transcriptional activation of IRF-3
and IRF-7. These data suggest that intracellular RNP formation contributes to the
early recognition of VSV infection, activates the catalytic activity of TBK1, and
induces transcriptional upregulation of IKKepsilon in epithelial cells. Induction
of IKKepsilon potentially functions as a component of the amplification mechanism
involved in the establishment of the antiviral state.

PMCID: PMC516426
PMID: 15367631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. BMC Cancer. 2004 Sep 14;4:65.

Methylation profiles of thirty four promoter-CpG islands and concordant
methylation behaviours of sixteen genes that may contribute to carcinogenesis of 
astrocytoma.

Yu J(1), Zhang H, Gu J, Lin S, Li J, Lu W, Wang Y, Zhu J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epigenetics and Gene Therapy, State-Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and
Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, LN
2200/25, Xie-Tu Road, Shanghai 200032, China. gyujian@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Astrocytoma is a common aggressive intracranial tumor and presents a 
formidable challenge in the clinic. Association of altered DNA methylation
patterns of the promoter CpG islands with the expression profile of
cancer-related genes, has been found in many human tumors. Therefore, DNA
methylation status as such may serve as an epigenetic biomarker for both
diagnosis and prognosis of human tumors, including astrocytoma.
METHODS: We used the methylation specific PCR in conjunction with sequencing
verification to establish the methylation profile of the promoter CpG island of
thirty four genes in astrocytoma tissues from fifty three patients (The WHO
grading: I: 14, II: 15, III: 12 and IV: 12 cases, respectively). In addition,
compatible tissues (normal tissues distant from lesion) from three
non-astrocytoma patients were included as the control.
RESULTS: Seventeen genes (ABL, APC, APAF1, BRCA1, CSPG2, DAPK1, hMLH1, LKB1,
PTEN, p14ARF, p15INK4b, p27KIP1, p57KIP2, RASSF1C, RB1, SURVIVIN, and VHL)
displayed a uniformly unmethylated pattern in all the astrocytoma and
non-astrocytoma tissues examined. However, the MAGEA1 gene that was inactivated
and hypermethylated in non-astrocytoma tissues, was partially demethylated in
24.5% of the astrocytoma tissues (co-existence of the hypermethylated and
demethylated alleles). Of the astrocytoma associated hypermethylated genes, the
methylation pattern of the CDH13, cyclin a1, DBCCR1, EPO, MYOD1, and p16INK4a
genes changed in no more than 5.66% (3/53) of astrocytoma tissues compared to
non-astrocytoma controls, while the RASSF1A, p73, AR, MGMT, CDH1, OCT6, MT1A,
WT1, and IRF7 genes were more frequently hypermethylated in 69.8%, 47.2%, 41.5%, 
35.8%, 32%, 30.2%, 30.2%, 30.2% and 26.4% of astrocytoma tissues, respectively.
Demethylation mediated inducible expression of the CDH13, MAGEA1, MGMT, p73 and
RASSF1A genes was established in an astrocytoma cell line (U251), demonstrating
that expression of these genes is likely regulated by DNA methylation. AR gene
hypermethylation was found exclusively in female patients (22/27, 81%, 0/26, 0%, 
P < 0.001), while the IRF7 gene hypermethylation preferentially occurred in the
male counterparts (11/26, 42.3% to 3/27, 11%, P < 0.05). Applying the mathematic 
method "the Discovery of Association Rules", we have identified groups consisting
of up to three genes that more likely display the altered methylation patterns in
concert in astrocytoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Of the thirty four genes examined, sixteen genes exhibited
astrocytoma associated changes in the methylation profile. In addition to the
possible pathological significance, the established concordant methylation
profiles of the subsets consisting of two to three target genes may provide
useful clues to the development of the useful prognostic as well as diagnostic
assays for astrocytoma.

PMCID: PMC520749
PMID: 15367334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nat Immunol. 2004 Oct;5(10):1061-8. Epub 2004 Sep 7.

Interferon-alpha induction through Toll-like receptors involves a direct
interaction of IRF7 with MyD88 and TRAF6.

Kawai T(1), Sato S, Ishii KJ, Coban C, Hemmi H, Yamamoto M, Terai K, Matsuda M,
Inoue J, Uematsu S, Takeuchi O, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)ERATO, Akira Innate Immunity Program, Japan Science and Technology Agency,
Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka University, 3-1 Yamada-oka,
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) are involved in the recognition of microbial
pathogens. A subset of TLRs, TLR7, TLR8 and TLR9, induces antiviral responses by 
producing interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha). Production of IFN-alpha is dependent on
the Toll-interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adaptor MyD88. Here we show
that MyD88 formed a complex with the transcription factor IRF7 but not with IRF3.
The death domain of MyD88 interacted with an inhibitory domain of IRF7, and this 
interaction resulted in activation of the IFN-alpha-dependent promoters.
Furthermore, the adaptor molecule TRAF6 also bound and activated IRF7. Ubiquitin 
ligase activity of TRAF6 was required for IRF7 activation. These results indicate
that TLR-mediated IFN-alpha induction requires the formation of a complex
consisting of MyD88, TRAF6 and IRF7 as well as TRAF6-dependent ubiquitination.

PMID: 15361868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Sep;271(18):3693-703.

Mechanism for transcriptional synergy between interferon regulatory factor
(IRF)-3 and IRF-7 in activation of the interferon-beta gene promoter.

Yang H(1), Ma G, Lin CH, Orr M, Wathelet MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0576, USA.

The interferon-beta promoter has been studied extensively as a model system for
combinatorial transcriptional regulation. In virus-infected cells the
transcription factors ATF-2, c-Jun, interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3, IRF-7
and NF-kappaB, and the coactivators p300/CBP play critical roles in the
activation of this and other promoters. It remains unclear, however, why most
other combinations of AP-1, IRF and Rel proteins fail to activate the
interferon-beta gene. Here we have explored how different IRFs may cooperate with
other factors to activate transcription. First we showed in undifferentiated
embryonic carcinoma cells that ectopic expression of either IRF-3 or IRF-7, but
not IRF-1, was sufficient to allow virus-dependent activation of the
interferon-beta promoter. Moreover, the activity of IRF-3 and IRF-7 was strongly 
affected by promoter context, with IRF-7 preferentially being recruited to the
natural interferon-beta promoter. We fully reconstituted activation of this
promoter in insect cells. Maximal synergy required IRF-3 and IRF-7 but not IRF-1,
and was strongly dependent on the presence of p300/CBP, even when these
coactivators only modestly affected the activity of each factor by itself. These 
results suggest that specificity in activation of the interferon-beta gene
depends on a unique promoter context and on the role played by coactivators as
architectural factors.

Copyright 2004 FEBS

PMID: 15355347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 29;279(44):46335-42. Epub 2004 Aug 20.

The latent membrane protein 1 of Epstein-Barr virus establishes an antiviral
state via induction of interferon-stimulated genes.

Zhang J(1), Das SC, Kotalik C, Pattnaik AK, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Nebraska Center for Virology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE 68588, USA.

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection is associated with several human cancers.
Latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) is one of the key viral proteins required for
transformation of primary B cells in vitro and establishment of EBV latency. In
this report, we show that LMP-1 is able to induce the expression of several
interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes (ISGs) with antiviral properties such as 2'-5' 
oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS), stimulated trans-acting factor of 50 kDa
(STAF-50), and ISG-15. LMP-1 inhibits vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV)
replication at low multiplicity of infection (0.1 pfu/cell). The antiviral effect
of LMP-1 is associated with the ability of LMP-1 to induce ISGs; an LMP-1 mutant 
that cannot induce ISGs fails to induce an antiviral state. High levels of ISGs
are expressed in EBV latency cells in which LMP-1 is expressed. EBV latency cells
have antiviral activity that inhibits replication of superinfecting VSV. The
antiviral activity of LMP-1 is apparently not related to IFN production in our
experimental systems. In addition, EBV latency is responsive to viral
superinfection: LMP-1 is induced and EBV latency is disrupted by EBV lytic
replication during VSV superinfection of EBV latency cells. These data suggest
that LMP-1 has antiviral effect, which may be an intrinsic part of EBV latency
program to assist the establishment and/or maintenance of EBV latency.

PMID: 15322136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 22;279(43):45194-207. Epub 2004 Aug 11.

Global and distinct targets of IRF-5 and IRF-7 during innate response to viral
infection.

Barnes BJ(1), Richards J, Mancl M, Hanash S, Beretta L, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor 48109, USA.

The interferon regulatory factors (IRF) are transcriptional mediators of cellular
response to viral invasion that play a critical role in the innate antiviral
defense. Two of these factors, IRF-5 and IRF-7, play a critical role in the
induction of interferon (IFNA) genes in infected cells; they are expressed
constitutively in monocytes, B cells, and precursors of dendritic cells (pDC2)
that are high producers of interferon alpha, and their expression can be further 
stimulated by type I interferon. The goal of the present study was to identify
and analyze expression of cellular genes that are modulated by IRF-5 and IRF-7
during the innate response to viral infection. The transcription profiles of
infected BJAB cells overexpressing IRF-5 or IRF-7 were determined by using
oligonucleotide arrays with probe sets representing about 6800 human genes. This 
analysis shows that IRF-5 and IRF-7 activate a broad profile of heterologous
genes encoding not only antiviral, inflammatory, and pro-apoptotic proteins but
also proteins of other functional categories. The number of IRF-5- and
IRF-7-modulated genes was significantly higher in infected than in uninfected
cells, and the transcription signature was predominantly positive. Although IRF-5
and IRF-7 stimulated a large number of common genes, a distinct functional
profile was associated with each of these IRFs. The noted difference was a broad 
antiviral and early inflammatory transcriptional profile in infected BJAB/IRF-5
cells, whereas the IRF-7-induced transcripts were enriched for the group of
mitochondrial genes and genes affecting the DNA structure. Taken together, these 
data indicate that IRF-5 and IRF-7 act primarily as transcriptional activators
and that IRF-5-and IRF-7-induced innate antiviral response results in a broad
alteration of the transcriptional profile of cellular genes.

PMID: 15308637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Immunol. 2004 Aug 1;173(3):1535-48.

Regulation of IFN regulatory factor-7 and IFN-alpha production by enveloped virus
and lipopolysaccharide in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Dai J(1), Megjugorac NJ, Amrute SB, Fitzgerald-Bocarsly P.

Author information: 
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-New Jersey Medical School, 
Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC) are a major source of IFN-alpha upon
exposure to enveloped viruses and TLR-7 and TLR-9 ligands. Although IFN
regulatory factor-7 (IRF-7) is known to play an essential role in virus-activated
transcription of IFN-alpha genes, the molecular mechanisms of IFN-alpha
production in human PDC remain poorly understood. We and others have recently
reported high constitutive levels of IRF-7 expression in PDC as compared with
other PBMC. In this study, we demonstrate that both LPS and HSV up-regulate the
expression of IRF-7 in PDC, and that this enhancement of IRF-7 is dependent on
NF-kappa B activation. The NF-kappa B inhibitors MG132 and
pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate efficiently inhibited the induction of IRF-7 by HSV or
LPS, and also down-regulated the constitutive expression of IRF-7 in PDC and
blocked the HSV-induced production of IFN-alpha. In addition, we found that
nuclear translocation of IRF-7 occurred rapidly in response to HSV stimulation,
but not in response to LPS, which is consistent with the stimulation of IFN-alpha
production by virus and not by LPS. Although LPS by itself was not able to induce
IFN-alpha production, it led to rapid up-regulation of TLR-4 on PDC and increased
the magnitude and accelerated the kinetics of HSV-induced IFN-alpha production in
PDC, providing a mechanism that might be operative in a scenario of mixed
infection. In contrast to the current concept of IFN-alpha regulation established
in cell lines, this study strongly supports the immediate availability of high
constitutive levels of IRF-7 expression in PDC, and suggests an activation
required for IRF-7 that contributes to IFN-alpha production in virus-stimulated
PDC.

PMID: 15265881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. FEBS Lett. 2004 Jul 16;570(1-3):97-101.

PIASy represses TRIF-induced ISRE and NF-kappaB activation but not apoptosis.

Zhang J(1), Xu LG, Han KJ, Wei X, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)National Jewish Medical and Research Center, 1400 Jackson Street, k516c,
Denver, CO 80206, USA.

The TIR domain-containing adapter protein TRIP is critically involved in
TLR3-induced IFN-beta production through activation of NF-kappaB and ISRE. In
addition, TRIF also induces apoptosis when overexpressed in 293 cells. In this
report, we demonstrate that PIASy, a member of the PIAS SUMO-ligase family,
interacts with TRIP, IRF-3 and IRF-7. In reporter gene assays, PIASy dramatically
inhibits TRIF-induced NF-kappaB, ISRE and IFN-beta activation but not
TRIF-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, PIASy also inhibits IRF-3, IRF-7 and Sendai 
virus-induced ISRE activation. Our results suggest that PIASy is an inhibitor of 
TRIF-induced ISRE and NF-kappaB activation but not apoptosis.

PMID: 15251447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Virol. 2004 Jun;78(12):6282-6.

Induction of suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 by herpes simplex virus type 1
contributes to inhibition of the interferon signaling pathway.

Yokota S(1), Yokosawa N, Okabayashi T, Suzutani T, Miura S, Jimbow K, Fujii N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
South-1, West-17, Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8556, Hokkaido, Japan.

We showed previously that herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) suppresses the
interferon (IFN) signaling pathway during the early infection stage in the human 
amnion cell line FL. HSV-1 inhibits the IFN-induced phosphorylation of Janus
kinases (JAK) in infected FL cells. In the present study, we showed that the
suppressor of cytokine signaling-3 (SOCS3), a host negative regulator of the
JAK/STAT pathway, is rapidly induced in FL cells after HSV-1 infection. Maximal
levels of SOCS3 protein were detected at around 1 to 2 h after infection. This is
consistent with the occurrence of HSV-1-mediated inhibition of IFN-induced JAK
phosphorylation. The HSV-1 wild-type strain VR3 induced SOCS3 more efficiently
than did mutants that are defective in UL41 or UL13 and that are hyperresponsive 
to IFN. Induction of the IRF-7 protein and transcriptional activation of
IFN-alpha4, which occur in a JAK/STAT pathway-dependent manner, were poorly
induced by VR3 but efficiently induced by the mutant viruses. In contrast,
phosphorylation of IRF-3 and transcriptional activation of IFN-beta, which are
JAK/STAT pathway-independent process, were equally well induced by the wild-type 
strain and the mutants. In conclusion, the SOCS3 protein appears to be mainly
responsible for the suppression of IFN signaling and IFN production that occurs
during HSV-1 infection.

PMCID: PMC416529
PMID: 15163721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2004 Mar;24(3):185-95.

Transcriptional response of T cells to IFN-alpha: changes induced in
IFN-alpha-sensitive and resistant cutaneous T cell lymphoma.

Tracey L(1), Spiteri I, Ortiz P, Lawler M, Piris MA, Villuendas R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Program, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
(CNIO), Madrid, Spain.

Interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) therapy is commonly used in the treatment of
neoplastic and autoimmune diseases, including cutaneous T cell lymphoma (CTCL).
However, the IFN-alpha response is unpredictable, and the IFN-alpha cell targets 
and pathways are only partially understood. To delineate the molecular mechanisms
of IFN-alpha activity, gene expression profiling was performed in a time-course
experiment of both IFN-alpha sensitive and IFN-alpha-resistant variants of a CTCL
cell line. These experiments revealed that IFN-alpha is responsible for the
regulation of hundreds of genes in both variants and predominantly involves genes
implicated in signal transduction, cell cycle control, apoptosis, and
transcription regulation. Specifically, the IFN-alpha response of tumoral T cells
is due to a combination of induction of apoptosis in which TNFSF10 and HSXIAPAF1 
may play an important role and cell cycle arrest achieved by downregulation of
CDK4 and CCNG2 and upregulation of CDKN2C and tumor suppressor genes (TSGs).
Resistance to IFN-alpha appears to be associated with failure to induce IRF1 and 
IRF7 and deregulation of the apoptotic signals of HSXIAPAF1, TRADD, BAD, and
BNIP3. Additionally, cell cycle progression is heralded by upregulation of CDC25A
and CDC42. A critical role of NF-kappaB in promoting cell survival in
IFN-alpha-resistant cells is indicated by the upregulation of RELB and LTB.

PMID: 15035852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Mol Ther. 2004 Mar;9(3):347-54.

Candidate genes associated with tumor regression mediated by intratumoral IL-12
electroporation gene therapy.

Li S(1), Xia X, Mellieon FM, Liu J, Steele S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, Louisiana State University,
Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA. sli@vetmed.lsu.edu

Interleukin-12 (IL-12) is one of the most effective cytokines for treating
malignancy. Intratumoral delivery of the murine Il-12 gene, using
electroporation, has been found effective in inducing regression of established
tumors in mice, and more effective than intramuscular injection of this gene by
electroporation, but what is not known is the molecular mechanism by which IL-12 
exerts an antitumor effect. To define these candidate genes, the gene expression 
profiles of tumors treated with and without intratumoral Il-12 electroporation
gene therapy were analyzed by cDNA array. Mig (Cxcl9), Stat1, and IRF7 are the
three genes that are the most altered at the level of expression after
administration of Il-12 via intratumoral electroporation, when subjected to
further characterization by Northern blot, Western blot, and immunostaining. The 
results from Northern blot and immunostaining analyses indicate that intratumoral
delivery of the murine Il-12 gene via electroporation induces accumulation of
IRF7 in the nuclei of tumor cells and upregulates Mig and Stat1 expression by 15-
and 5-fold, respectively, compared to intratumoral electroporation of control
plasmid DNA. Intramuscular injection of the same Il-12 gene using electroporation
upregulates Mig and Stat1 by only 6- and 2.9-fold, respectively, but does not
induce any IRF7 accumulation in the nuclei. Further functional analyses of Mig
indicate that expression in tumors can induce CD4+ but not CD8+ T cell
infiltration. Further functional analysis of Stat1 indicates that a lack of Stat1
expression inhibits the Il-12-mediated induction of IP10, a known antiangiogenic 
gene. These data suggest that these three genes may positively correlate with the
antitumor efficacy of intratumoral Il-12 electroporation gene therapy.

PMID: 15006601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Eur J Immunol. 2004 Mar;34(3):796-805.

Viral infection and Toll-like receptor agonists induce a differential expression 
of type I and lambda interferons in human plasmacytoid and monocyte-derived
dendritic cells.

Coccia EM(1), Severa M, Giacomini E, Monneron D, Remoli ME, Julkunen I, Cella M, 
Lande R, Uzé G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Infectious, Parasitic and
Immune-mediated Diseases, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

In humans, the type I interferon (IFN) family consists of 13 IFN-alpha subtypes, 
IFN-beta and IFN-omicron the newly discovered IFN-like family consists of
IFN-lambda1, -lambda2 and -lambda3. We have investigated the expression of type I
and lambda IFN genes following virus infections or Toll-like receptor (TLR)
triggering in monocyte-derived DC (MDDC) and plasmacytoid DC (pDC). We found that
all IFN-alpha, -beta, -omicron and -lambda subtypes are expressed in
influenza-virus-infected MDDC or pDC. Conversely, differential type I IFN gene
transcription was induced in MDDC and pDC stimulated by specific TLR agonists.
TLR-9 stimulation by CpG DNA induced the expression of all IFN-alpha, -beta,
-omicron and -lambda subtypes in pDC, whereas TLR-4 stimulation by LPS, or TLR-3 
stimulation by poly I:C, induced only IFN-beta and IFN-lambda gene expression in 
MDDC. The expression pattern of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-5 and IRF-7 in MDDC
and pDC was also determined. IRF-5 was constitutively expressed in the two DC
subsets whereas IRF-7 was constitutive in pDC but its expression was induced
along MDDC maturation. Overall, our data indicate that the coordinated expression
of IFN-lambda with IFN-beta would be of crucial importance for the maturation of 
DC.

PMID: 14991609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Autoimmunity. 2003 Dec;36(8):447-55.

Positive and negative control of virus-induced interferon-A gene expression.

Mesplède T(1), Navarro S, Génin P, Morin P, Island ML, Bonnefoy E, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228-CNRS, Laboratoire de Régulation Transcriptionnelle et Maladies
Génétiques, UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Peres, Université Paris V, 45, rue des
Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Transcriptional regulation is a consequence of the combination of both activation
and repression for establishing specific patterns of eukaryotic gene expression. 
The regulation of the expression of type I interferon (IFN-A and -B) multigene
family is controlled primarily at the transcriptional level and has been widely
studied as a model to understand the mechanisms of stable repression, transient
expression and postinduction repression of genes. The positive and negative
regulatory elements required for this on/off switch have been defined within a
complex 5' upstream region of their transcription start site. The differential
expression pattern of IFN-A genes is thought to involve both substitutions in the
virus responsive element (VRE-A) and presence or absence of the distal negative
regulatory element (DNRE) which is delimited upstream of the VRE-A. The
interferon regulatory factors (IRF)-3 and -7 binding to the VRE-A and interacting
as homodimers or heterodimers participate in the virus-induced transcriptional
activation of IFN-A family. This data and the presence of homeodomain protein
pituitary homeobox 1 (Pitx1) binding to the distal DNRE, negatively regulating
the IRF-3 and IRF-7 activities and interacting physically with IRF-3 and IRF-7
contribute to our understanding of the complex differential transcriptional
activation and repression of the IFN-A genes.

PMID: 14984021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Jan;122(1):51-60.

In psoriasis lesional skin the type I interferon signaling pathway is activated, 
whereas interferon-alpha sensitivity is unaltered.

van der Fits L(1), van der Wel LI, Laman JD, Prens EP, Verschuren MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. c.vanderfits@erasmusmc.nl

Erratum in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Aug;123(2):415.

The epidermal phenotype as observed in psoriatic skin results from inflammation
and abnormal proliferation and terminal differentiation of keratinocytes. Mice
deficient for interferon regulatory factor-2, a repressor of interferon
signaling, display psoriasis-like skin inflammation. The development of this
phenotype is strictly dependent on type I interferon (interferon-alpha/beta)
signaling. The aim of this study was to assess the involvement of
interferon-alpha/beta in the pathogenesis of human psoriasis. In psoriatic skin, 
we measured an increased expression of components that play central and crucial
roles in interferon-alpha/beta signal transduction. Culturing keratinocytes or
healthy skin biopsies with recombinant interferon-alpha stimulated this signaling
pathway; however, this did not induce the expression of markers that are
generally used to define the psoriasis phenotype. Furthermore, skin from
psoriasis patients responded identically to interferon-alpha stimulation,
demonstrating that psoriatic skin does not have an aberrant sensitivity to type I
interferon. We conclude that in psoriatic lesional skin the type I interferon
signaling pathway is activated, despite an unaltered interferon-alpha
sensitivity. Our data furthermore show that type I interferon, in contrast to
interferon-gamma, does not act directly on keratinocytes to induce a psoriatic
phenotype. Thus, if the observed activated type I interferon signaling is indeed 
functionally involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis, its contribution might be
indirect, putatively involving other cell types besides keratinocytes.

PMID: 14962089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Virol. 2004 Feb;78(4):1706-17.

Innate cellular response to virus particle entry requires IRF3 but not virus
replication.

Collins SE(1), Noyce RS, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5.

Mammalian cells respond to virus infections by eliciting both innate and adaptive
immune responses. One of the most effective innate antiviral responses is the
production of alpha/beta interferon and the subsequent induction of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), whose products collectively limit virus
replication and spread. Following viral infection, interferon is produced in a
biphasic fashion that involves a number of transcription factors, including the
interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 1, 3, 7, and 9. In addition, virus infection
has been shown to directly induce ISGs in the absence of prior interferon
production through the activation of IRF3. This process is believed to require
virus replication and results in IRF3 hyperphosphorylation, nuclear localization,
and proteasome-mediated degradation. Previously, we and others demonstrated that 
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) induces ISGs and an antiviral response in
fibroblasts in the absence of both interferon production and virus replication.
In this report, we show that the entry of enveloped virus particles from diverse 
virus families elicits a similar innate response. This process requires IRF3, but
not IRF1, IRF7, or IRF9. Following virus replication, the large DNA viruses HSV-1
and vaccinia virus effectively inhibit ISG mRNA accumulation, whereas the small
RNA viruses Newcastle disease virus, Sendai virus, and vesicular stomatitis virus
do not. In addition, we found that IRF3 hyperphosphorylation and degradation do
not correlate with ISG and antiviral state induction but instead serve as a
hallmark of productive virus replication, particularly following a
high-multiplicity infection. Collectively, these data suggest that virus entry
triggers an innate antiviral response mediated by IRF3 and that subsequent virus 
replication results in posttranslational modification of IRF3, such as
hyperphosphorylation, depending on the nature of the incoming virus.

PMCID: PMC369475
PMID: 14747536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Virol. 2004 Feb;78(4):1675-84.

The herpes simplex virus ICP0 RING finger domain inhibits IRF3- and IRF7-mediated
activation of interferon-stimulated genes.

Lin R(1), Noyce RS, Collins SE, Everett RD, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Research Institute, Montreal H3T 1E2, Canada.

Virus infection induces a rapid cellular response in cells characterized by the
induction of interferon. While interferon itself does not induce an antiviral
response, it activates a number of interferon-stimulated genes that collectively 
function to inhibit virus replication and spread. Previously, we and others
reported that herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) induces an interferon
-independent antiviral response in the absence of virus replication. Here, we
report that the HSV-1 proteins ICP0 and vhs function in concert to disable the
host antiviral response. In particular, we show that ICP0 blocks interferon
regulatory factor IRF3- and IRF7-mediated activation of interferon-stimulated
genes and that the RING finger domain of ICP0 is essential for this activity.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that HSV-1 modifies the IRF3 pathway in a manner
different from that of the small RNA viruses most commonly studied.

PMCID: PMC369457
PMID: 14747533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 2004 Apr 9;279(15):15652-61. Epub 2004 Jan 22.

Mechanisms of the TRIF-induced interferon-stimulated response element and
NF-kappaB activation and apoptosis pathways.

Han KJ(1), Su X, Xu LG, Bin LH, Zhang J, Shu HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, National Jewish Medical and Research Center,
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, Colorado 80206, USA.
shuh@njc.org

Toll-like receptor-3 is critically involved in host defense against viruses
through induction of type I interferons (IFNs). Recent studies suggest that a
Toll/interleukin-1 receptor domain-containing adapter protein (TRIF) and two
protein kinases (TANK-binding kinase-1 (TBK1) and IkappaB kinase (IKK)-epsilon)
are critically involved in Toll-like receptor-3-mediated IFN-beta production
through activation of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and IRF-7. In this study, we 
demonstrate that TRIF interacts with both IRF-7 and IRF-3. In addition to TBK1
and IKKepsilon, our results indicate that IKKbeta can also phosphorylate IRF-3
and activate the IFN-stimulated response element. TRIF-induced IRF-3 and IRF-7
activation was mediated by TBK1 and its downstream kinases IKKbeta and
IKKepsilon. TRIF induced NF-kappaB activation through an IKKbeta- and tumor
necrosis factor receptor-associated factor-6-dependent (but not TBK1- and
IKKepsilon-dependent) pathway. In addition, TRIF also induced apoptosis through a
RIP/FADD/caspase-8-dependent and mitochondrion-independent pathway. Furthermore, 
our results suggest that the TRIF-induced IFN-stimulated response element and
NF-kappaB activation and apoptosis pathways are uncoupled and provide a molecular
explanation for the divergent effects induced by the adapter protein TRIF.

PMID: 14739303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(3):1411-25.

Transforming growth factor beta/Smad3 signaling regulates IRF-7 function and
transcriptional activation of the beta interferon promoter.

Qing J(1), Liu C, Choy L, Wu RY, Pagano JS, Derynck R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Growth and Development, Program in Cell Biology, University of
California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

The rapid induction of alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) and IFN-beta expression plays
a critical role in the innate immune response against viral infection. We studied
the effects of transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) and its intracellular
effectors, the Smads, on the function of IRF-7, an essential transcription factor
for IFN-alpha and -beta induction. IRF-7 interacted with Smads, and IRF-7, but
not IRF-3, cooperated with Smad3 to activate IFN-beta transcription. This
transcriptional cooperation occurred at the IRF-binding sequences in the IFN-beta
promoter, and dominant-negative interference with TGF-beta receptor signaling and
Smad3 function decreased IRF-7-mediated transcription. Furthermore, elimination
of Smad3 expression in Smad3(-/-) fibroblasts delayed and decreased
double-stranded RNA-induced expression of endogenous IFN-beta, whereas
restoration of Smad3 expression enhanced IFN-beta induction. The IRF-7-Smad3
cooperativity resulted from the regulation of the transactivation activity of
IRF-7 by Smad3, and dominant-negative interference with Smad3 function decreased 
IRF-7 activity. Consistent with the regulation by Smad3, the transcriptional
activity of IRF-7 depended on and was regulated by TGF-beta signaling. Our
studies underscore a role of TGF-beta/Smad3 signaling in IRF-7-mediated induction
of IFN-beta expression.

PMCID: PMC321430
PMID: 14729983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cell Res. 2003 Oct;13(5):319-33.

Methylation profiling of twenty four genes and the concordant methylation
behaviours of nineteen genes that may contribute to hepatocellular
carcinogenesis.

Yu J(1), Zhang HY, Ma ZZ, Lu W, Wang YF, Zhu JD.

Author information: 
(1)The State-Key Laboratory for Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Shanghai Jiaotong University, LN 2200/25, Xietu Road, Shanghai 200032,
China.

To determine the possible role of the epigenetic mechanisms in carcinogenesis of 
the hepatocellular carcinoma, we methylation-profiled the promoter CpG islands of
twenty four genes both in HCC tumors and the neighboring non-cancerous tissues of
twenty eight patients using the methylation-specific PCR (MSP) method in
conjunction with the DNA sequencing. In comparison with the normal liver tissues 
from the healthy donors, it was found that while remained unmethylated the ABL,
CAV, EPO, GATA3, LKB1, NEP, NFL, NIS and p27KIP1 genes, varying extents of the
HCC specific hypermethylation were found associated with the ABO, AR, CSPG2,
cyclin a1, DBCCR1, GALR2, IRF7, MGMT, MT1A, MYOD1, OCT6, p57KIP2, p73, WT1 genes,
and demethylation with the MAGEA1 gene, respectively. Judged by whether the
hypermethylated occurred in HCC more frequently than in their neighboring normal 
tissues, the hypermethylation status of the AR, DBCCR1, IRF7, OCT6, and p73 genes
was considered as the event specific to the late stage, while that the rest that 
lacked such a distinguished contrast, as the event specific to the early stage of
HCC carcinogenesis. Among all the clinical pathological parameters tested for the
association with, the hypermethylation of the cyclin a1 gene was more prevalent
in the non-cirrhosis group (P=0.021) while the hypermethylated p16INK4a gene was 
more common in the cirrhosis group (P=0.017). The concordant methylation
behaviors of nineteen genes, including the four previously studied and their
association with cirrhosis has been evaluated by the best subgroup selection
method. The data presented in this report would enable us to shape our
understanding of the mechanisms for the HCC specific loss of the epigenetic
stability of the genome, as well as the strategy of developing the novel robust
methylation based diagnostic and prognostic tools.

PMID: 14672555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 27;279(9):7643-54. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus-encoded vIRF-3 stimulates the
transcriptional activity of cellular IRF-3 and IRF-7.

Lubyova B(1), Kellum MJ, Frisancho AJ, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns Hopkins University School
of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus has been linked to Kaposi's sarcoma, body
cavity-based lymphoma, and Castleman's disease. The Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus genome contains a cluster of open reading frames encoding proteins
(vIRFs) with homology to the cellular transcription factors of the interferon
regulatory factor family. vIRF-3, also called LANA2, is a latently expressed
nuclear protein. Here we demonstrate that vIRF-3 directly interacts with cellular
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) IRF-3, IRF-7, and the transcriptional
co-activator CBP/p300. The mapping of the vIRF-3 binding domain revealed that
vIRF-3 associates with both IRF-3 and IRF-7 through its C-terminal region. The
p300 domain, which interacts with vIRF-3, is distinct from the previously
identified IBiD domain, to which both vIRF-1 and IRF-3 bind. Thus, in contrast to
vIRF-1, vIRF-3 neither blocks the interaction between IRF-3 and p300 nor inhibits
the histone acetylation. Although vIRF-3 is not a DNA-binding protein, it is
recruited to the IFNA promoters via its interaction with IRF-3 and IRF-7. The
presence of vIRF-3 in the enhanceosome assembled on the IFNA promoters increases 
binding of IRF-3, IRF-7, and acetylated histone H3 to this promoter region.
Consequently, vIRF-3 stimulates the IRF-3- and IRF-7-mediated activation of type 
I interferon (IFNA and IFNB) genes and the synthesis of biologically active type 
I interferons in infected B cells. These studies illustrate that vIRF-3 and
vIRF-1 have clearly distinct functions. In addition to its co-repressor activity,
vIRF-3 can also act as a transcriptional activator on genes controlled by
cellular IRF-3 and IRF-7.

PMID: 14668346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Cancer Res. 2003 Oct 1;63(19):6424-31.

Interferon regulatory factor 5, a novel mediator of cell cycle arrest and cell
death.

Barnes BJ(1), Kellum MJ, Pinder KE, Frisancho JA, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1650 Orleans Street, Baltimore, MD 21231, 
USA. barnebe@jhmi.edu

We have previously shown a critical role for IFN regulatory factor 5 (IRF-5) in
the innate immune response to virus infection. For the first time, we now show
that although IRF-5 is a direct target of p53, its cell cycle regulatory and
proapoptotic effects are p53 independent. IRF-5 inhibits both in vitro and in
vivo B-cell lymphoma tumor growth in the absence of wild-type p53. The molecular 
mechanism(s) of IRF-5-mediated growth inhibition is associated with a G(2)-M cell
cycle arrest and modulation of growth regulatory and proapoptotic genes,
including p21, Bak, DAP kinase 2, and Bax. Taken together, these data indicate
that although IRF-5 is a downstream target of p53, its growth inhibitory and
proapoptotic effects are independent of p53.

PMID: 14559832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2003 Nov;15(5):453-66.

Molecular cloning and characterization of crucian carp (Carassius auratus L.)
interferon regulatory factor 7.

Zhang YB(1), Hu CY, Zhang J, Huang GP, Wei LH, Zhang QY, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Wuhan Center for
Developmental Biology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Wuhan 430072, China.

Interferon (IFN) can induce an antiviral state via interferon-regulatory
transcription factors (IRFs), which bind to and control genes directed by the
interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE). Here we describe a fish IRF,
termed CaIRF7, cloned from a subtractive cDNA library which is constructed with
mRNAs obtained from crucian carp (Carassius auratus L.) blastulae embryonic (CAB)
cells infected by UV-inactivated GCHV and mock-infected cells. CaIRF7 cDNA was
found to be 1816 bp in length, with a 42 bp 5'UTR and a 508 bp 3'UTR. The open
reading frame translates into 421 amino acids in which a DNA-binding domain (DBD)
containing the repeated tryptophan motif and IRFs association domain have been
identified. Like chicken GgIRF3, CaIRF7 was most similar to mammalian IRF7 with
27 to 30% identity overall and some 37% identity in their DBDs. A single
transcript of 1.9 kb was detected in virally induced CAB cells by virtual
Northern blotting. RT-PCR analysis revealed a wide tissue distribution of CaIRF7 
constitutive expression, with detectable transcript in non-infected CAB cells and
various tissues of healthy crucian carp. In addition, CaIRF7 expression was
differentially increased by stimulation of the CAB cells with active GCHV,
UV-inactivated GCHV or CAB IFN, indicating that the activation of CaIRF7 was
directly regulated by IFN.

PMID: 14550671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Exp Med. 2003 Oct 6;198(7):1043-55. Epub 2003 Sep 29.

LPS-TLR4 signaling to IRF-3/7 and NF-kappaB involves the toll adapters TRAM and
TRIF.

Fitzgerald KA(1), Rowe DC, Barnes BJ, Caffrey DR, Visintin A, Latz E, Monks B,
Pitha PM, Golenbock DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease and Immunology, Department of Medicine, The
University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2003 Nov 3;198(9):following 1450.

Toll-IL-1-resistance (TIR) domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFN-beta
(TRIF)-related adaptor molecule (TRAM) is the fourth TIR domain-containing
adaptor protein to be described that participates in Toll receptor signaling.
Like TRIF, TRAM activates interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-3, IRF-7, and
NF-kappaB-dependent signaling pathways. Toll-like receptor (TLR)3 and 4 activate 
these pathways to induce IFN-alpha/beta, regulated on activation, normal T cell
expressed and secreted (RANTES), and gamma interferon-inducible protein 10
(IP-10) expression independently of the adaptor protein myeloid differentiation
factor 88 (MyD88). Dominant negative and siRNA studies performed here demonstrate
that TRIF functions downstream of both the TLR3 (dsRNA) and TLR4 (LPS) signaling 
pathways, whereas the function of TRAM is restricted to the TLR4 pathway. TRAM
interacts with TRIF, MyD88 adaptor-like protein (Mal)/TIRAP, and TLR4 but not
with TLR3. These studies suggest that TRIF and TRAM both function in LPS-TLR4
signaling to regulate the MyD88-independent pathway during the innate immune
response to LPS.

PMCID: PMC2194210
PMID: 14517278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Leukoc Biol. 2003 Dec;74(6):1125-38. Epub 2003 Sep 2.

Comparative analysis of IRF and IFN-alpha expression in human plasmacytoid and
monocyte-derived dendritic cells.

Izaguirre A(1), Barnes BJ, Amrute S, Yeow WS, Megjugorac N, Dai J, Feng D, Chung 
E, Pitha PM, Fitzgerald-Bocarsly P.

Author information: 
(1)UMDNJ-New Jersey Medical School, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC) produce high levels of type I IFN upon
stimulation with viruses, while monocytes and monocyte-derived dendritic cells
(MDDC) produce significantly lower levels. To find what determines the high
production of type I IFN in PDC, we examined the relative levels of IRF
transcription factors, some of which play critical roles in the induction of IFN.
Furthermore, to determine whether the differences could result from expression of
distinct IFNA subtypes, the profile of IFNA genes expressed was examined. PDC
responded equally well to stimulation with HSV-1 and Sendai virus (SV) by
producing high levels of type I IFN, whereas the MDDC and monocyte response to SV
were lower, and neither responded well to HSV-1. All three populations
constitutively expressed most of the IRF genes. However, real-time RT-PCR
demonstrated increased levels of IRF-7 transcripts in PDC compared with
monocytes. As determined by intracellular flow cytometry, the PDC constitutively 
expressed significantly higher levels of IRF-7 protein than the other populations
while IRF-3 levels were similar among populations. Analysis of the profile of
IFNA genes expressed in virus-stimulated PDC, monocytes and MDDC demonstrated
that each population expressed IFNA1 as the major subtype but that the range of
the subtypes expressed in PDC was broader, with some donor and stimulus-dependent
variability. We conclude that PDC but not MDDC are uniquely preprogrammed to
respond rapidly and effectively to a range of viral pathogens with high levels of
IFN-alpha production due to the high levels of constitutively expressed IRF-7.

PMID: 12960254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Leuk Lymphoma. 2003 Jul;44(7):1187-99.

Transcriptional profiling during the early differentiation of granulocyte and
monocyte progenitors controlled by conditional versions of the E2a-Pbx1
oncoprotein.

Sykes DB(1), Scheele J, Pasillas M, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0612, USA.

The E2a-Pbx1 oncoprotein of human pre-B cell leukemia prevents differentiation
and maintains continued cell division in cultured myeloid progenitors.
Previously, estrogen-dependent forms of E2a-Pbx1 were generated that immortalized
neutrophil (ECoM-G cells) or monocyte (ECoM-M cells) progenitors and that
permitted their terminal differentiation upon estrogen withdrawal. Here,
representational difference analysis (RDA) and Affymetrix array analysis are used
to identify changes in gene expression that accompany the early differentiation
of these cells. The promoters of these genes, whose expression changes upon
E2a-Pbx1 inactivation, integrate the biochemical mechanism through which E2a-Pbx1
arrests differentiation and maintains cell division. Inactivation of E2a-Pbx1
caused the 10- to 80-fold up regulation of a small subset of myeloid
differentiation genes (MRP8, Cnlp, NB1, Bactenecin, YM1, Stefin 1, Lipocortin,
Lactoferrin, gp91 phox and Ly6-G) and a 10-fold down regulation of the TLE1
corepressor gene, as well as of a group of genes expressed in dividing cells
(c-Myc, Nucleophosmin, Spermidine synthase, NOP56, Hnrpa1). Transcription of 97% 
of cellular genes, including 300 other transcription factor genes (21 Hox genes) 
and other myeloid genes, varied less than 3-fold, with most varying less than
50%. Therefore, E2a-Pbx1 prevents transcription and maintains the cell cycle by a
specific rather than a global transcriptional mechanism. Monocyte progenitors
were distinguished by persistent expression of IRF8 and of a category of other
genes characterized as "interferon-stimulated" (ISG15, ISG20, Ifit1, Ifi202a,
Ifi203, IfiS204, Ifi204-related, IRF7 and Ly6-E.1), as well as by the
upregulation of the Lrg21 bZip transcription factor gene during late
differentiation. The synchronous expression of stage-specific and cell cycle
genes regulated by E2a-Pbx1 in these cell lines comprises a model system in which
analysis of their promoters can be used as a starting point to backtrack to the
transcriptional mechanisms of oncogenesis by E2a-Pbx1.

PMID: 12916872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Virol. 2003 Sep;77(17):9359-68.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 regulates expression of Epstein-Barr virus latent 
membrane protein 1: a regulatory circuit.

Ning S(1), Hahn AM, Huye LE, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

We have shown previously that interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7), a
multifunctional protein intimately involved in latent Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
infection, is induced as well as activated by EBV latent membrane protein 1
(LMP1), the principal EBV oncoprotein. Since the LMP1 promoter (LMP1p) contains
an interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE), we hypothesized that IRF7 might
be able to regulate LMP1 expression and thus participate in a regulatory circuit 
between these two genes. In this study, IRF7 was shown first to activate LMP1p in
transient transfection assays. Compared with EBV nuclear antigen 2 (EBNA2), the
most potent viral transactivator of LMP1p, IRF7 has a lesser effect
(approximately 10% that of EBNA2) on induction of LMP1p. Study with IRF7 deletion
mutants showed that IRF7 functional domains have similar effects on both the beta
interferon (IFN-beta) and LMP1 promoters in BJAB and 293 cells, and study with
IRF7 phosphomimetic mutants showed that IRF7 phosphorylation may be involved in
the activation of these two promoters. Further, the ISRE in LMP1p responds to
IRF7 induction and IRF7 binds to this element. In the EBV-positive cell line
P3HR1, which lacks the complete EBNA2 and EBV-encoded leader protein genes and
hence expresses low-level LMP1, IRF7 alone can notably increase the endogenous
LMP1 mRNA and protein levels. These results indicate that LMP1 is regulated by
this host cell gene in addition to the viral factor, EBNA2, and may help to
explain how LMP1 is expressed in type II latency in the absence of EBNA2.
Moreover, IRF7 can regulate a viral gene in addition to a host cellular gene such
as the IFN-beta gene. Together with the previous data that LMP1 can induce IRF7
expression and facilitate IRF7 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation, these
results suggest a positive regulatory circuit between IRF7 and LMP1.

PMCID: PMC187426
PMID: 12915551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jul 11;306(4):860-6.

Essential role of IRF-3 in lipopolysaccharide-induced interferon-beta gene
expression and endotoxin shock.

Sakaguchi S(1), Negishi H, Asagiri M, Nakajima C, Mizutani T, Takaoka A, Honda K,
Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Type I interferons (IFN-alpha/beta) affect many aspects of immune responses. Many
pathogen-associated molecules, including bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and
virus-associated double-stranded RNA, induce IFN gene expression through
activation of distinct Toll-like receptors (TLRs). Although much has been studied
about the activation of the transcription factor IRF-3 and induction of IFN-beta 
gene by the LPS-mediated TLR4 signaling, definitive evidence is missing about the
actual role of IRF-3 in LPS responses in vitro and in vivo. Using IRF-3 deficient
mice, we show here that IRF-3 is indeed essential for the LPS-mediated IFN-beta
gene induction. Loss of IRF-3 also affects the expression of profile of other
cytokine/chemokine genes. We also provide evidence that the LPS/TLR4 signaling
activates IRF-7 to induce IFN-beta, if IRF-7 is induced by IFNs prior to LPS
simulation. Finally, the IRF-3-deficient mice show resistance to LPS-induced
endotoxin shock. These results place IRF-3 as a molecule central to LPS/TLR4
signaling.

PMID: 12821121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Virol. 2003 Jun;77(12):7113-9.

Impairment of interferon-induced IRF-7 gene expression due to inhibition of ISGF3
formation by trichostatin A.

Génin P(1), Morin P, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228-CNRS, Laboratoire de Régulation Transcriptionnelle et Maladies
Génétiques, UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université Paris V, 75270 Paris
Cedex 06, France.

Two members of the signal transducer and activator of transcription family, STAT1
and STAT2, form, together with interferon regulatory factor 9 (IRF-9), the ISGF3 
complex that activates the expression of the interferon-stimulated genes (ISG).
The ISGF3 complex also participates in the virus-induced alpha/beta interferon
(IFN-alpha/beta) gene amplification cascade by up-regulating IRF-7 gene
expression. Here, we show that treatment of cells with trichostatin A (TSA), a
deacetylase inhibitor, inhibits the virus-induced activation of IFN-alpha/beta
promoters and dramatically reduces the ability of different ISG promoters to
respond to IFN stimulation. Impairment of IFN-alpha/beta and ISG expression by
TSA in infected cells is due to the blockage of interferon-stimulated ISGF3
complex formation, which leads to the abolition of IRF-7 gene expression. We also
show that the TSA-dependent inhibition of ISGF3 is related to impaired nuclear
accumulation of STAT2. Our data suggest that an acetylation/deacetylation
mechanism participates in the regulation of cellular distribution and function of
STAT2 in IFN-alpha/beta signaling.

PMCID: PMC156205
PMID: 12768031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 18;278(29):26589-96. Epub 2003 May 5.

The tumor suppressor interferon regulatory factor 1 interferes with SP1
activation to repress the human CDK2 promoter.

Xie RL(1), Gupta S, Miele A, Shiffman D, Stein JL, Stein GS, van Wijnen AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Cell growth control by interferons (IFNs) involves up-regulation of the tumor
suppressor interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF1). To exert its anti-proliferative
effects, this factor must ultimately control transcription of several key genes
that regulate cell cycle progression. Here we show that the G1/S phase-related
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2) gene is a novel proliferation-related downstream
target of IRF1. We find that IRF1, but not IRF2, IRF3, or IRF7, selectively
represses CDK2 gene transcription in a dose- and time-dependent manner. We
delineate the IRF1-responsive repressor element between nt -68 to -31 of the CDK2
promoter. For comparison, the tumor suppressor p53 represses CDK2 promoter
activity independently of IRF1 through sequences upstream of nt -68, and the
CDP/cut/Cux1 homeodomain protein represses transcription down-stream of -31.
Thus, IRF1 repression represents one of three distinct mechanisms to attenuate
CDK2 levels. The -68/-31 segment lacks a canonical IRF responsive element but
contains a single SP1 binding site. Mutation of this element abrogates
SP1-dependent enhancement of CDK2 promoter activity as expected but also
abolishes IRF1-mediated repression. Forced elevation of SP1 levels increases
endogenous CDK2 levels, whereas IRF1 reduces both endogenous SP1 and CDK2 protein
levels. Hence, IRF1 represses CDK2 gene expression by interfering with
SP1-dependent transcriptional activation. Our findings establish a causal series 
of events that functionally connect the anti-proliferative effects of interferons
with the IRF1-dependent suppression of the CDK2 gene, which encodes a key
regulator of the G1/S phase transition.

PMID: 12732645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Immunol. 2003 May 1;170(9):4465-74.

Activation with CpG-A and CpG-B oligonucleotides reveals two distinct regulatory 
pathways of type I IFN synthesis in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Kerkmann M(1), Rothenfusser S, Hornung V, Towarowski A, Wagner M, Sarris A, Giese
T, Endres S, Hartmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, University
of Munich, Munich, Germany.

Comment in
    J Immunol. 2003 Sep 15;171(6):2767.

Two different CpG oligonucleotides (ODN) were used to study the regulation of
type I IFN in human plasmacytoid dendritic cells (PDC): ODN 2216, a CpG-A ODN,
known to induce high amounts of IFN-alpha in PDC, and ODN 2006, a CpG-B ODN,
which is potent at stimulating B cells. CpG-A ODN showed higher and prolonged
kinetics of type I IFN production compared with that of CpG-B ODN. In contrast,
CpG-B ODN was more active than CpG-A ODN in stimulating IL-8 production and
increasing costimulatory and Ag-presenting molecules, suggesting that CpG-A and
CpG-B trigger distinct regulatory pathways in PDC. Indeed, CpG-A ODN, but not
CpG-B ODN, activated the type I IFNR-mediated autocrine feedback loop. PDC were
found to express high constitutive levels of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)7. IRF7
and STAT1, but not IRF3, were equally up-regulated by both CpG-A and CpG-B. CD40 
ligand synergistically increased CpG-B-induced IFN-alpha independent of the IFNR 
but did not affect CpG-B-induced IFN-beta. In conclusion, our studies provide
evidence for the existence of two distinct regulatory pathways of type I IFN
synthesis in human PDC, one dependent on and one independent of the IFNR-mediated
feedback loop. The alternate use of these pathways is based on the type of
stimulus rather than the quantity of IFN-alphabeta available to trigger the IFNR.
Constitutive expression of IRF7 and the ability to produce considerable amounts
of IFN-alpha independent of the IFNR seem to represent characteristic features of
PDC.

PMID: 12707322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Science. 2003 May 16;300(5622):1148-51. Epub 2003 Apr 17.

Triggering the interferon antiviral response through an IKK-related pathway.

Sharma S(1), tenOever BR, Grandvaux N, Zhou GP, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research-Jewish General Hospital, Departments
of Microbiology and Immunology and Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec 
H3T 1E2, Canada.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2004 Jan;40(1):184-6.
    Science. 2003 May 16;300(5622):1100-1.

Rapid induction of type I interferon expression, a central event in establishing 
the innate antiviral response, requires cooperative activation of numerous
transcription factors. Although signaling pathways that activate the
transcription factors nuclear factor kappaB and ATF-2/c-Jun have been well
characterized, activation of the interferon regulatory factors IRF-3 and IRF-7
has remained a critical missing link in understanding interferon signaling. We
report here that the IkappaB kinase (IKK)-related kinases IKKepsilon and
TANK-binding kinase 1 are components of the virus-activated kinase that
phosphorylate IRF-3 and IRF-7. These studies illustrate an essential role for an 
IKK-related kinase pathway in triggering the host antiviral response to viral
infection.

PMID: 12702806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Nat Immunol. 2003 May;4(5):471-7. Epub 2003 Apr 7.

Central role for type I interferons and Tyk2 in lipopolysaccharide-induced
endotoxin shock.

Karaghiosoff M(1), Steinborn R, Kovarik P, Kriegshäuser G, Baccarini M, Donabauer
B, Reichart U, Kolbe T, Bogdan C, Leanderson T, Levy D, Decker T, Müller M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, Veterinary University of Vienna,
A-1210 Vienna, Austria.

Toll-like receptor-4 activation by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces the
expression of interferon-beta (IFN-beta) in a MyD88-independent manner. Here we
report that mice devoid of the JAK protein tyrosine kinase family member, Tyk2,
were resistant to shock induced by high doses of LPS. Basal and LPS-induced
expression of IFN-beta and IFN-alpha4 mRNA in Tyk2-null macrophages were
diminished. However, Tyk2-null mice showed normal systemic production of nitric
oxide and proinflammatory cytokines and the in vivo response to tumor necrosis
factor (TNF) was unperturbed. IFN-beta-null but not STAT1-null mice were also
resistant to high dose LPS treatment. Together, these data suggest that Tyk2 and 
IFN-beta are essential effectors in LPS induced lethality.

PMID: 12679810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Virol. 2003 Apr;77(7):4221-30.

The ORF45 protein of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus is associated with
purified virions.

Zhu FX(1), Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Dental
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) ORF45 is encoded by an
immediate-early gene in the KSHV genome. This protein was recently shown to
interact with interferon regulatory factor 7 and inhibit virus-mediated
alpha/beta interferon induction (Zhu et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA
99:5573-5578, 2002). ORF45 was characterized as a phosphorylated protein, and it 
is localized in the cytoplasm of infected cells. In this report, we provide
evidence that ORF45 is associated with KSHV virions. (i) ORF45 was detected in
gradient-purified virions by Western blotting along with known structural
proteins of KSHV including gB, K8.1, and major capsid protein. In contrast,
ORF50/Rta, K8alpha, and ORF59/PF8 were not detected in the same virion
preparation. (ii) ORF45 comigrates with KSHV virions in sucrose gradient
ultracentrifugation. (iii) Virion-associated ORF45 was resistant to trypsin
digestion but became sensitive after the virions were treated with detergent
which destroys the viral envelope. (iv) ORF45 remained associated with
tegument-nucleocapsid complex when virion-specific glycoproteins were removed
after detergent treatment. (v) An ORF45 protein band was visualized by sodium
dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis of extensively purified KSHV
virions and identified by mass spectrometry. (vi) By immunoelectron microscopy,
virus-like structures were specifically stained by anti-ORF45 antibody. Based on 
the evidence, we conclude that ORF45 is associated with purified KSHV virions and
appears to be a tegument protein. The presence of ORF45 in KSHV virions raised
the possibility that this protein may be delivered to host cells at the start of 
infection and therefore have the opportunity to act at the very early stage of
the infection, suggesting an important role of ORF45 in KSHV primary infection.

PMCID: PMC150667
PMID: 12634379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Immunol. 2003 Mar 15;170(6):3059-64.

The roles of Toll-like receptor 9, MyD88, and DNA-dependent protein kinase
catalytic subunit in the effects of two distinct CpG DNAs on dendritic cell
subsets.

Hemmi H(1), Kaisho T, Takeda K, Akira S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Host Defense, Research Institute for Microbial Diseases, Osaka
University and Solution-Oriented Research for Science and Technology, Japan
Science and Technology Corp., Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Oligodeoxynucleotides containing unmethylated CpG motifs (CpG DNAs) can function 
as powerful immune adjuvants by activating APC. Compared with conventional
phosphorothioate-backbone CpG DNAs, another type of CpG DNAs, called an A or D
type (A/D-type), possesses higher ability to induce IFN-alpha production.
Conventional CpG DNAs can exert their activity through Toll-like receptor 9
(TLR9) signaling, which depends on a cytoplasmic adapter, MyD88. However, it
remains unknown how A/D-type CpG DNAs exhibit their immunostimulatory function.
In this study we have investigated murine dendritic cell (DC) responses to these 
two distinct CpG DNAs. Not only splenic, but also in vitro bone marrow-derived,
DCs could produce larger amounts of IFN-alpha in response to A/D-type CpG DNAs
compared with conventional CpG DNAs. This IFN-alpha production was mainly due to 
the B220(+) DC subset. On the other hand, the B220(-) DC subset responded
similarly to both CpG DNAs in terms of costimulatory molecule up-regulation and
IL-12 induction. IFN-alpha, but not IL-12, induction was dependent on type I IFN.
However, all activities of both CpG DNAs were abolished in TLR9- and MyD88-, but 
were retained in DNA-PKcs-deficient DCs. This study demonstrates that the
TLR9-MyD88 signaling pathway is essential for all DC responses to both types of
CpG DNAs.

PMID: 12626561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Vaccine. 2003 Mar 28;21(13-14):1363-70.

Super-activated interferon-regulatory factors can enhance plasmid immunization.

Bramson JL(1), Dayball K, Hall JR, Millar JB, Miller M, Wan YH, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Center for Gene Therapeutics, 
McMaster University, 1200 Main Street West, Hamilton, Ont., Canada L8N 3Z5.
bramsonj@mcmaster.ca

We have been investigating the adjuvant properties of two super-activated
interferon-regulatory factors (IRFs), IRF-3(5D) and IRF7/3A, identified in our
previous studies of structure-function relationships, for enhancing plasmid
vaccines. Intramuscular injection of plasmid cocktails encoding IRF-3(5D) and
IRF7/3A molecules elicited cytotoxic T cell responses in over 80% of mice
following a single immunization compared to a 20% response-rate using a control
cocktail. Most interestingly, greater than 60% of mice immunized with the
super-activated IRFs developed antigen-specific antibodies compared to 0% of the 
mice in the control group. Finally, vaccines which incorporated the
super-activated IRFs provided greater protection against challenge with a
recombinant vaccinia virus. These results support further investigation of the
potential of these agents as adjuvants for genetic immunization.

PMID: 12615431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):15495-504. Epub 2003 Feb 25.

Interferon regulatory factor-7 synergizes with other transcription factors
through multiple interactions with p300/CBP coactivators.

Yang H(1), Lin CH, Ma G, Baffi MO, Wathelet MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology, University of Cincinnati
College of Medicine, 231 Albert Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0576, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-7 is activated in response to virus infection 
and stimulates the transcription of a set of cellular genes involved in host
antiviral defense. The mechanism by which IRF-7 is activated and cooperates with 
other transcription factors is not fully elucidated. Activation of IRF-7 results 
from a conformational change triggered by the virus-dependent phosphorylation of 
its C terminus. This conformational change leads to dimerization, nuclear
accumulation, DNA-binding, and transcriptional transactivation. Here we show that
activation of IRF-7, like that of IRF-3, is dependent on modifications of two
distinct sets of Ser/Thr residues. Moreover, we show that different
virus-inducible cis-acting elements display requirements for specific IRFs. In
particular, the virus-responsive element of the ISG15 gene promoter can be
activated by either IRF-3 or IRF-7 alone, whereas the P31 element of the
interferon-beta gene is robustly activated only when IRF-3, IRF-7, and the
p300/CBP coactivators are all present. Furthermore, we find that IRF-7 interacts 
with four distinct regions of p300/CBP. These interactions not only stimulate the
intrinsic transcriptional activity of IRF-7, but they are also indispensable for 
its ability to strongly synergize with other transcription factors, including
c-Jun and IRF-3.

PMID: 12604599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):16630-41. Epub 2003 Feb 24.

Virus-induced heterodimer formation between IRF-5 and IRF-7 modulates assembly of
the IFNA enhanceosome in vivo and transcriptional activity of IFNA genes.

Barnes BJ(1), Field AE, Pitha-Rowe PM.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.
barnebe@jhmi.edu

Transcription factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family have been 
identified as critical mediators of early inflammatory gene transcription in
infected cells. We have shown previously that IRF-5, like IRF-3 and IRF-7, is a
direct transducer of virus-mediated signaling and plays a role in the expression 
of multiple cytokines/chemokines. The present study is focused on the molecular
mechanisms underlying the formation and function of IRF-5/IRF-7 heterodimers in
infected cells. The interaction between IRF-5 and IRF-7 is not cooperative and
results in a repression rather than enhancement of IFNA gene transcription. The
formation of the IRF-5/IRF-7 heterodimer is dependent on IRF-7 phosphorylation,
as shown by the glutathione S-transferase pull-down and immunoprecipitation
assays. Mapping of the interaction domain revealed that formation of IRF-5/IRF-7 
heterodimers occurs through the amino terminus resulting in a masking of the DNA 
binding domain, the consequent alteration of the composition of the enhanceosome 
complex binding to IFNA promoters in vivo, and modulation of the expression
profile of IFNA subtypes. Thus, these results indicate that IRF-5 can act as both
an activator and a repressor of IFN gene induction dependent on the
IRF-interacting partner, and IRF-5 may be a part of the regulatory network that
ensures timely expression of the immediate early inflammatory genes.

PMID: 12600985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Biochimie. 2002 Jul;84(7):643-54.

Regulation of virus-induced interferon-A genes.

Civas A(1), Island ML, Génin P, Morin P, Navarro S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228, CNRS, Laboratoire de régulation transcriptionnelle et maladies
génétiques, UFR biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université Paris V, 45, rue des
Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris cedex 6, France. civas@biomedicale.univ-paris5.fr

Different members of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family are early
activated by viral infection of eukaryotic cells. The IRFs participate in the
virus-induced transcriptional regulation of different genes, including the
multigenic interferon-A (IFN-A) family, members of which are involved in the
establishment of an antiviral state, cell growth inhibition or apoptosis. This
study presents the recent progress in the field of virus-induced transactivation 
and repression of IFN-A gene promoters. Data presented on the modular
organization of IFN-A gene promoters and their transactivation dependent on IRF-3
and IRF-7 provide a new insight on the cooperativity mechanisms among the
different IRF family members. Data on the transcriptional repression of
virus-induced interferon-A promoters by the homeodomain protein Pitx1 contribute 
to our understanding of the complex differential transcriptional activation,
repression and antirepression of the IFN-A genes.

Copyright 2002 Société françcaise de biochimie et biologie moléculaire / Editions
scientifiques et médicales Elsevier SAS

PMID: 12453636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Nov;72(5):1011-9.

CpG-DNA-induced IFN-alpha production involves p38 MAPK-dependent STAT1
phosphorylation in human plasmacytoid dendritic cell precursors.

Takauji R(1), Iho S, Takatsuka H, Yamamoto S, Takahashi T, Kitagawa H, Iwasaki H,
Iida R, Yokochi T, Matsuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Fukui Medical University, Yochida-gun, Japan.

Human plasmacytoid or CD4(+)CD11c(-) type 2 dendritic cell precursors (PDC) were 
identified as natural type I interferon (IFN)-producing cells in response to
viral and bacterial infection. They represent effector cells of innate immunity
and link it to the distinct adaptive immunity by differentiating into mature DC. 
It has been reported that oligodeoxyribonucleotides containing unmethylated CpG
motifs (CpG DNA) stimulate PDC to produce IFN-alpha, but the molecular mechanisms
involved remain unknown. We found that CpG-DNA-induced IFN-alpha production in
PDC was completely impaired by the inhibitor of the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathway. Expression of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-7 was enhanced
by CpG-DNA treatment, which was preceded by the phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)1 on Tyr-701, as well as its
enhanced phosphorylation on Ser-727. All of these events were also suppressed by 
the p38 MAPK inhibitor. STAT1, STAT2, and IRF-9, components of IFN-stimulated
gene factor 3 (ISGF3), were recognized in the nuclear fraction of CpG-DNA-treated
cells. Neither anti-IFN-alpha/beta antibodies (Ab) nor anti-IFNAR Ab suppressed
STAT1 phosphorylation, enhancement of IRF-7 expression, or IFN-alpha production
in the early phase of the culture. These results suggest that CpG DNA induces p38
MAPK-dependent phosphorylation of STAT1 in a manner independent of
IFN-alpha/beta, which may cause ISGF3 formation to increase the transcription of 
the IRF-7 gene, thereby leading to IFN-alpha production in human PDC.

PMID: 12429724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 2002 Dec 20;277(51):49417-21. Epub 2002 Oct 8.

Acetylation of interferon regulatory factor-7 by p300/CREB-binding protein
(CBP)-associated factor (PCAF) impairs its DNA binding.

Caillaud A(1), Prakash A, Smith E, Masumi A, Hovanessian AG, Levy DE, Marié I.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Virologie et Immunologie Cellulaire, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris,
France.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is an interferon-inducible transcription
factor required for induction of delayed early interferon alpha genes and the
onset of a potent antiviral state. After induction of IRF7 by autocrine
interferon, latent IRF7 is activated by virus-induced phosphorylation on serine
residues within the C-terminal regulatory domain. Although it is likely that IRF7
is subjected to a cascade of events responsible for regulating its biological
activity, to date no mechanism other than phosphorylation has been reported to
modulate IRF7 activity. Here, we report that IRF7 is acetylated in vivo by the
histone acetyltransferases p300/CBP-associated factor (PCAF) and GCN5. The single
lysine residue target for acetylation, lysine 92, is located in the DNA-binding
domain and is conserved throughout the entire IRF family. Mutation of lysine 92
resulted in complete abolition of DNA binding ability. However, a mutant that
cannot be acetylated by PCAF due to a change in the surrounding amino acid
context of lysine 92 showed increased DNA binding and activity compared with wild
type IRF7. Conversely, we showed that acetylated IRF7 displayed impaired DNA
binding capability and that over-expression of PCAF led to decreased IRF7
activity. Together, our results strongly suggest that acetylation of lysine 92
negatively modulates IRF7 DNA binding.

PMID: 12374802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Oct;22(20):7120-33.

Repression by homeoprotein pitx1 of virus-induced interferon a promoters is
mediated by physical interaction and trans repression of IRF3 and IRF7.

Island ML(1), Mesplede T, Darracq N, Bandu MT, Christeff N, Djian P, Drouin J,
Navarro S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Régulation de la Transcription et Maladies Génétiques, CNRS,
UPR 2228, UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université René Descartes, 75270
Paris Cedex 06, France.

Interferon A (IFN-A) genes are differentially expressed after virus induction.
The differential expression of individual IFN-A genes is modulated by the
specific transcription activators IFN regulatory factor 3 (IRF3) and IRF-7 and
the homeoprotein transcription repressor Pitx1. We now show that repression by
Pitx1 does not appear to be due to the recruitment of histone deacetylases. On
the other hand, Pitx1 inhibits the IRF3 and IRF7 transcriptional activity of the 
IFN-A11 and IFN-A5 promoters and interacts physically with IRF3 and IRF7. Pitx1
trans-repression activity maps to specific C-terminal domains, and the Pitx1
homeodomain is involved in physical interaction with IRF3 or IRF7. IRF3 is able
to bind to the antisilencer region of the IFN-A4 promoter, which overrides the
repressive activity of Pitx1. These results indicate that interaction between the
Pitx1 homeodomain and IRF3 or IRF7 and the ability of the Pitx1 C-terminal
repressor domains to block IFN-A11 and IFN-A5 but not IFN-A4 promoter activities 
may contribute to our understanding of the complex differential transcriptional
activation, repression, and antirepression of the IFN-A genes.

PMCID: PMC139826
PMID: 12242290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Virol. 2002 Jul;76(13):6652-9.

Regulation of DNA-raised immune responses by cotransfected interferon regulatory 
factors.

Sasaki S(1), Amara RR, Yeow WS, Pitha PM, Robinson HL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology and Immunology, Yerkes National Primate Research
Center and Vaccine Research Center, Emory University School of Medicine, 954
Gatewood Road, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1), IRF-3, and IRF-7 have been tested as
genetic adjuvants for influenza virus hemagglutinin (HA) and nucleoprotein
vaccine DNAs. Cotransfection of HA with IRF-3 and IRF-7 increased CD4 T-cell
responses by 2- to 4-fold and CD8 T-cell responses by more than 10-fold.
Following intramuscular deliveries of DNA, both CD4 and CD8 T cells were biased
towards type 1 immune responses and the production of gamma interferon. Following
gene gun bombardments of DNA, both were biased towards type 2 immune responses
and the production of interleukin-4. The biases of the T-cell responses towards
type 1 or type 2 were stronger for immunizations with IRF-3 as an adjuvant than
for immunizations with IRF-7 as an adjuvant. Moderate adjuvant effects for
antibody were observed. The isotypes of the antibody responses reflected the
method of DNA delivery; intramuscular deliveries of DNA predominantly raised
immunoglobulin G2a (IgG2a), whereas gene gun deliveries of DNA predominantly
raised IgG1. These biases were enhanced by the codelivered IRFs. Overall, under
the conditions of our experiments, IRF-3 had good activity for T cells, IRF-7 had
good activity for both antibody and T cells, and IRF-1 had good activity for
antibody.

PMCID: PMC136278
PMID: 12050378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26225-32. Epub 2002 May 13.

BRCA1 regulates the interferon gamma-mediated apoptotic response.

Andrews HN(1), Mullan PB, McWilliams S, Sebelova S, Quinn JE, Gilmore PM, McCabe 
N, Pace A, Koller B, Johnston PG, Haber DA, Harkin DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Cancer Research Centre, The Queen's University
Belfast, Belfast BT9 7AB, Northern Ireland.

BRCA1 is a tumor suppressor gene implicated in transcriptional regulation. We
have generated cell lines with inducible expression of BRCA1 as a tool to
identify downstream targets that may be important mediators of BRCA1 function.
Oligonucleotide array-based expression profiling identified 11 previously
described interferon regulated genes that were up-regulated following inducible
expression of BRCA1. Northern blot analysis revealed that a subset of the
identified targets including IRF-7, MxA, and ISG-54 were synergistically
up-regulated by BRCA1 in the presence of interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) but not
interferons alpha or beta. Importantly, IFN-gamma-mediated induction of IRF-7 and
MxA was attenuated in the BRCA1 mutant cell line HCC1937, an effect that was
rescued following reconstitution of exogenous wild type BRCA1 in these cells.
Furthermore, reconstituted BRCA1 sensitized HCC1937 cells to IFN-gamma-induced
apoptotic cell death. This study identifies BRCA1 as a component of the
IFN-gamma-regulated signaling pathway and suggests that BRCA1 may play a role in 
the regulation of IFN-gamma-mediated apoptosis.

PMID: 12011077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 May 1;30(9):2068-75.

Functional characterization of the interferon regulatory element in the enhancer 
1 region of the hepatitis B virus genome.

Alcantara FF(1), Tang H, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

An interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE)/interferon regulatory element
(IRE) spanning nucleotide coordinates 1091-1100 is present in the enhancer 1/X
gene promoter region of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome. In the context of a
minimal promoter element, the enhancer 1/X gene promoter ISRE/IRE was shown to be
a functional regulatory site capable of mediating interferon alpha- (IFNalpha)
and interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3)-specific transcriptional
activation in transient transfection analysis. The enhancer 1/X gene promoter
ISRE/IRE was also shown to mediate interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 1 and IRF7 
activation of transcription from a minimal promoter construct. In contrast,
IFNalpha and the IRFs had minimal effect on HBV transcription and replication in 
the context of the viral genome in cell culture.

PMCID: PMC113846
PMID: 11972347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Gene Ther. 2002 Mar;9(6):390-7.

Regression of tumors by IFN-alpha electroporation gene therapy and analysis of
the responsible genes by cDNA array.

Li S(1), Xia X, Zhang X, Suen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Head and Neck Surgery, Henry Ford Health System, 
Detroit, MI 48202, USA.

The key to success with nonviral gene therapy as a treatment for cancer is to
discover effective therapeutic genes and gene delivery methods and to understand 
how tumors are eradicated. We discovered that electroporation of IFN-alpha DNA
into tumors in the SCCVII tumor-bearing mice led to tumor eradication in 50% of
the mice and a more than two-fold increase in survival time when compared with
controls (P = 0.0012). Analyses using cDNA array and Northern blot indicated that
the genes responsible for the therapeutic effect of electro-IFN-alpha gene
therapy included IRF-7, Granzyme A, Granzyme C, Gjb2, Krt14, Mig, IP-10 and MCP3.
Because most of these genes have been known to either inhibit angiogenesis (Mig, 
IP-10), inhibit tumor growth (Gjb2, MCP3), kill tumor cells (Granzyme A and C),
or induce expression of antitumor gene (IRF-7), they may become promising
therapeutic gene candidates for a combination gene therapy approach to cancer
treatment.

PMID: 11960315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 16;99(8):5573-8. Epub 2002 Apr 9.

A Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesviral protein inhibits virus-mediated
induction of type I interferon by blocking IRF-7 phosphorylation and nuclear
accumulation.

Zhu FX(1), King SM, Smith EJ, Levy DE, Yuan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania School of Dental
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Interferons constitute the earliest immune response against viral infection. They
elicit antiviral effects as well as multiple biological responses involved in
cell growth regulation and immune activation. Because the interferon-induced
cellular antiviral response is the primary defense mechanism against viral
infection, many viruses have evolved strategies to antagonize the inhibitory
effects of interferon. Here, we demonstrate a strategy that Kaposi's
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus uses to block virus-mediated induction of type I
interferon. We found that a viral immediate-early protein, namely ORF45,
interacts with cellular interferon-regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7). In consequence,
IRF-7 phosphorylation is inhibited and the accumulation of IRF-7 in the nucleus
in response to viral infection is blocked. IRF-7 is a transcription regulator
that is responsible for virus-mediated activation of type I interferon genes. By 
blocking the phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF-7, ORF45
efficiently inhibits the activation of interferon alpha and beta genes during
viral infection. Inhibition of interferon gene expression through a viral protein
blocking the activation and nuclear translocation of a crucial transcription
factor is a novel mechanism for viral immune evasion.

PMCID: PMC122811
PMID: 11943871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Virol. 2002 May;76(9):4520-5.

Promotion of alpha/beta interferon induction during in vivo viral infection
through alpha/beta interferon receptor/STAT1 system-dependent and -independent
pathways.

Malmgaard L(1), Salazar-Mather TP, Lewis CA, Biron CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Division of Biology and
Medicine, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.

Viruses and viral components can be potent inducers of alpha/beta interferons
(IFN-alpha/beta). In culture, IFN-alpha/beta prime for their own expression, in
response to viruses, through interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7) induction.
The studies presented here evaluated the requirements for functional IFN
receptors and the IFN signaling molecule STAT1 in IFN-alpha/beta induction during
infections of mice with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). At 24 h after 
infection, levels of induced IFN-alpha/beta in serum were reduced 90 to 95% in
IFN-alpha/beta receptor-deficient (IFN-alpha/betaR(-/-)) and STAT1(-/-) mice
compared to those in wild-type mice. However, at 48 h, these mice showed elevated
expression in the serum whereas IFN-alpha/beta levels were still reduced >75% in 
IFN-alpha/betagammaR(-/-) mice even though the viral burden was heavy. Levels of 
IFN-beta, IFN-alpha4, and non-IFN-alpha4 subtype mRNA expression correlated with 
IFN-alpha/beta bioactivity, and all IFN-alpha/beta subtypes were coincidentally
detectable. IRF-7 mRNA was induced under conditions of IFN-alpha/beta production,
including late production in IFN-alpha/betaR(-/-) mice. These data demonstrate
that the presence of the virus alone is not sufficient to induce IFN-alpha/beta
during LCMV infection in vivo. Instead, autocrine amplification through the
IFN-alpha/betaR is necessary for optimal induction. In the absence of a
functional IFN-alpha/betaR, however, alternative mechanisms, independent of STAT1
but requiring a functional IFN-gammaR, take over.

PMCID: PMC155081
PMID: 11932417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Virol. 2002 Apr;76(7):3395-420.

Altered patterns of cellular gene expression in dermal microvascular endothelial 
cells infected with Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus.

Poole LJ(1), Yu Y, Kim PS, Zheng QZ, Pevsner J, Hayward GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, .Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 2120, USA.

Kaposi's sarcoma (KS)-associated herpesvirus (KSHV; also called human herpesvirus
8) is believed to be the etiologic agent of Kaposi's sarcoma, multicentric
Castleman's disease, and AIDS-associated primary effusion lymphoma. KSHV
infection of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (DMVEC) in culture
results in the conversion of cobblestone-shaped cells to spindle-shaped cells, a 
characteristic morphological feature of cells in KS lesions. All spindle-shaped
cells in KSHV-infected DMVEC cultures express the latency-associated nuclear
protein LANA1, and a subfraction of these cells undergo spontaneous lytic cycle
induction that can be enhanced by tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate (TPA) treatment. 
To study the cellular response to infection by KSHV, we used two different gene
array screening systems to examine the expression profile of either 2,350 or
9,180 human genes in infected compared to uninfected DMVEC cultures in both the
presence and absence of TPA. In both cases, between 1.4 and 2.5% of the genes
tested were found to be significantly upregulated or downregulated. Further
analysis by both standard and real-time reverse transcription-PCR procedures
directly confirmed these results for 14 of the most highly upregulated and 13 of 
the most highly downregulated genes out of a total of 37 that were selected for
testing. These included strong upregulation of interferon-responsive genes such
as interferon response factor 7 (IRF7) and myxovirus resistance protein R1, plus 
upregulation of exodus 2 beta-chemokine, RDC1 alpha-chemokine receptor, and
transforming growth factor beta3, together with strong downregulation of cell
adhesion factors alpha(4)-integrin and fibronectin plus downregulation of bone
morphogenesis protein 4, matrix metalloproteinase 2, endothelial plasminogen
activator inhibitor 1, connective tissue growth factor, and interleukin-8.
Significant dysregulation of several other cytokine-related genes or receptors,
as well as endothelial cell and macrophage markers, and various other genes
associated with angiogenesis or transformation was also detected. Western
immunoblot and immunohistochemical analyses confirmed that the cellular IRF7
protein levels were strongly upregulated during the early lytic cycle both in
KSHV-infected DMVEC and in the body cavity-based lymphoma BCBL1 PEL cell line.

PMCID: PMC136008
PMID: 11884566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Mol Biol. 2002 Mar 8;316(5):1009-22.

Preferential binding sites for interferon regulatory factors 3 and 7 involved in 
interferon-A gene transcription.

Morin P(1), Bragança J, Bandu MT, Lin R, Hiscott J, Doly J, Civas A.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2228-CNRS, Laboratoire de Régulation Transcriptionnelle et Maladies
Génétiques, UFR Biomédicale des Saints-Pères, Université Paris V, 45 rue des
Saints-Pères, 75270 Paris Cedex 06, France.

Transcription of the murine interferon-A4 (IFN-A4) gene is mediated by a virus
responsive element (VRE-A4) located in the promoter proximal [-120 to -43]
region. VRE-A4 contains four DNA modules (A to D) which cooperate for maximal
IFN-A4 activation following virus infection. The differential expression between 
the highly expressed IFN-A4 and the weakly inducible IFN-A11 gene promoters is
essentially due to point mutations within the C and D modules of the
virus-responsive element VRE-A11. We now demonstrate that in murine L929 and
human 293 cells, transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7, which are potent
activators of virus-induced type I IFN transcription, differentially affect
IFN-A4 and IFN-A11 promoter activities. Using electrophoretic mobility shift
assays and DNase I footprinting data, our studies demonstrate that the AB modules
correspond to a preferential site for IRF-7, whereas the C module is
preferentially recognized by IRF-3. Furthermore, transfection of reporter
constructs driven by four copies of different GAAANN hexameric motifs found
within VRE-A4 indicates that the NN residues of these hexameric sequences define 
the preferential binding sites for IRF-3 or IRF-7. Together, these experiments
clarify the molecular basis for differential expression of IFN-A genes following 
virus infection by delineating the sequence requirements for IRF association with
the virus responsive elements of the IFN-A genes.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 11884139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 10;277(19):16592-8. Epub 2002 Feb 27.

Stimulation of IRF-7 gene expression by tumor necrosis factor alpha: requirement 
for NFkappa B transcription factor and gene accessibility.

Lu R(1), Moore PA, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center and the Department of Molecular 
Biology and Genetics, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7) plays an important role in innate
immunity, where, together with IRF-3, it controls the expression of interferon
A/B genes as well as chemokine RANTES (regulated on activation normal T cell
expressed and secreted). Previously, we characterized human IRF-7 promoter and
showed that an interferon-stimulated response element site in the first intron
binds interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) and confers the response to
interferon. Here we report the stimulation of IRF-7 expression by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) and tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNFalpha) in human peripheral blood monocytes. Using promoter analysis in
combination with electrophoretic mobility shift assays, we have demonstrated that
an NFkappaB site located next to the TATA box, binds p50 and p65 heterodimer and 
is required for the induction of the IRF-7 gene by TPA and TNFalpha. In addition,
we report stimulation of IRF-7 gene expression by topoisomerase II (TOPII)
inhibitors. We show by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay that treatment with
the TOPII inhibitor etoposide induces association of acetylated histone 3 with
the promoter of IRF-7 gene, indicating that TOPII-mediated changes in chromatin
structure could be responsible for the induction. This suggests that the IRF-7
gene is localized in the condensed area of the chromosome where it is
inaccessible to transcription factors that would promote its constitutive
expression.

PMID: 11877397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Exp Med. 2002 Feb 18;195(4):507-16.

Virus-induced interferon alpha production by a dendritic cell subset in the
absence of feedback signaling in vivo.

Barchet W(1), Cella M, Odermatt B, Asselin-Paturel C, Colonna M, Kalinke U.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Biology Programme, EMBL-Monterotondo, I-00016 Monterotondo-Scalo, Rome, 
Italy.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2002 Feb 18;195(4):F15-8.

An effective type I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) response is critical for the
control of many viral infections. Here we show that in vesicular stomatitis virus
(VSV)-infected mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) the production of IFN-alpha is 
dependent on type I IFN receptor (IFNAR) triggering, whereas in infected mice
early IFN-alpha production is IFNAR independent. In VSV-infected mice type I IFN 
is produced by few cells located in the marginal zone of the spleen. Unlike other
dendritic cell (DC) subsets, FACS((R))-sorted CD11c(int)CD11b(-)GR-1(+) DCs show 
high IFN-alpha expression, irrespective of whether they were isolated from
VSV-infected IFNAR-competent or -deficient mice. Thus, VSV preferentially
activates a specialized DC subset presumably located in the marginal zone to
produce high-level IFN-alpha largely independent of IFNAR feedback signaling.

PMCID: PMC2193622
PMID: 11854363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):95-101.

Structure and function of IRF-7.

Zhang L(1), Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Nebraska Center for Virology, UNL Biological Sciences, University of Nebraska,
Lincoln, NE 68588, USA. lzhang@unlnotes.unl.edu

Interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRF) are a family of transcription factors
with multiple functions. IRF-7 was initially cloned within the biologic context
of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latency and discovered to have an intimate relation
with the EBV primary oncogenic protein, latent membrane protein-1 (LMP-1). EBV
regulates and uses IRF-7 as a secondary mediator for several target genes
involved in latency and immune regulation. Other than its functions in EBV
latency, IRF-7 has been identified as one of the major players in virally induced
IFN production that is central to innate immunity. Thus, IRF-7 plays important
roles in a variety of biologic systems.

PMID: 11846980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):87-93.

Enhancement and diversification of IFN induction by IRF-7-mediated positive
feedback.

Levy DE(1), Marié I, Smith E, Prakash A.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology and Immunology Program, Department of Pathology and Kaplan 
Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016. levyd01@med.nyu.edu

Interferons (IFN) are potent components of the innate immune response to
microbial infection. The genes for type I IFN (IFN-alpha and IFN-beta) are
rapidly induced in response to viral infection through a mechanism that involves 
latent cellular transcription factors that are activated in response to innate
recognition of viral components. IFN regulatory factor (IRF) proteins are key to 
this regulation, and their conversion from latent to active involves
virus-induced serine phosphorylation. Differential utilization of distinct IRF
proteins by different members of the type I IFN gene family produces a graded
induction of gene expression, resulting in tight control of these cytokines
through a positive feedback mechanism. Early response to virus causes secretion
of a subset of IFN genes through the action of IRF-3 in conjunction with
additional transcription factors, such as NF-kappaB and activator protein-1
(AP-1) (c-jun/ATF). This early IFN acts in an autocrine manner to stimulate
production of IRF-7, a transcription factor capable of activating the many
additional members of the IFN-alpha gene family. The dependence of IRF-7 on
virus-induced phosphorylation for its activity insures that IFN production is
limited to virus-infected cells. Characterization of the cellular components
involved in viral detection and IRF activation will further delineate this vital 
mechanism of innate immune response.

PMID: 11846979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):59-71.

On the role of IRF in host defense.

Barnes B(1), Lubyova B, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,
Oncology Research Center, Baltimore, MD 21231-1001, USA.

Transcription factors of the interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRF) family have
been shown to play an essential role in the regulated expression of type I IFN
genes, IFN-stimulated genes (ISG), and other cytokines and chemokines. Three
members of the IRF family, IRF-3, IRF-5, and IRF-7, have been identified as
acting as direct transducers of virus-mediated signaling. In infected cells,
these factors are activated by phosphorylation on the serine residues,
transported to the nucleus, where they bind to the promoters of IFNA and IFNB
genes and tether histone transacetylases to the transcription complex
enhanceosome. IFNB and IFNA subtypes are expressed at different levels in
infected cells. The ratio between the relative levels of IRF-3 and IRF-7 was
shown to play an essential role in the inducible expression of type I IFN genes, 
whereas IRF-3 alone is sufficient for expression of the IFNB gene. IRF-5 was
identified recently as another inducer of IFNA genes, which has two unique
properties: (1) its activation is virus specific, and (2) the profile of IFNA
genes induced by IRF-5 is distinct from that induced by IRF-7. Several viruses
target functions of IRF to eliminate the early inflammatory response. Kaposi's
sarcoma herpesvirus (KSHV) encodes a cluster of four genes with homology to
cellular IRF. Three of these vIRF were shown to inhibit induction of IFN genes
and ISG in infected cells and function as dominant negative mutants of cellular
IRF. The unique properties of previously uncharacterized vIRF-2 and vIRF-3 are
discussed.

PMID: 11846976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):49-58.

Overlapping and distinct mechanisms regulating IRF-3 and IRF-7 function.

Servant MJ(1), Tenoever B, Lin R.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
and Departments of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Recent molecular, biochemical, and gene disruption studies have demonstrated the 
essential role of interferon (IFN) regulatory factor-3, (IRF-3) and IRF-7 in the 
activation of type I IFN gene expression and the induction of the antiviral
state. Both transcription factors share structural and functional properties, as 
well as a common mechanism of activation through C-terminal phosphorylation. The 
purpose of this review is to summarize recent investigations indicating that
similar signalling pathways are likely involved in the activation of IRF-3 and
IRF-7. Moreover, unique biochemical events, such as coactivator association and
differential recognition of cis-acting elements, also illustrate the capacity of 
IRF-3 and IRF-7 to selectively regulate type I IFN and IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) 
expression.

PMID: 11846975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Virol. 2001 Dec;75(24):12393-401.

Intracellular signaling molecules activated by Epstein-Barr virus for induction
of interferon regulatory factor 7.

Zhang L(1), Wu L, Hong K, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599-7295, USA. lzhang2@unlnotes.unl.edu

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) is the principal
oncogenic protein in the EBV transformation process. LMP-1 induces the expression
of interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7) and activates IRF-7 protein by
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. LMP-1 is an integral membrane protein 
with two regions in its C terminus that initiate signaling processes, the
C-terminal activator regions 1 (CTAR-1) and CTAR-2. Here, genetic analysis of
LMP-1 has determined that the PXQXT motif that governs the interaction between
LMP-1 CTAR-1 and tumor necrosis factor receptor-associated factors (TRAFs) is
needed to induce the expression of IRF-7. Mutations in the PXQXT motif in CTAR-1 
that disrupt the interaction between LMP-1 and TRAFs abolished the induction of
IRF-7. Also, dominant-negative mutants of TRAFs inhibited the induction of IRF-7 
by CTAR-1. The last three amino acids (YYD) of CTAR-2 are also important for the 
induction of IRF-7. When both PXQXT and YYD were mutated (LMP-DM), the LMP-1
mutant failed to induce IRF-7. Also, LMP-DM blocked the induction of IRF-7 by
wild-type LMP-1. These data strongly suggest that both CTAR-1 and CTAR-2 of LMP-1
independently induce the expression of IRF-7. In addition, NF-kappaB is involved 
in the induction of IRF-7. A superrepressor of IkappaB (sr-IkappaB) could block
the induction of IRF-7 by LMP-1, and overexpression of NF-kappaB (p65 plus p50)
could induce the expression of IRF-7. In addition, we have found that human IRF-7
is a stable protein, and sodium butyrate, a modifier of chromatin structure,
induces IRF-7.

PMCID: PMC116135
PMID: 11711629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Semin Cancer Biol. 2001 Dec;11(6):445-53.

Interferon regulatory factor 7: a key cellular mediator of LMP-1 in EBV latency
and transformation.

Zhang L(1), Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill 27599-7295, USA. luzhang@med.unc.edu

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7) was cloned within the biological context
of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latency, and has an intimate relation with EBV. EBV
latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) regulates IRF-7 both by inducing the expression
of IRF-7 and by activating IRF-7 protein through phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation in a post-translational manner. The activated IRF-7 then functions 
to regulate both EBV and cellular target genes involved in latency,
transformation and immune regulation. IRF-7 appears to be a key cellular latency 
protein involved in both the pathogenesis and persistence of EBV infection.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11669606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):45491-6. Epub 2001 Oct 3.

Monocyte differentiation to macrophage requires interferon regulatory factor 7.

Lu R(1), Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center and the Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, The
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors are a growing family of transcription factor that
have been implicated in cellular events such as cell-growth regulation, antiviral
defense, and development of the immune system. Interferon regulatory factor 7
(IRF-7) is expressed predominantly in lymphoid tissues and has been studied
extensively in the context of viral infection and the induction of interferon and
cytokine gene expression. In this paper, the involvement of IRF-7 in monocyte
differentiation was examined in U937, HL60, and human primary macrophages. We
report the induction of IRF-7 expression by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate 
in U937 and HL60 cells and demonstrate that this induction is essential for the
monocyte differentiation to macrophages. We show that the monocyte
differentiation is inhibited in cells expressing a dominant negative IRF-7
mutant, as evidenced by decreased expression of two macrophage-differentiation
markers, CD11b and CD11c, and impaired phagocytic activity. In addition, we
demonstrate that overexpression of IRF-7 is sufficient to trigger monocyte
differentiation and to induce cell cycle arrest. The identification of IRF-7 as a
key regulator in monocyte differentiation suggests a novel function of IRF-7 in
innate immunity.

PMID: 11585813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Neurology. 2001 Aug 28;57(4):681-5.

Differing effects of IFN beta vs IFN gamma in MS: gene expression in cultured
astrocytes.

Satoh J(1), Kuroda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Internal Medicine, Saga Medical School,
Nabeshima, Japan. satoj1@post.saga-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Recent clinical trials indicate that interferon-beta (IFN beta) is
effective in reducing exacerbations in relapsing-remitting MS, whereas IFN gamma 
provokes acute relapses. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the
beneficial effects of IFN beta and the detrimental effects of IFN gamma in MS
remain to be characterized. Previously, the authors showed that IFN beta
inhibited IFN gamma-induced major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II
expression on astrocytes.
OBJECTIVE: To clarify the gene expression profile in cultured fetal human
astrocytes after exposure to IFN beta, IFN gamma, or IFN beta plus IFN gamma.
METHODS: Astrocytes were incubated for 24 hours in the culture medium with or
without inclusion of 50 ng/mL recombinant human IFN beta, IFN gamma, or both. The
gene expression profile was studied by analyzing a cDNA expression array
containing clones of various functional classes.
RESULTS: Among 1,185 clones examined, the expression of six distinct genes was
markedly induced after IFN treatment. Northern blot analysis verified a
significant up-regulation of mRNA for interferon regulatory factor-7 (IRF-7) and 
pleiotrophin predominantly in astrocytes treated with IFN beta, both IRF-1 and
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 mRNA mainly in astrocytes treated with IFN
gamma, and signal transducer and activator of transcription-1 alpha and MHC class
I HLA-C mRNA equally in astrocytes exposed to either type of IFN. In contrast,
the treatment of astrocytes with either IFN beta or IFN gamma did not alter the
levels of expression of mRNA for brain-derived neurotrophic factor, 27-kd heat
shock protein, prion protein, or defender against apoptotic cell death-1. No
antagonistic action was observed between IFN beta and IFN gamma in the pattern of
gene induction in astrocytes.
CONCLUSION: A preferential induction of IRF-7 in IFN beta-treated astrocytes and 
a predominant expression of IRF-1 in IFN gamma-exposed astrocytes might
contribute to one of the molecular mechanisms underlying the clinically opposite 
effects of IFN beta and IFN gamma in MS.

PMID: 11524479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jul 13;285(2):518-25.

Constitutive IFN-alpha/beta signal for efficient IFN-alpha/beta gene induction by
virus.

Hata N(1), Sato M, Takaoka A, Asagiri M, Tanaka N, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Efficient IFN-alpha/beta gene induction in virus-infected cells is an event
central to innate immunity, in which the transcription factor IRF-7 plays a
critical role together with IRF-3. Unlike IRF-3, IRF-7 is short-lived and its
gene expression is dependent on IFN-alpha/beta signalling; hence, the
signal-dependent enhancement of IRF-7 gene induction during viral infection is
essential for positive-feedback regulation of IFN-alpha/beta gene induction.
Here, we provide evidence that constitutive, IRF-3/IRF-7-independent production
of IFN-alpha/beta in uninfected cells is critical for setting the IRF-7
expression levels, determining whether or not the positive-feedback mechanism
will operate effectively upon viral infection. In fact, spleen cells are more
dependent than fibroblasts on this mechanism; the IFN-alpha/beta gene induction
is impaired more severely by blocking the IRF-7 induction pathway than by
introducing an IRF-3 null mutation. Thus, the constitutive IFN-alpha/beta signal 
provides a foundation for the IRF-7-mediated enhancement of its own production in
response to virus infection.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11444873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Mar 30;282(2):515-23.

PACT, a double-stranded RNA binding protein acts as a positive regulator for type
I interferon gene induced by Newcastle disease virus.

Iwamura T(1), Yoneyama M, Koizumi N, Okabe Y, Namiki H, Samuel CE, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical
Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8613, Japan.

Virus infection triggers innate responses to host cells including production of
type I interferon (IFN). Since IFN production is also induced by treatment with
poly(I:C), viral double-stranded (ds) RNA has been postulated to play a direct
role in the process. In the present study, we investigated the effect of dsRNA
binding proteins on virus-induced activation of the IFN-beta gene. We found that 
PACT, originally identified as protein activator for dsRNA-dependent protein
kinase (PKR) and implicated in the regulation of translation, augmented IFN-beta 
gene activation induced by Newcastle disease virus. Concomitantly with the
augmented activity of IFN-beta enhancer, increased activity of NF-kappaB and
IRF-3 and IRF-7 was observed. For the observed effect, the dsRNA-binding activity
of PACT was essential. We identified residues of PACT that interact with a
presumptive target molecule to exert its function. Furthermore, PACT colocalized 
with viral replication complex in the infected cells. Thus the observed effect of
PACT is novel and PACT is involved in the regulation of viral replication and
results in a marked increase of cellular IFN-beta gene expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11401490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Virol. 2001 Jul;75(13):6070-85.

Hantavirus infection induces the expression of RANTES and IP-10 without causing
increased permeability in human lung microvascular endothelial cells.

Sundstrom JB(1), McMullan LK, Spiropoulou CF, Hooper WC, Ansari AA, Peters CJ,
Rollin PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Winship Cancer Institute,
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30323, USA. JSUNDST@emory.edu

Sin Nombre virus (SNV) and Hantaan virus (HTN) infect endothelial cells and are
associated with different patterns of increased vascular permeability during
human disease. It is thought that such patterns of increased vascular
permeability are a consequence of endothelial activation and subsequent
dysfunction mediated by differential immune responses to hantavirus infection. In
this study, the ability of hantavirus to directly induce activation of human lung
microvascular endothelial cells (HMVEC-Ls) was examined. No virus-specific
modulation in the constitutive or cytokine-induced expression of cellular
adhesion molecules (CD40, CD54, CD61, CD62E, CD62P, CD106, and major
histocompatibility complex classes I and II) or in cytokines and chemokines
(eotaxin, tumor necrosis factor alpha, interleukin 1beta [IL-1beta], IL-6, IL-8, 
MCP-1, MIP-1alpha, and MIP-1beta) was detected at either the protein or message
level in hantavirus-infected HMVEC-Ls. Furthermore, no virus-specific enhancement
of paracellular or transcellular permeability or changes in the organization and 
distribution of endothelial intercellular junctional proteins was observed.
However, infection with either HTN or SNV resulted in detectable levels of the
chemokines RANTES and IP-10 (the 10-kDa interferon-inducible protein) in HMVEC-Ls
within 72 h and was associated with nuclear translocation of interferon
regulatory factor 3 (IRF-3) and IRF-7. Gamma interferon (IFN-gamma)-induced
expression of RANTES and IP-10 could also be detected in uninfected HMVEC-Ls and 
was associated with nuclear translocation of IRF-1 and IRF-3. Treatment of
hantavirus-infected HMVEC-Ls with IFN-gamma for 24 h resulted in a synergistic
enhancement in the expression of both RANTES and IP-10 and was associated with
nuclear translocation of IRF-1, IRF-3, IRF-7, and NF-kappaB p65. These results
reveal a possible mechanism by which hantavirus infection and a TH1 immune
response can cooperate to synergistically enhance chemokine expression by
HMVEC-Ls and trigger immune-mediated increases in vascular permeability.

PMCID: PMC114323
PMID: 11390609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 May 25;283(5):1150-6.

Gene induction pathways mediated by distinct IRFs during viral infection.

Nakaya T(1), Sato M, Hata N, Asagiri M, Suemori H, Noguchi S, Tanaka N, Taniguchi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.

During viral infection, interferon-alpha/beta (IFN-alpha/beta) and many
IFN-inducible genes are induced to elicit antiviral responses of the host. Using 
cells with a gene disruption(s) for the IRF family of transcription factors, we
provide evidence that these genes, containing similar IRF-binding cis-elements,
are classified into distinct groups, based on the gene induction pathway(s). The 
IFN-beta gene induction is dependent on either IRF-3 or IRF-7, whereas induction 
of the IFN-alpha gene family is IRF-7-dependent. On the other hand, ISG15, ISG54 
and IP-10 are induced by either IRF-3 or IFN stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). We
also show that another group of genes is totally dependent on ISGF3. Thus, during
viral infection, a given gene responds either directly to a virus or
virus-induced IFN-alpha/beta or both through distinct pathways. The differential 
utilization of these induction pathways for these genes during viral infection
may reflect their distinct functional roles in the efficient antiviral response.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11355893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Genes Cells. 2001 Apr;6(4):375-88.

Induction of IRF-3/-7 kinase and NF-kappaB in response to double-stranded RNA and
virus infection: common and unique pathways.

Iwamura T(1), Yoneyama M, Yamaguchi K, Suhara W, Mori W, Shiota K, Okabe Y,
Namiki H, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, 3-18-22 Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Infection by virus or treatment with double-stranded RNA (dsRNA)
results in the activation of transcription factors including IRF-3, IRF-7 and a
pleiotropic regulator NF-kappaB by specific phosphorylation. These factors are
important in triggering a cascade of antiviral responses. A protein kinase that
is yet to be identified is responsible for the activation of these factors and
plays a key role in the responses.
RESULTS: The signal cascade was analysed using sensitive assays for the
activation of IRF-3 and NF-kappaB, and various inhibitors. We found that the
activation of IRF-3 and NF-kappaB by dsRNA or virus involves a process that is
sensitive to Geldanamycin. Although the induction of NF-kappaB by dsRNA/virus and
TNF-alpha involves common downstream pathways including IKK activation, the
upstream, Geldanamycin-sensitive process was unique to the dsRNA/virus-induced
signal. By an in vitro assay using cell extract, we found an inducible protein
kinase activity with physiological specificity of IRF-3 phosphorylation.
Furthermore, the same extract specifically phosphorylated IRF-7 in a similar
manner.
CONCLUSIONS: Double-stranded RNA or virus triggers a specific signal cascade that
results in the activation of the IRF-3/-7 kinase we detected, which corresponds
to the long-sought signalling machinery that is responsible for triggering the
early phase of innate response. The signal branches to a common NF-kappaB
activation cascade, thus resulting in the activation of a set of critical
transcription factors for the response.

PMID: 11318879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 15;20(7):800-11.

HHV-8 encoded vIRF-1 represses the interferon antiviral response by blocking
IRF-3 recruitment of the CBP/p300 coactivators.

Lin R(1), Genin P, Mamane Y, Sgarbanti M, Battistini A, Harrington WJ Jr, Barber 
GN, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec H3T IE2, Canada.

Human herpes virus 8 (HHV-8) has developed unique mechanisms for altering
cellular proliferative and apoptotic control pathways by incorporating viral
homologs to several cellular regulatory genes into its genome. One of the
important pirated genes encoded by the ORF K9 reading frame is a viral homolog of
the interferon regulatory factors (IRF), a family of cellular transcription
proteins that regulates expression of genes involved in pathogen response, immune
modulation and cell proliferation. vIRF-1 has been shown to downregulate the
interferon- and IRF-mediated transcriptional activation of ISG and murine IFNA4
gene promoters. In this study we demonstrate that vIRF-1 efficiently inhibited
virus-induced expression of endogenous interferon B, CC chemokine RANTES and CXC 
chemokine IP-10 genes. Co-expression analysis revealed that vIRF-1 selectively
blocked IRF-3 but not IRF-7-mediated transactivation. vIRF-1 was able to bind to 
both IRF-3 and IRF-7 in vivo as detected by coimmunoprecipitation analysis, but
did not affect IRF-3 dimerization, nuclear translocation and DNA binding
activity. Rather, vIRF-1 interacted with the CBP/p300 coactivators and
efficiently inhibited the formation of transcriptionally competent IRF-3-CBP/p300
complexes. These results illustrate that vIRF-1 is able to block the early stages
of the IFN response to virus infection by interfering with the activation of
IRF-3 responsive, immediate early IFN genes.

PMID: 11314014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 25;276(21):18624-32. Epub 2001 Feb 13.

The cell cycle control element of histone H4 gene transcription is maximally
responsive to interferon regulatory factor pairs IRF-1/IRF-3 and IRF-1/IRF-7.

Xie R(1), van Wijnen AJ, van Der Meijden C, Luong MX, Stein JL, Stein GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, Massachusetts 01655, USA.

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) are transcriptional mediators of
interferon-responsive signaling pathways that are involved in antiviral defense, 
immune response, and cell growth regulation. To investigate the role of IRF
proteins in the regulation of histone H4 gene transcription, we compared the
transcriptional contributions of IRF-1, IRF-2, IRF-3, and IRF-7 using transient
transfection assays with H4 promoter/luciferase (Luc) reporter genes. These IRF
proteins up-regulate reporter gene expression but IRF-1, IRF-3, and IRF-7 are
more potent activators of the H4 promoter than IRF-2. Forced expression of
different IRF combinations reveals that IRF-2 reduces IRF-1 or IRF-3 dependent
activation, but does not affect IRF-7 function. Thus, IRF-2 may have a dual
function in histone H4 gene transcription by acting as a weak activator at low
dosage and a competitive inhibitor of other strongly activating IRFs at high
levels. IRF-1/IRF-3 and IRF-1/IRF-7 pairs each mediate the highest levels of site
II-dependent promoter activity and can up-regulate transcription by 120-150-fold.
We also find that interferon gamma up-regulates IRF-1 and site II-dependent
promoter activity. This up-regulation is not observed when the IRF site is
mutated or if cells are preloaded with IRF-1. Our results indicate that IRF-1,
IRF-2, IRF-3, and IRF-7 can all regulate histone H4 gene expression. The pairwise
utilization of distinct IRF factors provides a flexible transcriptional mechanism
for integration of diverse growth-related signaling pathways.

PMID: 11278666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Annu Rev Immunol. 2001;19:623-55.

IRF family of transcription factors as regulators of host defense.

Taniguchi T(1), Ogasawara K, Takaoka A, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
tada@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) constitute a family of transcription factors
that commonly possess a novel helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. Following the
initial identification of two structurally related members, IRF-1 and IRF-2,
seven additional members have now been reported. In addition, virally encoded
IRFs, which may interfere with cellular IRFs, have also been identified. Thus
far, intensive functional analyses have been done on IRF-1, revealing a
remarkable functional diversity of this transcription factor in the regulation of
cellular response in host defense. Indeed, IRF-1 selectively modulates different 
sets of genes, depending on the cell type and/or the nature of cellular stimuli, 
in order to evoke appropriate responses in each. More recently, much attention
has also been focused on other IRF family members. Their functional roles,
through interactions with their own or other members of the family of
transcription factors, are becoming clearer in the regulation of host defense,
such as innate and adaptive immune responses and oncogenesis.

PMID: 11244049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 1999;64:465-72.

Transcription factor IRF-1 and its family members in the regulation of host
defense.

Taniguchi T(1), Tanaka N, Ogasawara K, Taki S, Sato M, Takaoka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

PMID: 11232323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Virology. 2001 Feb 15;280(2):273-82.

Analysis of functional domains of interferon regulatory factor 7 and its
association with IRF-3.

Au WC(1), Yeow WS, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

IRF-7 plays an essential role in virus-activated transcription of IFNA genes. To 
analyze functional domains of IRF-7 we have constructed an amino-terminal
deletion mutant of IRF-7 (237-514) which exerted a dominant negative (DN) effect 
on virus-induced expression of the endogenous Type I IFN genes. Focusing on the
molecular mechanism underlying the dominant negative effect of IRF-7 DN, we found
that virus-activated transcription of endogenous IFNA genes requires full-length 
IRF-7 and that Serine 483 and 484 play an essential role. While IRF-7 DN had no
effect on virus-stimulated nuclear translocation of IRF-3 and IRF-7, the binding 
of IRF-7 DN to IRF-3 and IRF-7 was detected by GST pull-down assay as well as by 
immunoprecipitation in infected cells, indicating that IRF-7 DN targets both
IRF-7 and IRF-3. The region by which IRF-7 interacts with IRF-3 was mapped
between amino acid 418 and 473. Overexpression of IRF-7 DN in virus-infected
2FTGH cells resulted in an inhibition of IFN synthesis and in a significant
reduction of binding of both IRF-3 and IRF-7 to the IFNA1 promoter.
Interestingly, the IRF-7 DN-mediated suppression of IFNA gene expression can be
negated by overexpression of IRF-3. Altogether these results suggest that the
IRF-3/IRF-7 complexes are biologically active and are involved in virus-activated
transcription of endogenous IFNA genes.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11162841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 23;276(12):8951-7. Epub 2000 Dec 21.

IRF3 and IRF7 phosphorylation in virus-infected cells does not require
double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase R or Ikappa B kinase but is blocked 
by Vaccinia virus E3L protein.

Smith EJ(1), Marié I, Prakash A, García-Sastre A, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, Molecular
Oncology and Immunology Program, New York University School of Medicine, New
York, New York 10016, USA.

Induction of interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) gene expression in virus-infected cells 
requires phosphorylation-induced activation of the transcription factors IRF3 and
IRF7. However, the kinase(s) that targets these proteins has not been identified.
Using a combined pharmacological and genetic approach, we found that none of the 
kinases tested was responsible for IRF phosphorylation in cells infected with
Newcastle disease virus (NDV). Although the broad-spectrum kinase inhibitor
staurosporine potently blocked IRF3 and -7 phosphorylation, inhibitors for
protein kinase C, protein kinase A, MEK, SAPK, IKK, and protein kinase R (PKR)
were without effect. Both IkappaB kinase and PKR have been implicated in IFN
induction, but cells genetically deficient in IkappaB kinase, PKR, or the
PKR-related genes PERK, IRE1, or GCN2 retained the ability to phosphorylate IRF7 
and induce IFNalpha. Interestingly, PKR mutant cells were defective for response 
to double-stranded (ds) RNA but not to virus infection, suggesting that dsRNA is 
not the only activating viral component. Consistent with this notion, protein
synthesis was required for IRF7 phosphorylation in virus-infected cells, and the 
kinetics of phosphorylation and viral protein production were similar. Despite
evidence for a lack of involvement of dsRNA and PKR, vaccinia virus E3L protein, 
a dsRNA-binding protein capable of inhibiting PKR, was an effective IRF3 and -7
phosphorylation inhibitor. These results suggest that a novel cellular protein
that is activated by viral products in addition to dsRNA and is sensitive to E3L 
inhibition is responsible for IRF activation and reveal a novel mechanism for the
anti-IFN effect of E3L distinct from its inhibition of PKR.

PMID: 11124948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Virol. 2001 Jan;75(1):341-50.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 mediates activation of Tap-2 by Epstein-Barr virus
latent membrane protein 1.

Zhang L(1), Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599-7265, USA. luzhang@med.unc.edu

Transporter associated with antigen processing 2 (Tap-2) is responsible for
ATP-dependent transport of peptides from the cytosol to the endoplasmic
reticulum, where peptides bind to newly synthesized human leukocyte antigen (HLA)
class I molecules, which are essential for cellular immune responses.
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) has been shown to
induce the expression of Tap-2. In this study, the induction of endogenous Tap-2 
by LMP-1 is shown to be associated with and requires the expression of interferon
regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7). In DG75 Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) cells, in which
LMP-1 induces the expression of IRF-7, LMP-1 induced endogenous Tap-2, and
ectopic expression of IRF-7 could enhance the induction. In Akata BL cells, in
which LMP-1 could not induce IRF-7, LMP-1 could not induce Tap-2. Addition of
IRF-7, which complements the defect in Akata cells, could stimulate the
expression of Tap-2. Furthermore, LMP-1 and IRF-7A but not other IRF-7 splicing
variants could activate endogenous Tap-2. A Tap-2 promoter reporter construct
could be activated by the overexpression of IRF-7A. The activation could be
specifically enhanced by LMP-1 and was dependent on an intact
interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) present in the Tap-2 promoter.
Also, IRF-7 can bind to the Tap-2 promoter under physiological conditions in
vivo, as shown by formaldehyde cross-linking, as well as to the Tap-2 ISRE in
vitro, as shown by gel mobility shift assays. Furthermore, LMP-1 facilitates the 
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of IRF-7. These data point to the role 
of IRF-7 as a secondary mediator of LMP-1-activated signal transduction for Tap-2
as follows: LMP-1 stimulates the expression of IRF-7 and facilitates its
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation, and then the activated IRF-7 mediates 
the activation of the cellular Tap-2 gene. The induction of Tap-2 by IRF-7 and
LMP-1 may have an important implication for the immune response to EBV and its
persistence in vivo.

PMCID: PMC113927
PMID: 11119603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;20(23):8803-14.

Phosphorylation-induced dimerization of interferon regulatory factor 7 unmasks
DNA binding and a bipartite transactivation domain.

Marié I(1), Smith E, Prakash A, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is an interferon (IFN)-inducible
transcription factor required for activation of a subset of IFN-alpha genes that 
are expressed with delayed kinetics following viral infection. IRF7 is
synthesized as a latent protein and is posttranslationally modified by protein
phosphorylation in infected cells. Phosphorylation required a carboxyl-terminal
regulatory domain that controlled the retention of the active protein exclusively
in the nucleus, as well as its binding to specific DNA target sequences,
multimerization, and ability to induce target gene expression. Transcriptional
activation by IRF7 mapped to two distinct regions, both of which were required
for full activity, while all functions were masked in latent IRF7 by an
autoinhibitory domain mapping to an internal region. A conditionally active form 
of IRF7 was constructed by fusing IRF7 with the ligand-binding and dimerization
domain of estrogen receptor (ER). Hormone-dependent dimerization of chimeric
IRF7-ER stimulated DNA binding and transcriptional transactivation of endogenous 
target genes. These studies demonstrate the regulation of IRF7 activity by
phosphorylation-dependent allosteric changes that result in dimerization and that
facilitate nuclear retention, derepress transactivation, and allow specific DNA
binding.

PMCID: PMC86519
PMID: 11073981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Immunity. 2000 Oct;13(4):539-48.

Distinct and essential roles of transcription factors IRF-3 and IRF-7 in response
to viruses for IFN-alpha/beta gene induction.

Sato M(1), Suemori H, Hata N, Asagiri M, Ogasawara K, Nakao K, Nakaya T, Katsuki 
M, Noguchi S, Tanaka N, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Japan.

Induction of the interferon (IFN)-alpha/beta gene transcription in virus-infected
cells is an event central to innate immunity. Mice lacking the transcription
factor IRF-3 are more vulnerable to virus infection. In embryonic fibroblasts,
virus-induced IFN-alpha/beta gene expression levels are reduced and the spectrum 
of the IFN-alpha mRNA subspecies altered. Furthermore, cells additionally
defective in IRF-7 expression totally fail to induce these genes in response to
infections by any of the virus types tested. In these cells, a normal profile of 
IFN-alpha/beta mRNA induction can be achieved by coexpressing both IRF-3 and
IRF-7. These results demonstrate the essential and distinct roles of thetwo
factors, which together ensure the transcriptional efficiency and diversity of
IFN-alpha/beta genes for the antiviral response.

PMID: 11070172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Blood. 2000 Jul 1;96(1):374.

Clinical manifestations, management, and molecular genetics in congenital factor 
VII deficiency: the International Registry on Congenital Factor VII Deficiency
(IRF7)

Mariani G, Herrmann FH, Bernardi F, Schved JF, Auerswald G, Ingerslev J.

PMID: 10939805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6342-53.

Selective DNA binding and association with the CREB binding protein coactivator
contribute to differential activation of alpha/beta interferon genes by
interferon regulatory factors 3 and 7.

Lin R(1), Génin P, Mamane Y, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3T 1E2. mdli@musica.mcgill.ca

Recent studies implicate the interferon (IFN) regulatory factors (IRF) IRF-3 and 
IRF-7 as key activators of the alpha/beta IFN (IFN-alpha/beta) genes as well as
the RANTES chemokine gene. Using coexpression analysis, the human IFNB, IFNA1,
and RANTES promoters were stimulated by IRF-3 coexpression, whereas the IFNA4,
IFNA7, and IFNA14 promoters were preferentially induced by IRF-7 only. Chimeric
proteins containing combinations of different IRF-7 and IRF-3 domains were also
tested, and the results provided evidence of distinct DNA binding properties of
IRF-3 and IRF-7, as well as a preferential association of IRF-3 with the CREB
binding protein (CBP) coactivator. Interestingly, some of these fusion proteins
led to supraphysiological levels of IFN promoter activation. DNA binding site
selection studies demonstrated that IRF-3 and IRF-7 bound to the
5'-GAAANNGAAANN-3' consensus motif found in many virus-inducible genes; however, 
a single nucleotide substitution in either of the GAAA half-site motifs
eliminated IRF-3 binding and transactivation activity but did not affect IRF-7
interaction or transactivation activity. These studies demonstrate that IRF-3
possesses a restricted DNA binding site specificity and interacts with CBP,
whereas IRF-7 has a broader DNA binding specificity that contributes to its
capacity to stimulate delayed-type IFN gene expression. These results provide an 
explanation for the differential regulation of IFN-alpha/beta gene expression by 
IRF-3 and IRF-7 and suggest that these factors have complementary rather than
redundant roles in the activation of the IFN-alpha/beta genes.

PMCID: PMC86109
PMID: 10938111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Virol. 2000 Sep;74(17):8194-201.

Characterization of a novel human herpesvirus 8-encoded protein, vIRF-3, that
shows homology to viral and cellular interferon regulatory factors.

Lubyova B(1), Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

The genome of the human herpesvirus 8 (HHV-8) contains a cluster of open reading 
frames (ORFs) encoding proteins with homology to the cellular transcription
factors of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family. Two of these
homologues, vIRF-1 and vIRF-2, were previously identified and functionally
analyzed. In this study, we have characterized a novel gene, designated vIRF-3,
encoded within the previously predicted ORF K10.5 and our newly identified ORF
K10. 6. Northern blotting of RNA extracted from BCBL-1 cells with a
vIRF-3-specific probe and reverse transcription-PCR analyses revealed a single
transcript of 2.2 kb with a splice present in the coding region. The vIRF-3 mRNA 
levels in BCBL-1 cells were increased upon 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate
treatment, with kinetics of expression similar to those of the early immediate
genes. The vIRF-3 ORF encodes a 73-kDa protein with homology to cellular IRF-4
and HHV-8-encoded vIRF-2 and K11. In transient transfection assays with the
IFNACAT reporter, vIRF-3 functioned as a dominant-negative mutant of both IRF-3
and IRF-7 and inhibited virus-mediated transcriptional activity of the IFNA
promoter. Similarly, the overexpression of vIRF-3 in mouse L929 cells resulted in
inhibition of virus-mediated synthesis of biologically active interferons. These 
results suggest that by targeting IRF-3 and IRF-7, which play a critical role in 
the activation of alpha/beta interferon (IFN) genes, HHV-8 has evolved a
mechanism by which it directly subverts the functions of IRFs and down-regulates 
the induction of the IFN genes that are important components of the innate
immunity.

PMCID: PMC112355
PMID: 10933732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 13;275(41):31805-12.

Regulation of the promoter activity of interferon regulatory factor-7 gene.
Activation by interferon snd silencing by hypermethylation.

Lu R(1), Au WC, Yeow WS, Hageman N, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

The molecular mechanism by which virus induces expression of the early
inflammatory genes has not yet been completely elucidated. Previous studies
indicated that the virus-mediated transcription of type I interferon (IFN) genes 
required activation of two members of IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family, IRF-3
and IRF-7, where the expression of IRF-7 was found to be indispensable for the
induction of IFNA genes. To determine the factors that regulate expression of
IRF-7 gene, as well as its inducibility by type I IFNs, we have isolated and
characterized the promoter and first intron of the human IRF-7 gene. This region 
shows a presence of two potential interferon-sensitive response elements
(ISRE/IRF-E). However, only the ISRE present in the first intron was functional
and conferred interferon inducibility in a transient transfection assay. Using a 
pull-down assay with an oligodeoxynucleotide corresponding to this ISRE
immobilized to magnetic beads, we have demonstrated that this ISRE binds ISGF3
complex and IRF-1 from the extract of IFN-treated cells but not from the
untreated cells. We have further shown that the previously observed lack of
expression of IRF-7 in 2fTGH fibrosarcoma cell line, correlated with
hypermethylation of the CpG island in the human IRF-7 promoter. The repression of
the promoter activity was relieved by treatment with DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor 5-aza-deoxycytidine. In vitro methylation of IRF-7 promoter silenced
IRF-7 directed expression of luciferase gene in HeLa cells that express
endogenous IRF-7 gene. Whether silencing of IRF-7 by methylation is instrumental 
for the process of tumorigenesis remains to be determined.

PMID: 10924517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Biochem. 2000 Aug;128(2):301-7.

Analyses of virus-induced homomeric and heteromeric protein associations between 
IRF-3 and coactivator CBP/p300.

Suhara W(1), Yoneyama M, Iwamura T, Yoshimura S, Tamura K, Namiki H, Aimoto S,
Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical 
Science, Honkomagome, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8613, Japan.

Cellular genes including the type I interferon genes are activated in response to
viral infection. We previously reported that IRF-3 (interferon regulatory factor 
3) is specifically phosphorylated on serine residues and directly transmits a
virus-induced signal from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, and then participates in 
the primary phase of gene induction. In this study, we analyzed the molecular
mechanism of IRF-3 activation further. The formation of a stable homomeric
complex of IRF-3 between the specifically phosphorylated IRF-3 molecules
occurred. While virus-induced IRF-7 did not bind to p300, the phosphorylated
IRF-3 complex formed a stable multimeric complex with p300 (active holocomplex). 
Competition using a synthetic phosphopeptide corresponding to the activated IRF-3
demonstrated that p300 directly recognizes the structure in the vicinity of the
phosphorylated residues of IRF-3. These results indicated that the
phosphorylation of serine residues at positions 385 and 386 is critical for the
formation of the holocomplex, presumably through a conformational switch
facilitating homodimer formation and the generation of the interaction interface 
with CBP/p300.

PMID: 10920266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34320-7.

Multiple regulatory domains control IRF-7 activity in response to virus
infection.

Lin R(1), Mamane Y, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Montreal H3T 1E2, Canada. mdli@musica.mcgill.ca

Recent studies implicate the interferon regulatory factors (IRF), IRF-3 and
IRF-7, as key activators of Type 1 interferon genes, as well as the RANTES
(regulated on activation normal T cell expressed) chemokine gene. Both IRF-3 and 
IRF-7 are regulated in part by virus-induced C-terminal phosphorylation, leading 
to nuclear translocation, stimulation of DNA binding, and transcriptional
activities. Structure-function studies with IRF-7 suggested a complex
organization of the C-terminal region, with a constitutive activation domain
located between amino acids 150-246, an accessory inducibility region at the very
end of IRF-7 between amino acids 467 and 503, and an inhibitory region (amino
acids 341-467) adjacent to the C-terminal end that interferes with
transactivation. Furthermore, an element that increases basal and virus-inducible
activity is located between amino acids 278 and 305. A transcriptionally active
form of IRF-7 was also generated by substitution of Ser-477 and Ser-479 residues 
with the phosphomimetic Asp. IRF-7, particularly IRF-7(S477D/S479D), was a strong
transactivator of type I interferon and RANTES chemokine gene expression. Unlike 
wild type IRF-3, IRF-7 overexpression was able to stimulate inteferon gene
expression in the absence of virus infection. Using tagged versions of IRF-7 and 
IRF-3, the formation of homo- and heterodimers was detected by
co-immunoprecipitation. These results demonstrate that IRF-3 and IRF-7
transcription factors possess distinct structural characteristics that impart
complementary rather than redundant functional roles in cytokine gene activation.

PMID: 10893229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Immunol. 2000 May 15;164(10):5352-61.

Regulation of RANTES chemokine gene expression requires cooperativity between
NF-kappa B and IFN-regulatory factor transcription factors.

Génin P(1), Algarté M, Roof P, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Departments of Microbiology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Virus infection of host cells activates a set of cellular genes, including
cytokines, IFNs, and chemokines, involved in antiviral defense and immune
activation. Previous studies demonstrated that virus-induced transcriptional
activation of a member of the human CC-chemokine RANTES required activation of
the latent transcription factors IFN-regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and NF-kappa B via
posttranslational phosphorylation. In the present study, we further characterized
the regulatory control of RANTES transcription during virus infection using in
vivo genomic footprinting analyses. IRF-3, the related IRF-7, and NF-kappa B are 
identified as important in vivo binding factors required for the cooperative
induction of RANTES transcription after virus infection. Using fibroblastic or
myeloid cells, we demonstrate that the kinetics and strength of RANTES
virus-induced transcription are highly dependent on the preexistence of IRFs and 
NF-kappa B. Use of dominant negative mutants of either I kappa B-alpha or IRF-3
demonstrate that disruption of either pathway dramatically abolishes the ability 
of the other to bind and activate RANTES expression. Furthermore, coexpression of
IRF-3, IRF-7, and p65/p50 leads to synergistic activation of RANTES promoter
transcription. These studies reveal a model of virus-mediated RANTES promoter
activation that involves cooperative synergism between IRF-3/IRF-7 and NF-kappa B
factors.

PMID: 10799898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cancer Res. 2000 Mar 1;60(5):1153-6.

Chemotherapeutic DNA-damaging drugs activate interferon regulatory factor-7 by
the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase-4-cJun NH2-terminal kinase pathway.

Kim TK(1), Kim T, Kim TY, Lee WG, Yim J.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Initiative Center for Genetic Reprogramming,
Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics, Seoul National University, Seoul
National University, Korea. TK_Kim@hms.harvard.edu

Chemotherapeutic drugs and energy-rich radiation cause DNA damage, inducing
signaling pathways for apoptotic cell death or cell growth arrest. The tumor
suppressor gene p53 plays the critical role in the regulation of these DNA damage
responses. Human tumor cells can become resistant to chemotherapy through
functional inactivation of p53. Thus, it is important to identify p53-independent
DNA damage signaling pathways. Here, treatment of cells with chemotherapeutic
drugs or UV irradiation potentiated the transcriptional activity of IFN
regulatory factor-7 (IRF7), inducing its phosphorylation and its nuclear
translocation. Furthermore, IRF7 was activated by the c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase
(JNK) in response to DNA-damaging agents. Activation of JNK by mitogen-activated 
protein kinase kinase-4 stimulated the transcriptional activity of IRF7 and
induced its translocation into the nucleus. Thus, activation of IRF7 through the 
JNK signaling pathway may play a role in the transcriptional regulation of genes 
in response to DNA-damaging agents.

PMID: 10728664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Biol Chem. 2000 Mar 3;275(9):6313-20.

Reconstitution of virus-mediated expression of interferon alpha genes in human
fibroblast cells by ectopic interferon regulatory factor-7.

Yeow WS(1), Au WC, Juang YT, Fields CD, Dent CL, Gewert DR, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

Type I interferons constitute an important part of the innate immune response
against viral infection. Unlike the expression of interferon (IFN) B gene, the
expression of IFNA genes is restricted to the lymphoid cells. Both IFN regulatory
factor 3 and 7 (IRF-3 and IRF-7) were suggested to play positive roles in these
genes expression. However, their role in the differential expression of
individual subtypes of human IFNA genes is unknown. Using various IFNA reporter
constructs in transient transfection assay we found that overexpression of IRF-3 
in virus infected 2FTGH cells selectively activated IFNA1 VRE, whereas IRF-7 was 
able to activate IFNA1, A2, and A4. The binding of recombinant IRF-7 and IRF-3 to
these VREs correlated with their transcriptional activation. Nuclear proteins
from infected and uninfected IRF-7 expressing 2FTGH cells formed multiple
DNA-protein complexes with IFNA1 VRE, in which two unique DNA-protein complexes
containing IRF-7 were detected. In 2FTGH cells, virus stimulated expression of
IFNB gene but none of the IFNA genes. Reconstitution of IRF-7 synthesis in these 
cells resulted, upon virus infection, in the activation of seven endogenous IFNA 
genes in which IFNA1 predominated. These studies suggest that IRF-7 is a critical
determinant for the induction of IFNA genes in infected cells.

PMID: 10692430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Virol. 2000 Feb;74(3):1061-8.

Interferon regulatory factor 7 is induced by Epstein-Barr virus latent membrane
protein 1.

Zhang L(1), Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599-7295, USA. luzhang@med.unc.edu

Infection by Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) generates several types of latency with
different profiles of gene expression but with expression of Epstein-Barr nuclear
antigen 1 (EBNA-1) in common. The BamHI Q promoter (Qp) is used for the
transcription of EBNA-1 mRNA in type I latency, which is an EBV infection state
exemplified by Burkitt's lymphoma (BL). However, Qp is inactive in type III
latency, and other promoters (C/Wp) are used for transcription of EBNA-1, which
raises the question of how usage of these promoters is governed. Interferon (IFN)
regulatory factor 7 (IRF-7) was identified first as a negative regulator of Qp.
Expression of IRF-7 is associated with EBV type III latency, where Qp is
inactive, but not with type I latency, raising the possibility that a viral gene 
product(s) expressed in type III latency might induce IRF-7 and repress Qp. Here,
detailed analysis of the expression of IRF-7 revealed that it is associated with 
the expression of EBV latent membrane protein 1 (LMP-1) and that LMP-1 stimulates
the expression of IRF-7 in type III latency in which Qp is inactive. In contrast,
LMP-1 is not expressed in type I latency cells in which Qp is active. LMP-1
represses the constitutive activity of Qp reporter constructs. Mutational
analysis of Qp reporter constructs revealed that the Qp IFN-stimulated response
element (ISRE) is essential for the repression by LMP-1. Furthermore, LMP-1
reduced EBNA-1 mRNA derived from Qp only in type I cells in which IRF-7 could be 
induced. Finally, IFN-alpha, but not IFN-gamma, repressed endogenous Qp activity,
which is consistent with the ability of IFN-alpha to induce IRF-7. Thus, IRF-7
may mediate repression of Qp by LMP-1. The induction of IRF-7 by LMP-1 may be
relevant to the silencing of Qp in EBV type III latency.

PMCID: PMC111439
PMID: 10627515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Gene. 1999 Sep 3;237(1):1-14.

Interferon regulatory factors: the next generation.

Mamane Y(1), Heylbroeck C, Génin P, Algarté M, Servant MJ, LePage C, DeLuca C,
Kwon H, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Canada.

Interferons are a large family of multifunctional secreted proteins involved in
antiviral defense, cell growth regulation and immune activation. Viral infection 
induces transcription of multiple IFN genes, a response that is in part mediated 
by the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs). The initially characterized members 
IRF-1 and IRF-2 are now part of a growing family of transcriptional regulators
that has expanded to nine members. The functions of the IRFs have also expanded
to include distinct roles in biological processes such as pathogen response,
cytokine signaling, cell growth regulation and hematopoietic development. The aim
of this review is to provide an update on the novel discoveries in the area of
IRF transcription factors and the important roles of the new generation of
IRFs--particularly IRF-3, IRF-4 and IRF-7.

PMID: 10524230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jun 18;274(25):18060-6.

Lipopolysaccharide inhibits virus-mediated induction of interferon genes by
disruption of nuclear transport of interferon regulatory factors 3 and 7.

Juang YT(1), Au WC, Lowther W, Hiscott J, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center, The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

We have studied the effects of lipopolysaccharide (LPS) on the Newcastle disease 
virus (NDV)-mediated induction of cytokine genes expression. Raw cells treated
with LPS before or after virus infection showed down-regulation in the expression
of interferon A and, to a lesser extent, interferon B genes. In contrast,
induction of the interleukin (IL)-6 gene was enhanced. The effects of LPS were
not a result of the suppression of virus replication, because the transcription
of viral nucleocapsid gene was not affected. Consistent with these findings, LPS 
also suppressed the NDV-mediated induction of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
reporter gene driven by murine interferon A4 promoter in a transient transfection
assay. Furthermore, LPS inhibited virus-mediated phosphorylation of interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)-3 and the consequent translocation of IRF-3 from
cytoplasm to nucleus. The LPS-mediated inhibition of IFNA gene expression was
much weaker in infected Raw cells that constitutively overexpressed IRF-3. The
nuclear translocation of IRF-7 in infected cells was also inhibited by LPS. These
data suggest that LPS down-regulates the virus-mediated induction of IFNA genes
by post-translationally targeting the IRF-3 and IRF-7 proteins.

PMID: 10364258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. FEBS Lett. 1998 Dec 11;441(1):106-10.

Positive feedback regulation of type I IFN genes by the IFN-inducible
transcription factor IRF-7.

Sato M(1), Hata N, Asagiri M, Nakaya T, Taniguchi T, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
Japan.

The interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of transcription factors regulate
the interferon (IFN) system, among which IRF-3 is involved in the virus-induced
IFN-beta gene expression. Here we show that another member IRF-7 is critical for 
the IFN-alpha gene induction. Unlike the IRF-3 gene, the IRF-7 gene is induced by
IFNs through activation of the ISGF3 transcription factor, and IRF-7 undergoes
virus-induced nuclear translocation. In cells lacking p48, an essential component
of IFN stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), ectopic expression of IRF-7 but not
IRF-3 can rescue the deficiency to induce IFN-alpha genes. These results indicate
that IRF-7 is a key factor in the positive feedback regulation of IFN-alpha/beta 
production.

PMID: 9877175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. EMBO J. 1998 Nov 16;17(22):6660-9.

Differential viral induction of distinct interferon-alpha genes by positive
feedback through interferon regulatory factor-7.

Marié I(1), Durbin JE, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Interferon (IFN) genes are among the earliest transcriptional responses to virus 
infection of mammalian cells. Although the regulation of the IFNbeta gene has
been well characterized, the induction of the large family of IFNalpha genes has 
remained obscure. We report that the IFNalpha genes can be divided into two
groups: an immediate-early response gene (IFNalpha4) which is induced rapidly and
without the need for ongoing protein synthesis; and a set of genes that display
delayed induction, consisting of at least IFNalpha2, 5, 6 and 8, which are
induced more slowly and require cellular protein synthesis. One protein that must
be synthesized for induction of the delayed gene set is IFN itself, presumably
IFNalpha4 or IFNbeta, which stimulates the Jak-Stat pathway through the IFN
receptor, resulting in activation of the transcription factor
interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). Among the IFN-stimulated genes
induced through this positive feedback loop is the IFN regulatory factor (IRF)
protein, IRF7. Induction of IRF7 protein in response to IFN and its subsequent
activation by phosphorylation in response to virus-specific signals, involving
two C-terminal serine residues, are required for induction of the delayed
IFNalpha gene set.

PMCID: PMC1171011
PMID: 9822609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Mol Cell. 1998 Mar;1(4):507-18.

Virus infection induces the assembly of coordinately activated transcription
factors on the IFN-beta enhancer in vivo.

Wathelet MG(1), Lin CH, Parekh BS, Ronco LV, Howley PM, Maniatis T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell 1999 Jun;3(6):813.

We have identified a virus-activated factor (VAF) that binds to a regulatory
element shared by different virus-inducible genes. We provide evidence that VAF
contains two members of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of
transcriptional activator proteins (IRF-3 and IRF-7), as well as the
transcriptional coactivator proteins p300 and CBP. Remarkably, VAF, as well as
recombinant IRF-3 and IRF-7 proteins, binds very weakly to the interferon-beta
(IFN-beta) gene promoter in vitro. However, in virus-infected cells, both
proteins are recruited to the endogenous IFN-beta promoter as part of a protein
complex that includes ATF-2/c-Jun and NF-kappa B. These observations provide a
unique example of the coordinate activation of multiple transcriptional activator
proteins and their highly cooperative assembly into a transcriptional enhancer
complex in vivo.

PMID: 9660935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 1997 Dec;8(4):293-312.

The growing family of interferon regulatory factors.

Nguyen H(1), Hiscott J, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Interferons (IFN) exert their multiple biological effects through the induction
of expression of over 30 genes encoding proteins with antiviral,
antiproliferative and immunomodulatory functions. Among the many IFN-inducible
proteins are the Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs), a family of transcription 
regulators, originally consisting of the well-characterized IRF-1 and IRF-2
proteins; the family has now expanded to over 10 members and is still growing.
The present review provides a detailed description of recently characterized IRF 
family members. Studies analyzing IRF-expressing cell lines and IRF knockout mice
reveal that each member of the IRF family exerts distinct roles in biological
processes such as pathogen response, cytokine signalling, cell growth regulation 
and hematopoietic development. Understanding the molecular mechanisms by which
the IRFs affect these important cellular events and IFN expression will
contribute to a greater understanding of events leading to various viral, immune 
and malignant disease states and will suggest novel strategies for antiviral and 
immune modulatory therapy.

PMID: 9620643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


