
61. Infect Genet Evol. 2013 Oct;19:113-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meegid.2013.06.025. Epub
2013 Jul 5.

Understanding the molecular mechanism(s) of hepatitis C virus (HCV) induced
interferon resistance.

Qashqari H(1), Al-Mars A, Chaudhary A, Abuzenadah A, Damanhouri G, Alqahtani M,
Mahmoud M, El Sayed Zaki M, Fatima K, Qadri I.

Author information: 
(1)King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, P.O. Box 80216, 
Jeddah 21589, Saudi Arabia.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is one of the foremost causes of chronic liver disease
affecting over 300 million globally. HCV contains a positive-stranded RNA of
~9600 nt and is surrounded by the 5' and 3'untranslated regions (UTR). The only
successful treatment regimen includes interferon (IFN) and ribavirin. Like many
other viruses, HCV has also evolved various mechanisms to circumvent the IFN
response by blocking (1) downstream signaling actions via STAT1, STAT2, IRF9 and 
JAK-STAT pathways and (2) repertoire of IFN Stimulatory Genes (ISGs). Several
studies have identified complex host demographic and genetic factors as well as
viral genetic heterogeneity associated with outcomes of IFN therapy. The genetic 
predispositions of over 2000 ISGS may render the patients to become resistant,
thus identification of such parameters within a subset of population are
necessary for management corollary. The ability of various HCV genotypes to
diminish IFN antiviral responses plays critical role in the establishment of
chronic infection at the acute stage of infection, thus highlighting importance
of the resistance in HCV treated groups. The recently defined role of viral
protein such as C, E2, NS3/NS4 and NS5A proteins in inducing the IFN resistance
are discussed in this article. How the viral and host genetic composition and
epistatic connectivity among polymorphic genomic sites synchronizes the
evolutionary IFN resistance trend remains under investigation. However, these
signals may have the potential to be employed for accurate prediction of
therapeutic outcomes. In this review article, we accentuate the significance of
host and viral components in IFN resistance with the aim to determine the
successful outcome in patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23831932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Virol. 2013 Sep;87(17):9813-21. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01146-13. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Rotavirus NSP1 mediates degradation of interferon regulatory factors through
targeting of the dimerization domain.

Arnold MM(1), Barro M, Patton JT.

Author information: 
(1)Rotavirus Molecular Biology Section, Laboratory of Infectious Diseases,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Rotavirus nonstructural protein NSP1 can inhibit expression of interferon (IFN)
and IFN-stimulated gene products by inducing proteasome-mediated degradation of
IFN-regulatory factors (IRFs), including IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7. All IRF proteins
share an N-terminal DNA-binding domain (DBD), and IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 contain a 
similar C-proximal IRF association domain (IAD) that mediates IRF dimerization.
An autoinhibitory domain (ID) at the extreme C terminus interacts with the IAD,
burying residues necessary for IRF dimerization. Phosphorylation of
serine/threonine residues in the ID induces charge repulsions that unmask the
IAD, enabling IRF dimerization and subsequent nuclear translocation. To define
the region of IRF proteins targeted for degradation by NSP1, we generated IRF3
and IRF7 truncation mutants and transiently expressed each with simian SA11-4F
NSP1. These assays indicated that the IAD represented a necessary and sufficient 
target for degradation. Because NSP1 did not mediate degradation of truncated
forms of the IAD, NSP1 likely requires a structurally intact IAD for recognition 
and targeting of IRF proteins. IRF9, which contains an IAD-like region that
directs interactions with signal inducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
proteins, was also targeted for degradation by NSP1, while IRF1, which lacks an
IAD, was not. Analysis of mutant forms of IRF3 unable to undergo dimerization or 
that were constitutively dimeric showed that both were targeted for degradation
by NSP1. These results indicate that SA11-4F NSP1 can induce degradation of
inactive and activated forms of IAD-containing IRF proteins (IRF3 to IRF9),
allowing a multipronged attack on IFN-based pathways that promote antiviral
innate and adaptive immune responses.

PMCID: PMC3754143
PMID: 23824805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 6;8(6):e65801. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065801. Print 2013.

Resistance to oncolytic myxoma virus therapy in nf1(-/-)/trp53(-/-) syngeneic
mouse glioma models is independent of anti-viral type-I interferon.

Zemp FJ(1), McKenzie BA, Lun X, Maxwell L, Reilly KM, McFadden G, Yong VW,
Forsyth PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Clark H. Smith Brain Tumor Center, University of
Calgary, Tom Baker Cancer Centre, Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute,
Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(6):e101827.

Despite promising preclinical studies, oncolytic viral therapy for malignant
gliomas has resulted in variable, but underwhelming results in clinical
evaluations. Of concern are the low levels of tumour infection and viral
replication within the tumour. This discrepancy between the laboratory and the
clinic could result from the disparity of xenograft versus syngeneic models in
determining in vivo viral infection, replication and treatment efficacy. Here we 
describe a panel of primary mouse glioma lines derived from Nf1 (+/-) Trp53 (+/-)
mice in the C57Bl/6J background for use in the preclinical testing of the
oncolytic virus Myxoma (MYXV). These lines show a range of susceptibility to MYXV
replication in vitro, but all succumb to viral-mediated cell death. Two of these 
lines orthotopically grafted produced aggressive gliomas. Intracranial injection 
of MYXV failed to result in sustained viral replication or treatment efficacy,
with minimal tumour infection that was completely resolved by 7 days
post-infection. We hypothesized that the stromal production of Type-I interferons
(IFNa/ß) could explain the resistance seen in these models; however, we found
that neither the cell lines in vitro nor the tumours in vivo produce any IFNa/ß
in response to MYXV infection. To confirm IFNa/ß did not play a role in this
resistance, we ablated the ability of tumours to respond to IFNa/ß via IRF9
knockdown, and generated identical results. Our studies demonstrate that these
syngeneic cell lines are relevant preclinical models for testing experimental
glioma treatments, and show that IFNa/ß is not responsible for the MYXV treatment
resistance seen in syngeneic glioma models.

PMCID: PMC3675064
PMID: 23762429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Comp Immunol. 2013 Oct;41(2):230-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2013.05.019. Epub 2013
Jun 6.

Expressions of transcription factors in goldfish (Carassius auratus L.)
macrophages and their progenitors.

Katzenback BA(1), Foroutanpay BV, Belosevic M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The development of macrophages is a highly regulated process requiring
coordination amongst transcription factors. The presence/absence, relative
levels, antagonism, or synergy of all transcription factors involved is critical 
to directing lineage cell fate and differentiation. While relative levels of many
key myeloid transcription factors have been determined in mammalian macrophage
differentiation, a similar set of studies have yet to be conducted in a teleost
system. In this study, we report on the mRNA levels of transcription factors
(cebpa, cjun, cmyb, egr1, gata1, gata2, gata3, lmo2, mafb, pax5, pu.1 and runx1) 
in sorted goldfish progenitor cells, monocytes, and macrophages from primary
kidney macrophage cultures. The mRNA levels of runx1 and pu.1 were significantly 
higher, gata3 and pax5 mRNA levels were lower, in monocytes compared to
progenitors, and the mRNA levels of cjun, egr1, gata2, gata3, mafb and pax5 were 
significantly decreased in macrophages compared to progenitor cells. The relative
mRNA levels of the interferon regulatory factor family of transcription factors, 
irf1, irf2, irf5, irf7, irf8 and irf9 in sorted progenitors, monocytes and
macrophages were also measured. In contrast to other irf family transcription
factors examined, irf8 mRNA levels were increased in monocytes compared to
progenitors by greater than three-fold, suggesting that irf8 is important for
monopoiesis. Lastly, we show the differential regulation of myeloid transcription
factor mRNA levels in sorted progenitor cells from 1, 2, or 3-day old cultures in
response to the recombinant goldfish growth factors, rgCSF-1 and rgKITLA.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23748037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 31;288(22):16117-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.442442. Epub
2013 Apr 18.

Mild electrical stimulation at 0.1-ms pulse width induces p53 protein
phosphorylation and G2 arrest in human epithelial cells.

Fukuda R(1), Suico MA, Koyama K, Omachi K, Kai Y, Matsuyama S, Mitsutake K, Taura
M, Morino-Koga S, Shuto T, Kai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 862-0973, Japan.

Exogenous low-intensity electrical stimulation has been used for treatment of
various intractable diseases despite the dearth of information on the molecular
underpinnings of its effects. Our work and that of others have demonstrated that 
applied electrical stimulation at physiological strength or mild electrical
stimulation (MES) activates the PI3K-Akt pathway, but whether MES activates other
molecules remains unknown. Considering that MES is a form of physiological
stress, we hypothesized that it can activate the tumor suppressor p53, which is a
key modulator of the cell cycle and apoptosis in response to cell stresses. The
potential response of p53 to an applied electrical current of low intensity has
not been investigated. Here, we show that p53 was transiently phosphorylated at
Ser-15 in epithelial cells treated with an imperceptible voltage (1 V/cm) and a
0.1-ms pulse width. MES-induced p53 phosphorylation was inhibited by pretreatment
with a p38 MAPK inhibitor and transfection of dominant-negative mutants of p38,
MKK3b, and MKK6b, implying the involvement of the p38 MAPK signaling pathway.
Furthermore, MES treatment enhanced p53 transcriptional function and increased
the expression of p53 target genes p21, BAX, PUMA, NOXA, and IRF9. Importantly,
MES treatment triggered G2 cell cycle arrest, but not cell apoptosis. MES
treatment had no effect on the cell cycle in HCT116 p53(-/-) cells, suggesting a 
dependence on p53. These findings identify some molecular targets of electrical
stimulation and incorporate the p38-p53 signaling pathway among the transduction 
pathways that MES affects.

PMCID: PMC3668767
PMID: 23599430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Jul;12(7):1288-98. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0923. Epub
2013 Apr 18.

REST negatively and ISGF3 positively regulate the human STAT1 gene in melanoma.

Amalraj J(1), Cutler SJ, Ghazawi I, Boyle GM, Ralph SJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science and Genomics Research Centre, Griffith Health
Institute, Griffith University, Gold Coast Campus, Australia.

STAT1 plays a pivotal role in signal transduction and transcriptional activation 
in response to type I and II IFNs. Regulation of STAT1 expression has significant
consequences in human cancer cells, where STAT1 deficiencies have been associated
with cellular resistance to type I IFN. Distinct promoter, enhancer, and
repressor regions have previously been described in the regulatory part of the
human STAT1 gene extending as far as the second intron. A putative IFN-stimulated
response element sequence in the STAT1 promoter is inducible by type I IFN and
binds the IFN-a/ß-induced complex, ISGF3. Together with the previously
characterized IRF-E/GAS/IRF-E (IGI) motif, these positive regulatory elements
provide a means for intracellular amplification of STAT1 expression, which is
necessary for increasing cell responsiveness to the IFNs. In contrast, the
transcriptional repressor REST binds to an RE-1 element in the STAT1 repressor
region and in doing so represses transcription from the STAT1 gene regulatory
region in melanoma cells lines. Repression significantly decreased in a REST-null
cell line. Altering REST function from a transcriptional repressor into an
activator as REST-VP16 increased expression from RE-1-targeted reporters. RNA
expression of 65 melanoma cell lines by microarray and selected lines with known 
IFN responsiveness showed significant inverse correlations between STAT1/REST
that were related to cellular responses to IFN. Thus REST, through the intronic
RE-1 element, provides a means for downregulating STAT1 expression, affecting
melanoma responsiveness to IFN. Intracellular levels of REST may be a useful
marker to test for IFN resistance and as a novel therapeutic target in
IFN-resistant melanomas.

PMID: 23598529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Med Microbiol. 2013 Jul;62(Pt 7):968-79. doi: 10.1099/jmm.0.054502-0. Epub 2013
Apr 4.

Suppressor of cytokine signalling protein SOCS1 and UBP43 regulate the expression
of type I interferon-stimulated genes in human microvascular endothelial cells
infected with Rickettsia conorii.

Colonne PM(1), Sahni A, Sahni SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Rickettsia conorii, the causative agent of Mediterranean spotted fever,
preferentially infects human microvascular endothelium and activates
pro-inflammatory innate immune responses as evidenced by enhanced expression and 
secretion of cytokines and chemokines. Our recent studies reveal that human
microvascular endothelial cells (HMECs) infected with R. conorii also launch
'antiviral' host defence mechanisms typically governed by type I interferons. To 
summarize, infected HMECs secrete IFN-ß to activate STAT1 in an
autocrine/paracrine manner and display increased expression of IFN-stimulated
genes, for example ISG15, which in turn activate innate responses to interfere
with intracellular replication of rickettsiae. We now present evidence that UBP43
and SOCS1, known negative regulators of JAK/STAT signalling, are also induced in 
R. conorii-infected HMECs, of which UBP43 but not SOCS1 functions to negatively
regulate STAT1 activation. Interestingly, UBP43 induction is almost completely
abolished in the presence of IFN-ß-neutralizing antibody, implicating an
important role for UBP43 as a feedback inhibitor for IFN-ß-mediated STAT1
activation. In contrast, SOCS1 expression is only partially affected by IFN-ß
neutralization, implicating potential involvement of as-yet-unidentified
IFN-independent mechanism(s) in SOCS1 induction during R. conorii infection. A
number of IFN-stimulated genes, including ISG15, OAS1, MX1, IRF1, IRF9 and TAP1
are also induced in an IFN-ß-dependent manner, whereas GBP1 remains unaffected by
IFN-ß neutralization. Increased STAT1 phosphorylation in HMECs subjected to UBP43
knockdown led to transcriptional activation of OAS1, MX1 and GBP1, confirming the
negative regulatory role of UBP43. Although IRF1, IRF9 and TAP1 were induced by
IFN-ß, siRNA-mediated silencing of UBP43 or SOCS1 did not significantly affect
their transcriptional activation. Expression of ISG15 was, however, increased in 
HMECs transfected with siRNA for UBP43 and SOCS1. Thus, unique regulatory
patterns of induced expression of UBP43, SOCS1 and IFN-stimulated genes represent
pathogen-specific responses underlying IFN-ß-mediated host endothelial signalling
during the pathogenesis of spotted fever group rickettsiosis.

PMCID: PMC3709555
PMID: 23558133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Cell Res. 2013 May;23(5):673-90. doi: 10.1038/cr.2013.47. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

IFNß/TNFa synergism induces a non-canonical STAT2/IRF9-dependent pathway
triggering a novel DUOX2 NADPH oxidase-mediated airway antiviral response.

Fink K(1), Martin L, Mukawera E, Chartier S, De Deken X, Brochiero E, Miot F,
Grandvaux N.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du CHUM (CRCHUM), Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Erratum in
    Cell Res. 2014 Apr;24(4):509.

Airway epithelial cells are key initial innate immune responders in the fight
against respiratory viruses, primarily via the secretion of antiviral and
proinflammatory cytokines that act in an autocrine/paracrine fashion to trigger
the establishment of an antiviral state. It is currently thought that the early
antiviral state in airway epithelial cells primarily relies on IFNß secretion and
the subsequent activation of the interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3)
transcription factor complex, composed of STAT1, STAT2 and IRF9, which regulates 
the expression of a panoply of interferon-stimulated genes encoding proteins with
antiviral activities. However, the specific pathways engaged by the synergistic
action of different cytokines during viral infections, and the resulting
physiological outcomes are still ill-defined. Here, we unveil a novel delayed
antiviral response in the airways, which is initiated by the synergistic
autocrine/paracrine action of IFNß and TNFa, and signals through a non-canonical 
STAT2- and IRF9-dependent, but STAT1-independent cascade. This pathway ultimately
leads to the late induction of the DUOX2 NADPH oxidase expression. Importantly,
our study uncovers that the development of the antiviral state relies on
DUOX2-dependent H2O2 production. Key antiviral pathways are often targeted by
evasion strategies evolved by various pathogenic viruses. In this regard, the
importance of the novel DUOX2-dependent antiviral pathway is further underlined
by the observation that the human respiratory syncytial virus is able to subvert 
DUOX2 induction.

PMCID: PMC3641604
PMID: 23545780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Hepatology. 2013 Aug;58(2):603-16. doi: 10.1002/hep.26368. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Interferon regulatory factor 9 protects against hepatic insulin resistance and
steatosis in male mice.

Wang XA(1), Zhang R, Jiang D, Deng W, Zhang S, Deng S, Zhong J, Wang T, Zhu LH,
Yang L, Hong S, Guo S, Chen K, Zhang XF, She Z, Chen Y, Yang Q, Zhang XD, Li H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Renmin Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.

Obesity is a calorie-excessive state associated with high risk of diabetes,
atherosclerosis, and certain types of tumors. Obesity may induce inflammation and
insulin resistance (IR). We found that the expression of interferon (IFN)
regulatory factor 9 (IRF9), a major transcription factor mediating IFN responses,
was lower in livers of obese mice than in those of their lean counterparts.
Furthermore, whole-body IRF9 knockout (KO) mice were more obese and had
aggravated IR, hepatic steatosis, and inflammation after chronic high-fat diet
feeding. In contrast, adenoviral-mediated hepatic IRF9 overexpression in both
diet-induced and genetically (ob/ob) obese mice showed markedly improved hepatic 
insulin sensitivity and attenuated hepatic steatosis and inflammation. We further
employed a yeast two-hybrid screening system to investigate the interactions
between IRF9 and its cofactors. Importantly, we identified that IRF9 interacts
with peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPAR-a), an important
metabolism-associated nuclear receptor, to activate PPAR-a target genes. In
addition, liver-specific PPAR-a overexpression rescued insulin sensitivity and
ameliorated hepatic steatosis and inflammation in IRF9 KO mice.CONCLUSION: IRF9
attenuates hepatic IR, steatosis, and inflammation through interaction with
PPAR-a.

Copyright © 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3736732
PMID: 23471885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Virol. 2013 May;87(9):5219-28. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02643-12. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus Nsp1ß inhibits
interferon-activated JAK/STAT signal transduction by inducing karyopherin-a1
degradation.

Wang R(1), Nan Y, Yu Y, Zhang YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Laboratory, VA-MD Regional College of Veterinary Medicine
and Maryland Pathogen Research Institute, University of Maryland, College Park,
Maryland, USA.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) inhibits the
interferon-mediated antiviral response. Type I interferons (IFNs) induce the
expression of IFN-stimulated genes by activating phosphorylation of both signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and STAT2, which form
heterotrimers (interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 [ISGF3]) with interferon
regulatory factor 9 (IRF9) and translocate to the nucleus. PRRSV Nsp1ß blocks the
nuclear translocation of the ISGF3 complex by an unknown mechanism. In this
study, we discovered that Nsp1ß induced the degradation of karyopherin-a1 (KPNA1,
also called importin-a5), which is known to mediate the nuclear import of ISGF3. 
Overexpression of Nsp1ß resulted in a reduction of KPNA1 levels in a
dose-dependent manner, and treatment of the cells with the proteasome inhibitor
MG132 restored KPNA1 levels. Furthermore, the presence of Nsp1ß induced an
elevation of KPNA1 ubiquitination and a shortening of its half-life. Our analysis
of Nsp1ß deletion constructs showed that the N-terminal domain of Nsp1ß was
involved in the ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation of KPNA1. A nucleotide
substitution resulting in an amino acid change from valine to isoleucine at
residue 19 of Nsp1ß diminished its ability to induce KPNA1 degradation and to
inhibit IFN-mediated signaling. Interestingly, infection of MARC-145 cells by
PRRSV strains VR-2332 and VR-2385 also resulted in KPNA1 reduction, whereas
infection by an avirulent strain, Ingelvac PRRS modified live virus (MLV), did
not. MLV Nsp1ß had no effect on KPNA1; however, a mutant with an amino acid
change at residue 19 from isoleucine to valine induced KPNA1 degradation. These
results indicate that Nsp1ß blocks ISGF3 nuclear translocation by inducing KPNA1 
degradation and that valine-19 in Nsp1ß correlates with the inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3624296
PMID: 23449802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Transcription. 2012 Nov-Dec;3(6):305-9. doi: 10.4161/trns.21904. Epub 2012 Nov 1.

Akt1, EMSY, BRCA2 and type I IFN signaling: a novel arm of the IFN response.

Ezell SA(1), Tsichlis PN.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.

Interferon-stimulated transcription is thought to occur mainly through the action
of the JAK/STAT pathway. However, recent findings revealed an additional
PI3K/Akt-dependent pathway, which contributes to the induction of a set of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) through the regulation of the transcriptional 
repressor EMSY.

PMCID: PMC3630186
PMID: 23117821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Immunol Cell Biol. 2013 Jan;91(1):82-8. doi: 10.1038/icb.2012.53. Epub 2012 Oct
16.

Notch signaling regulates PD-1 expression during CD8(+) T-cell activation.

Mathieu M(1), Cotta-Grand N, Daudelin JF, Thébault P, Labrecque N.

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, University of Montreal,
Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Programmed cell death 1 (PD-1) is an inhibitory receptor involved in T-cell
activation, tolerance and exhaustion. Little is known on how the expression of
PD-1 is controlled during T-cell activation. Recent studies demonstrated that
NFATc1 and IRF9 regulate Pdcd1 (PD-1) transcription and that T-bet acts as a
transcriptional repressor. In this study, we have investigated the role of the
Notch signaling pathway in PD-1 regulation. Using specific inhibitors of the
Notch signaling pathway, we showed decreased PD-1 expression and inhibition of
Pdcd1 transcription by activated CD8(+) T cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
further showed occupancy of the Pdcd1 promoter with RBPJk and Notch1
intracellular domain at RBPJk-binding sites. Our results identify the Notch
signaling pathway as an important regulator of PD-1 expression by activated
CD8(+) T cells.

PMID: 23070399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Bing Du Xue Bao. 2012 Jun;28(4):462-70.

[Function of tumor suppressor p53 and its role in antiviral immunity].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan WJ(1), Wu KB, Ma ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Shanghai 200241, China. yanwenjun01@163.com

Tumor suppressor p53, known as 'the guardian of the genome', has the ability to
prevent the emergence of transformed cells by the induction of cell cycle arrest 
and apoptosis. Otherwise, there were researches about the function of p53, such
as NDA repair, regulating metabolism and maternal reproduction in recent years.
Furthermore, there was a new function for p53 in antiviral apoptosis mentioned in
the research, Integration of interferon-alpha/beta signaling to p53 responses in 
tumour suppression and antiviral defense. In order to define the antiviral
function of p53, many target genes has been defined, such as IRF9, IRF5, ISG15
and TLR3. All of these implied there must be a complex mechanism for role of p53 
in antiviral innate immunity, adaptive immunity and inflammation.

PMID: 22978174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Sci Rep. 2012;2:637. doi: 10.1038/srep00637. Epub 2012 Sep 6.

Silencing of microRNA-122 enhances interferon-a signaling in the liver through
regulating SOCS3 promoter methylation.

Yoshikawa T(1), Takata A, Otsuka M, Kishikawa T, Kojima K, Yoshida H, Koike K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is a major cause of chronic liver disease
worldwide. Although novel drugs against HCV are under development, the current
standard therapy consists principally of interferon (IFN). To improve the
response to IFN treatment by enhancing interferon-stimulated response element
(ISRE)-mediated gene transcription, we screened 75 microRNAs highly expressed in 
hepatocytes for their ability to modulate ISRE activity. Overexpression of
microRNA-122 (miR122) significantly suppressed ISRE activity. Conversely,
silencing of miR122 function enhanced IFN-induced ISRE activity, by decreasing
expression of suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3). This decrease in SOCS3 
level was not mediated by microRNA target gene suppression, but rather by
enhanced methylation at SOCS3 gene promoter. Taken together, our data, along with
the fact that antisense oligonucleotides of miR122 also directly inhibit HCV
replication, suggest that a combination therapy comprising IFN and silencing of
miR122 function may be a promising therapeutic option in the near future.

PMCID: PMC3434395
PMID: 22957141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Hepatol. 2013 Jan;58(1):16-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.08.007. Epub 2012 Aug
15.

HCV NS5A and IRF9 compete for CypA binding.

Bobardt M(1), Hopkins S, Baugh J, Chatterji U, Hernandez F, Hiscott J, Sluder A, 
Lin K, Gallay PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology & Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cyclophilin A (CypA) is vital for HCV replication. Cyp
inhibitors successfully decrease viral loads in HCV-infected patients. However,
their mechanisms of action remain unknown. Since interferon (IFN) can also
suppress HCV replication, we asked whether a link between CypA and the IFN
response exists.
METHODS: We used cellular and recombinant pulldown approaches to investigate the 
possibility of a specific association of CypA with host ligands.
RESULTS: We found for the first time that CypA binds to a major component of the 
IFN response - the IFN regulatory factor 9 (IRF9). IRF9 is the DNA-binding
component of the transcriptional IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). CypA binds
directly to IRF9 via its peptidyl-prolyl isomerase (PPIase) pocket. Cyp
inhibitors such as cyclosporine A (CsA) or non-immunosuppressive derivates such
as alisporivir and SCY-635, prevent IRF9-CypA complex formation. CypA binds to
the C-terminal IRF-association-domain (IAD), but not to the DNA-binding or linker
domains of IRF9. Remarkably, CypA associates with the multimeric ISGF3 complex.
We also obtained evidence that CypA neutralization enhances IFN-induced
transcription. Interestingly, the hepatitis C virus (HCV) non-structural 5A
(NS5A) protein, which is known to modulate the IFN response, competes with IRF9
for CypA binding and can prevent the formation of IRF9-CypA complexes.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates for the first time that CypA binds
specifically to a component of the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator
of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway, IRF9. This study also reveals a novel
opportunity of HCV to modulate the IFN response via NS5A.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3527675
PMID: 22902549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 24;109(30):12058-63. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1206458109. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

The Sin3a repressor complex is a master regulator of STAT transcriptional
activity.

Icardi L(1), Mori R, Gesellchen V, Eyckerman S, De Cauwer L, Verhelst J,
Vercauteren K, Saelens X, Meuleman P, Leroux-Roels G, De Bosscher K, Boutros M,
Tavernier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Protein Research, Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie, 
9000 Ghent, Belgium.

Tyrosine phosphorylation is a hallmark for activation of STAT proteins, but their
transcriptional activity also depends on other secondary modifications. Type I
IFNs can activate both the ISGF3 (STAT1:STAT2:IRF9) complex and STAT3, but with
cell-specific, selective triggering of only the ISGF3 transcriptional program.
Following a genome-wide RNAi screen, we identified the SIN3 transcription
regulator homolog A (Sin3a) as an important mediator of this STAT3-targeted
transcriptional repression. Sin3a directly interacts with STAT3 and promotes its 
deacetylation. SIN3A silencing results in a prolonged nuclear retention of
activated STAT3 and enhances its recruitment to the SOCS3 promoter, concomitant
with histone hyperacetylation and enhanced STAT3-dependent transcription.
Conversely, Sin3a is required for ISGF3-dependent gene transcription and for an
efficient IFN-mediated antiviral protection against influenza A and hepatitis C
viruses. The Sin3a complex therefore acts as a context-dependent ISGF3/STAT3
transcriptional switch.

PMCID: PMC3409767
PMID: 22783022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. BMC Med Genomics. 2012 Jun 19;5:27. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-5-27.

Network analysis identifies a putative role for the PPAR and type 1 interferon
pathways in glucocorticoid actions in asthmatics.

Diez D(1), Goto S, Fahy JV, Erle DJ, Woodruff PG, Wheelock ÅM, Wheelock CE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Bioinformatics and Genomics, World Premier International
Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Asthma is a chronic inflammatory airway disease influenced by genetic
and environmental factors that affects ~300 million people worldwide, leading to 
~250,000 deaths annually. Glucocorticoids (GCs) are well-known therapeutics that 
are used extensively to suppress airway inflammation in asthmatics. The airway
epithelium plays an important role in the initiation and modulation of the
inflammatory response. While the role of GCs in disease management is well
understood, few studies have examined the holistic effects on the airway
epithelium.
METHODS: Gene expression data were used to generate a co-transcriptional network,
which was interrogated to identify modules of functionally related genes. In
parallel, expression data were mapped to the human protein-protein interaction
(PPI) network in order to identify modules with differentially expressed genes. A
common pathways approach was applied to highlight genes and pathways functionally
relevant and significantly altered following GC treatment.
RESULTS: Co-transcriptional network analysis identified pathways involved in
inflammatory processes in the epithelium of asthmatics, including the Toll-like
receptor (TLR) and PPAR signaling pathways. Analysis of the PPI network
identified RXRA, PPARGC1A, STAT1 and IRF9, among others genes, as differentially 
expressed. Common pathways analysis highlighted TLR and PPAR signaling pathways, 
providing a link between general inflammatory processes and the actions of GCs.
Promoter analysis identified genes regulated by the glucocorticoid receptor (GCR)
and PPAR pathways as well as highlighted the interferon pathway as a target of
GCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Network analyses identified known genes and pathways associated with
inflammatory processes in the airway epithelium of asthmatics. This workflow
illustrated a hypothesis generating experimental design that integrated multiple 
analysis methods to produce a weight-of-evidence based approach upon which future
focused studies can be designed. In this case, results suggested a mechanism
whereby GCs repress TLR-mediated interferon production via upregulation of the
PPAR signaling pathway. These results highlight the role of interferons in asthma
and their potential as targets of future therapeutic efforts.

PMCID: PMC3408345
PMID: 22713245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2012 Aug;33(2):258-66. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2012.05.014.
Epub 2012 May 14.

Subcellular localization and functional characterization of a fish IRF9 from
crucian carp Carassius auratus.

Shi J(1), Zhang YB, Liu TK, Sun F, Gui JF.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Graduate School of the Chinese Academy
of Sciences, Wuhan, China.

Mammalian interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 9 (IRF-9) has long been recognized
as the DNA sequence recognition subunit of IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3)
complex, which is critical for type I IFN to induce the expression of
IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) against viral infection. Recent studies have shown
that fish IFN exerts antiviral effects by induction of a number of ISGs and also 
of itself; however, little is known about the role of fish IRF9 in IFN signaling.
Here we identify a fish IRF9 orthologue (CaIRF9) from IFN-producing cell line,
crucian carp Carassius auratus blastulae embryonic (CAB) cells. Analysis of
subcellular distribution of CaIRF9-green fluorescent protein indicates that
CaIRF9 is constitutively present in the nucleus, which is driven by two nuclear
localization signals (NLS), one locating within DNA-binding domain (DBD) of
CaIRF9 and the other immediately behind DBD, although human IRF9 contains only
one NLS analogous to the former of CaIRF9. Overexpression of CaIRF9 together with
CaSTAT2 not only activates ISRE-containing promoter but also upregulates the
expression of fish ISGs. Strikingly, CaIRF9 together with CaSTAT2 also exhibits
an ability to activate crucian carp IFN promoter, and blockade of cellular CaIRF9
attenuates IFN itself-induced activation of crucian carp IFN promoter. Taken
together, these data suggest that crucian carp IFN induces the expression of ISGs
and also of itself possibly by the JAK-STAT signaling pathway that is conserved
from fish to mammals.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22626811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2012 Jun;32(6):254-68. doi: 10.1089/jir.2011.0091.
Epub 2012 Apr 27.

Negative regulation of the type I interferon signaling pathway by synthetic
Toll-like receptor 7 ligands.

Forsbach A(1), Müller C, Montino C, Kritzler A, Nguyen T, Weeratna R, Jurk M,
Vollmer J.

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer Oligonucleotide Therapeutics Unit-Coley Pharmaceutical GmbH ,
Düsseldorf, Germany. aforsbach@gmx.de

Ten Toll-like receptor (TLR) family members have been reported in humans. Here,
the endoplasmatic receptors TLR9, TLR8, TLR7, and TLR3 respond to nucleic acids
and derivatives or to small molecules (TLR7 and 8). Another cytoplasmic RNA
receptor, retinoic acid inducible gene I (RIG-I), is stimulated by 5'
triphosphate double-stranded RNA. We discovered that TLR7 small-molecule agonists
inhibit nucleic acid-mediated TLR3, TLR7, TLR9, or RIG-I-dependent interferon-a
(IFN-a) immune response. Other cytokines and chemokines stimulated by nucleic
acid agonists remained unaffected. The observed blockage of TLR3, TLR7, TLR9, and
RIG-I-mediated IFN-a response appears to be driven by a competitive mechanism at 
the type I IFN pathway. Besides type I IFN, IFN response genes such as IFIT-1,
Mx1, OAS1, or IRF7 were affected, which indicates that the key element driving
the inhibition is located in the type I IFN pathway. Indeed, the heterotrimeric
complex formation of phosphor-signal transducer and activator of transcription
factor 1 (STAT1), phosphor-STAT2, and IRF9 (called ISGF3, IFN-stimulated gene
factor 3) is inhibited through the TLR7 small-molecule agonists by phosphor-STAT2
blockage. These findings provide novel insights into the use of synthetic TLR7 or
TLR7/8 small molecules as ligands for immune activation and suppression.

PMID: 22540943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Immunity. 2012 Apr 20;36(4):503-14. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.03.013.

The JAK-STAT pathway at twenty.

Stark GR(1), Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. starkg@ccf.org

We look back on the discoveries that the tyrosine kinases TYK2 and JAK1 and the
transcription factors STAT1, STAT2, and IRF9 are required for the cellular
response to type I interferons. This initial description of the JAK-STAT pathway 
led quickly to additional discoveries that type II interferons and many other
cytokines signal through similar mechanisms. This well-understood pathway now
serves as a paradigm showing how information from protein-protein contacts at the
cell surface can be conveyed directly to genes in the nucleus. We also review
recent work on the STAT proteins showing the importance of several different
posttranslational modifications, including serine phosphorylation, acetylation,
methylation, and sumoylation. These remarkably proficient proteins also provide
noncanonical functions in transcriptional regulation and they also function in
mitochondrial respiration and chromatin organization in ways that may not involve
transcription at all.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3909993
PMID: 22520844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Virol. 2012 Jun;86(12):6932-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.07147-11. Epub 2012 Apr 11.

Mice deficient in STAT1 but not STAT2 or IRF9 develop a lethal CD4+
T-cell-mediated disease following infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis
virus.

Hofer MJ(1), Li W, Manders P, Terry R, Lim SL, King NJ, Campbell IL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Bioscience and the Bosch Institute, University of Sydney, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia.

Interferon (IFN) signaling is crucial for antiviral immunity. While type I IFN
signaling is mediated by STAT1, STAT2, and IRF9, type II IFN signaling requires
only STAT1. Here, we studied the roles of these signaling factors in the host
response to systemic infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). In
wild-type (WT) mice and mice lacking either STAT2 or IRF9, LCMV infection was
nonlethal, and the virus either was cleared (WT) or established persistence
(STAT2 knockout [KO] and IRF9 KO). However, in the case of STAT1 KO mice, LCMV
infection was lethal and accompanied by severe multiorgan immune pathology,
elevated expression of various cytokine genes in tissues, and cytokines in the
serum. This lethal phenotype was unaltered by the coabsence of the gamma
interferon (IFN-<U+03B3>) receptor and hence was not dependent on IFN-<U+03B3>. Equally, the
disease was not due to a combined defect in type I and type II IFN signaling, as 
IRF9 KO mice lacking the IFN-<U+03B3> receptor survived infection with LCMV. Clearance
of LCMV is mediated normally by CD8(+) T cells. However, the depletion of these
cells in LCMV-infected STAT1 KO mice was delayed, but did not prevent, lethality.
In contrast, depletion of CD4(+) T cells prevented lethality in LCMV-infected
STAT1 KO mice and was associated with a reduction in tissue immune pathology.
These studies highlight a fundamental difference in the role of STAT1 versus
STAT2 and IRF9. While all three factors are required to limit viral replication
and spread, only STAT1 has the unique function of preventing the emergence of a
lethal antiviral CD4(+) T-cell response.

PMCID: PMC3393544
PMID: 22496215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31688. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031688. Epub 2012 Feb 21.

The nitric oxide pathway provides innate antiviral protection in conjunction with
the type I interferon pathway in fibroblasts.

Mehta DR(1), Ashkar AA, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster Immunology Research
Centre, Michael DeGroote Institute for Infectious Disease Research, McMaster
University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The innate host response to virus infection is largely dominated by the
production of type I interferon and interferon stimulated genes. In particular,
fibroblasts respond robustly to viral infection and to recognition of viral
signatures such as dsRNA with the rapid production of type I interferon;
subsequently, fibroblasts are a key cell type in antiviral protection. We
recently found, however, that primary fibroblasts deficient for the production of
interferon, interferon stimulated genes, and other cytokines and chemokines mount
a robust antiviral response against both DNA and RNA viruses following
stimulation with dsRNA. Nitric oxide is a chemical compound with pleiotropic
functions; its production by phagocytes in response to interferon-<U+03B3> is associated
with antimicrobial activity. Here we show that in response to dsRNA, nitric oxide
is rapidly produced in primary fibroblasts. In the presence of an intact
interferon system, nitric oxide plays a minor but significant role in antiviral
protection. However, in the absence of an interferon system, nitric oxide is
critical for the protection against DNA viruses. In primary fibroblasts, NF-<U+03BA>B
and interferon regulatory factor 1 participate in the induction of inducible
nitric oxide synthase expression, which subsequently produces nitric oxide. As
large DNA viruses encode multiple and diverse immune modulators to disable the
interferon system, it appears that the nitric oxide pathway serves as a secondary
strategy to protect the host against viral infection in key cell types, such as
fibroblasts, that largely rely on the type I interferon system for antiviral
protection.

PMCID: PMC3283670
PMID: 22363706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Mar;32(6):1032-43. doi: 10.1128/MCB.06021-11. Epub 2012 Jan
17.

Contribution of a TANK-binding kinase 1-interferon (IFN) regulatory factor 7
pathway to IFN-<U+03B3>-induced gene expression.

Farlik M(1), Rapp B, Marie I, Levy DE, Jamieson AM, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and
Immunobiology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

Signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) and interferon
regulatory factors (IRFs) share common target genes. Here we show that the Irf7
gene is regulated by transcription factors STAT1 and IRF9 in response to the type
II interferon (IFN) IFN-<U+03B3>. IRF7 cooperated with STAT1 and IRF1 to stimulate the
expression of a subset of IFN-<U+03B3>-induced STAT1 target genes. IRF7-mediated control
of the Gbp2 gene required the presence and basal activity of the S/T kinase
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), whereas the binding of IRF7 to the Gbp2 promoter
did not. Analysis of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) recruitment to the Gbp2 promoter 
revealed a role for IRF7 at later stages of the IFN-<U+03B3> response. In support of the
role of IRF7 in establishing an effective antibacterial response,
IFN-<U+03B3>-pretreated Irf7(-/-) macrophages showed an increased bacterial burden after
infection with Listeria monocytogenes. Our data thus describe a biologically
relevant basal activity of TBK1 and identify IRF7 as a novel player in the IFN-<U+03B3> 
response.

PMCID: PMC3295005
PMID: 22252317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FASEB J. 2012 Jan;26(1):240-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-191122. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

Opposed regulation of type I IFN-induced STAT3 and ISGF3 transcriptional
activities by histone deacetylases (HDACS) 1 and 2.

Icardi L(1), Lievens S, Mori R, Piessevaux J, De Cauwer L, De Bosscher K,
Tavernier J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Protein Research, Vlaams Instituut voor Biotechnologie, 
Ghent, Belgium.

The antiviral and antiproliferative responses mediated by type I interferons
(IFNs) depend on JAK/STAT signaling and ISGF3 (STAT1:STAT2:IRF9)-dependent
transcription. In addition, type I IFNs stimulate STAT3 activation in many cell
types, an event generally associated with cell cycle progression, survival, and
proliferation. To gather more insight into this functionally contradictive
phenomenon, we studied the regulation of STAT3 transcriptional activity upon type
I IFN treatment. We show that IFNa2 stimulation strongly induces STAT3
phosphorylation, nuclear translocation, and promoter binding, yet the activation 
of transcription of a STAT3-dependent reporter and endogenous genes, such as
SOCS3 and c-FOS, is impaired. Simultaneous treatment with IFNa2 and trichostatin 
A, as well as combined HDAC1/HDAC2 silencing, restores STAT3-dependent reporter
gene and endogenous gene expression, strongly suggesting that HDAC1 and HDAC2 are
directly involved in repressing IFNa2-activated STAT3. Of note, single silencing 
of only one of the two HDACs does not lead to enhanced STAT3 activity, supporting
a functional redundancy between these two enzymes. In sharp contrast, HDAC1 and
HDAC2 activities are required for ISGF3-dependent gene expression. We conclude
that HDAC1 and HDAC2 differentially modulate STAT activity in response to IFNa2: 
while they are required for the induction of ISGF3-responsive genes, they impair 
the transcription of STAT3-dependent genes.

PMID: 21957129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Med Virol. 2011 Sep;83(9):1597-607. doi: 10.1002/jmv.22158.

Inverse association of IL28B genotype and liver mRNA expression of genes
promoting or suppressing antiviral state.

Abe H(1), Hayes CN, Ochi H, Tsuge M, Miki D, Hiraga N, Imamura M, Takahashi S,
Kubo M, Nakamura Y, Kamatani N, Chayama K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Digestive Diseases, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN,
Hiroshima, Japan.

High intrahepatic expression levels of interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) in
chronic hepatitis C patients are associated with poor response to interferon plus
ribavirin combination therapy. Expression levels of 16 genes (OAS1, PKR, MxA,
ISG15, RIG-I, TLR8, IRF7, IRF9, NFKBIA, IL28A/IL28B, IL29, IL28RA, IL10RB,
IFNAR2, and STAT1) that promote antiviral state and 4 genes (SOCS1, SOCS3,
Zc3h12a, and A20) that suppress antiviral state were analyzed using real-time PCR
assays in 133 liver biopsy samples from patients infected with genotypes 1 or 2. 
Expression levels of genes promoting antiviral state were positively correlated
with each other but were not correlated with those that suppress antiviral state.
Expression levels of some ISGs were inversely associated with common
polymorphisms within the IL28B locus. Genes promoting antiviral state were
expressed lower (e.g., ISG15, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.42E-12 and MxA, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>6.40E-11) in individuals 
with the protective rs12979860 CC genotype, and genes suppressing antiviral state
were expressed higher (A20, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00107 and Zc3h12a, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.00129, respectively), 
although some ISGs were not significant after the Bonferroni correction. The
expression levels of both an antiviral (MxA) and a suppressor (SOCS1) ISG were
independent predictors for non-response. These results suggest that rs12979860
genotype may be associated with response to combination therapy through an
inverse relationship between antiviral and suppressor ISGs in the liver.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21739451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Virol. 2011 Sep;85(18):9486-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.05007-11. Epub 2011 Jul 6.

Suppression of STAT-1 expression by human papillomaviruses is necessary for
differentiation-dependent genome amplification and plasmid maintenance.

Hong S(1), Mehta KP, Laimins LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Immunology, 303 E. Chicago Ave., Morton 6-681,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

High-risk human papillomaviruses (HPVs) infect stratified epithelia to establish 
persistent infections that maintain low-copy-number episomes in infected basal
cells. Amplification of viral genomes occurs upon keratinocyte differentiation,
followed by virion synthesis. During persistent HPV infections, viral proteins
act to evade surveillance by both innate and adaptive immune responses. One of
the primary pathways regulating the innate immune response is the JAK/STAT
pathway. Our studies indicate that the expression of STAT-1, but not other
members of interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF-3) complex such as
STAT-2 and IFN regulatory factor 9 (IRF9), is selectively suppressed by HPV
proteins at the level of transcription. Both E6 and E7 oncoproteins independently
suppress the expression of STAT-1, and mutational analyses indicate that the E6
targeting E6-associated protein (E6AP) is responsible for suppression. The levels
of STAT-1 proteins increase upon differentiation of both normal and HPV-positive 
cells but are still significantly reduced in the latter cells. Transient
restoration of STAT-1 levels in HPV-positive cells using recombinant retroviruses
significantly impaired viral amplification upon differentiation while long-term
increases abrogated maintenance of episomes. Similarly, increased levels of
STAT-1 induced by gamma interferon treatment inhibited HPV genome amplification
upon differentiation. Overall, our findings demonstrate that suppression of
STAT-1 expression by HPV proteins is necessary for genome amplification and
maintenance of episomes, suggesting an important role for this activity in viral 
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3165741
PMID: 21734056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Gen Virol. 2011 Oct;92(Pt 10):2394-8. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.034322-0. Epub 2011
Jun 22.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus viral interferon regulatory factor-2
inhibits type 1 interferon signalling by targeting interferon-stimulated gene
factor-3.

Mutocheluh M(1), Hindle L, Aresté C, Chanas SA, Butler LM, Lowry K, Shah K, Evans
DJ, Blackbourn DJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cancer Sciences and Cancer Research UK Cancer Centre, College of
Medical and Dental Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV) encodes four viral interferon
regulatory factors (vIRF-1-4). We investigated the mechanism and consequences of 
vIRF-2-mediated inhibition of interferon-response element signalling following
type I interferon (IFN) induction. Western blot and electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays identified the interferon-stimulated gene factor-3 (ISGF-3)
components STAT1 and IRF-9 as the proximal targets of vIRF-2 activity. The
biological significance of vIRF-2 inhibition of ISGF-3 was demonstrated by
vIRF-2-mediated rescue of the replication of the IFN-sensitive virus
encephalomyocarditis virus. This study provides both a mechanism and evidence for
KSHV vIRF-2-mediated suppression of the consequences of type 1 IFN-induced
signalling.

PMID: 21697347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Infect Immun. 2011 Sep;79(9):3733-43. doi: 10.1128/IAI.05008-11. Epub 2011 Jun
20.

Beta interferon-mediated activation of signal transducer and activator of
transcription protein 1 interferes with Rickettsia conorii replication in human
endothelial cells.

Colonne PM(1), Eremeeva ME, Sahni SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, USA.

Infection of the endothelial cell lining of blood vessels with Rickettsia
conorii, the causative agent of Mediterranean spotted fever, results in
endothelial activation. We investigated the effects of R. conorii infection on
the status of the Janus kinase (JAK)-signal transducer and activator of
transcription protein (STAT) signaling pathway in human microvascular endothelial
cells (HMECs), the most relevant host cell type, in light of rickettsial tropism 
for microvascular endothelium in vivo. R. conorii infection induced
phosphorylation of STAT1 on tyrosine 701 and serine 727 at 24, 48, and 72 h
postinfection in HMECs. Employing transcription profile analysis and neutralizing
antibodies, we further determined that beta interferon (IFN-ß) production and
secretion are critical for STAT1 activation. Secreted IFN-ß further amplified its
own expression via a positive-feedback mechanism, while expression of
transcription factors interferon regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) and IRF9, implicated 
in the IFN-ß-STAT1 feedback loop, was also induced. Metabolic activity of
rickettsiae was essential for the IFN-ß-mediated response(s) because tetracycline
treatment inhibited R. conorii replication, IFN-ß expression, and STAT1
phosphorylation. Inclusion of IFN-ß-neutralizing antibody during infection
resulted in significantly enhanced R. conorii replication, whereas addition of
exogenous IFN-ß had the opposite inhibitory effect. Finally, small interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown further confirmed a protective role for STAT1 against
intracellular R. conorii replication. In concert, these findings implicate an
important role for IFN-ß-mediated STAT1 activation in innate immune responses of 
vascular endothelium to R. conorii infection.

PMCID: PMC3165482
PMID: 21690236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Infect Dis. 2011 Jun 15;203(12):1784-90. doi: 10.1093/infdis/jir174. Epub 2011 
May 2.

Synergistic inhibition of enterovirus 71 replication by interferon and
rupintrivir.

Hung HC(1), Wang HC, Shih SR, Teng IF, Tseng CP, Hsu JT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology and Pharmaceutical Research, National Health
Research Institutes, Miaoli, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Enterovirus 71 (EV71) can cause severe diseases and even lead to
death in children. There is no vaccine or specific antiviral therapy to prevent
or cure EV71 infection. Although interferon (IFN)-a has been used in the
treatment of several viral infections, we found that IFN-a alone was ineffective 
in restricting EV71 replication in Vero cells.
METHODS: Through a bioinformatics analysis, several cellular proteins in the IFN 
response pathway were identified as susceptible substrates that might be degraded
by the EV71-encoded 3C protease (3C(pro)).
RESULTS: Indeed, IRF9 was shown to be vulnerable to 3C(pro) cleavage, as revealed
by enzyme-based and cell-based assays. Thus, the IFN-mediated antiviral mechanism
compromised by the viral 3C(pro) in EV71-infected cells may be accountable, at
least partially, for that IFN-a cannot inhibit EV71 replication. Because
rupintrivir (AG7088) is known to be an effective EV71 inhibitor, we investigated 
the effects of the combination of rupintrivir and IFN-a on EV71 replication and
found that they strongly synergized with each other in inhibiting EV71
replication.
CONCLUSIONS: Because rupintrivir was shown to be generally tolerable in earlier
clinical investigations, it is worth evaluating whether a combination of
rupintrivir and IFN-a could be an effective treatment for EV71.

PMID: 21536800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 10;286(23):20217-27. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.231068. Epub
2011 Apr 15.

Chromatin dynamics of gene activation and repression in response to interferon
alpha (IFN(alpha)) reveal new roles for phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms
of the transcription factor STAT2.

Testoni B(1), Völlenkle C, Guerrieri F, Gerbal-Chaloin S, Blandino G, Levrero M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Fondazione A. Cesalpino, 00161 Rome, Italy.
barbara.testoni@uniroma1.it

Signal transducer and activator of transcription 2 (STAT2), the critical
component of type I interferons signaling, is a prototype latent cytoplasmic
signal-dependent transcription factor. Activated tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT2
associates with STAT1 and IRF9 to bind the ISRE elements in the promoters of a
subset of IFN-inducible genes (ISGs). In addition to activate hundreds of ISGs,
IFNa also represses numerous target genes but the mechanistic basis for this dual
effect and transcriptional repression is largely unknown. We investigated by
ChIP-chip the binding dynamics of STAT2 and "active" phospho(P)-STAT2 on 113
putative IFNa direct target promoters before and after IFNa induction in Huh7
cells and primary human hepatocytes (PHH). STAT2 is already bound to 62% of our
target promoters, including most "classical" ISGs, before IFNa treatment. 31% of 
STAT2 basally bound promoters also show P-STAT2 positivity. By correlating in
vivo promoter occupancy with gene expression and changes in histone methylation
marks we found that: 1) STAT2 plays a role in regulating ISGs expression,
independently from its phosphorylation; 2) P-STAT2 is involved in ISGs
repression; 3) "activated" ISGs are marked by H3K4me1 and H3K4me3 before IFNa; 4)
"repressed" genes are marked by H3K27me3 and histone methylation plays a dominant
role in driving IFNa-mediated ISGs repression.

PMCID: PMC3121502
PMID: 21498520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jun 17;286(24):21092-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.200907. Epub 2011
Apr 15.

Distinct roles of transforming growth factor-beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1)-c-Rel
and interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4) pathways in human T cell lymphotropic
virus 1-transformed T helper 17 cells producing interleukin-9.

Refaat A(1), Zhou Y, Suzuki S, Takasaki I, Koizumi K, Yamaoka S, Tabuchi Y, Saiki
I, Sakurai H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathogenic Biochemistry, Institute of Natural Medicine, University
of Toyama, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

Investigation of helper T cell markers in HTLV-1-transformed cell lines
demonstrated that HuT-102 has an IL-9-producing Th17 phenotype. We confirmed the 
vital role of retinoic acid-related orphan receptor C, a Th17 transcription
factor, in the expression of IL-17. Interferon regulatory factor 4 (IRF4), a
transcription factor overexpressed in all HTLV-1-infected cells, regulated IL-17 
and IL-9 concomitantly. We further demonstrated a novel pathway for the
regulation of Tax-induced cytokines, IL-9 and IL-6, through TAK1-mediated nuclear
accumulation of c-Rel. A microarray analysis for IRF4 knocked down HuT-102 cells 
showed a significant up-regulation in the set of genes related to Th1, mainly
IFN-<U+03B3> and several transcription factors. T-bet and IRF1, but not STAT1 and IRF9, 
participated in counteracting the inhibitory effect of IRF4 on the production of 
IFN-<U+03B3>. Finally, suppression of both IRF4 and c-Rel resulted in the reduced
proliferation. Collectively, these findings indicate that TAK1-c-Rel and IRF4
pathways play distinct roles in the maintenance of IL-9-producing Th17 phenotype 
of HTLV-1-transformed cells.

PMCID: PMC3122170
PMID: 21498517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Oncogene. 2011 Jun 9;30(23):2670-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.635. Epub 2011 Mar 14.

p53-paralog DNp73 oncogene is repressed by IFNa/STAT2 through the recruitment of 
the Ezh2 polycomb group transcriptional repressor.

Testoni B(1), Schinzari V, Guerrieri F, Gerbal-Chaloin S, Blandino G, Levrero M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Expression, Fondazione A. Cesalpino, Rome, Italy.
barbara.testoni@uniroma1.it

The DNp73 proteins act as trans-repressors of p53 and p73-dependent transcription
and exert both anti-apoptotic activity and pro-proliferative activity. DNp73s are
frequently up-regulated in a variety of human cancers, including human
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs). Increased levels of DNp73 proteins confer to
HCC cells resistance to apoptosis and, irrespective to p53 status, a
chemoresistant phenotype. Here, we show that interferon (IFN)a down-regulates
DNp73 expression in primary human hepatocytes (PHHs) and HCC cell lines. IFNa has
been used as pro-apoptotic agent in the treatment of malignancies and there is
increasing evidence of IFNa effectiveness in HCC treatment and prevention of
recurrence. The precise mechanisms by which class I IFNs exert their
anti-proliferative and anti-tumor activity remain unclear. IFNa binding to its
receptor activates multiple intracellular signaling cascades regulating the
transcription of numerous direct target genes through the recruitment of a
complex comprising of STAT1, STAT2 and IFN regulatory factor (IRF)9 to their
promoters. We found that, in response to IFNa, the P2p73 promoter undergoes
substantial chromatin remodeling. Histone deacetylases (HDACs) replace histone
acetyl transferases. STAT2 is recruited onto the endogenous P2p73 promoter
together with the polycomb group protein Ezh2, leading to increased H3K27
methylation and transcriptional repression. The reduction of DNp73 levels by IFNa
is paralleled by an increased susceptibility to IFNa-triggered apoptosis of Huh7 
hepatoma cells. Our results show, for the first time, that IFN-stimulated gene
factor 3 recruitment may serve both in activating and repressing gene expression 
and identify the down-regulation of DNp73 as an additional mechanism to
counteract the chemoresistance of liver cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3114186
PMID: 21399658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Eur J Immunol. 2011 Feb;41(2):461-72. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040668. Epub 2010 Dec
29.

Counter-regulation mechanism of IL-4 and IFN-a signal transduction through
cytosolic retention of the pY-STAT6:pY-STAT2:p48 complex.

Kim SH(1), Lee CE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Department of Biological Science, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon, Korea.

IFN-a and IL-4 induce Th1 and Th2 responses, respectively, and often display
antagonistic actions against each other. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of 
counter-regulation, we have investigated the signal interception by IFN-a and
IL-4, employing a human B-cell line Ramos, sensitive to both cytokines. In these 
cells, IFN-a effectively inhibited IL-4-induced Fc epsilon receptor II (CD23)
expression, whereas IL-4 suppressed IFN-a-mediated IRF7 expression. The
counter-regulatory action by IL-4 and IFN-a proceeded with a delayed kinetics
requiring 4<U+2009>h. Notably, IFN-a did not affect the IL-4-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT6, but induced a time-dependent cytoplasmic accumulation
of phosphotyrosine(pY)-STAT6 and a corresponding decrease in nuclear pY-STAT6. By
confocal analysis and co-immunoprecipitation assays, we demonstrated the
colocalization and molecular interaction of IL-4-induced pY-STAT6 with
IFN-a-induced pY-STAT2:p48 in the cytosol. In addition, the over-expression of
STAT2 or STAT6 induced the concomitant cytosolic accumulation of pY-STAT6 or
pY-STAT2, leading to the suppression of IL-4-induced CD23 or IFN-a-induced IRF7
gene expression, respectively. Our data suggest that the signals ensued by IFN-a 
and IL-4 induce cytoplasmic sequestration of IL-4-activated STAT6 and
IFN-a-activated STAT2:p48 in B cells through the formation of
pY-STAT6:pY-STAT2:p48 complex, which provides a novel mechanism by which IFN-a
and IL-4 cross-regulate their signaling into the nucleus.

Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21268015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Immunol. 2011 Mar 1;186(5):2772-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003208. Epub 2011 Jan
24.

IFN-a directly promotes programmed cell death-1 transcription and limits the
duration of T cell-mediated immunity.

Terawaki S(1), Chikuma S, Shibayama S, Hayashi T, Yoshida T, Okazaki T, Honjo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Genomic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Yoshida-konoe, Sakyo-Ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

Programmed cell death-1 (PD-1) is an inhibitory coreceptor for T lymphocytes that
provides feedback inhibition of T cell activation. Although PD-1's expression on 
T cells is known to be activation dependent, the factors that determine the
timing, intensity, and duration of PD-1 expression in immune reactions are not
fully understood. To address this question, we performed a fine mapping analysis 
of a conserved 5'-flanking region of the PD-1 gene and identified a putative IFN 
stimulation response element, which was responsible for PD-1 transcription in the
2B4.11 T cell line. Consistent with this finding, activation by IFN-a enhanced
both the induction and maintenance of PD-1 expression on TCR-engaged primary
mouse T cells through an association IFN-responsive factor 9 (IRF9) to the IFN
stimulation response element. Furthermore, PD-1 expression on Ag-specific CD8(+) 
T cells was augmented by IFN-a in vivo. We propose that strong innate
inflammatory responses promote primary T cell activation and their
differentiation into effector cells, but also cause an attenuated T cell response
in sustained immune reactions, at least partially through type I IFN-mediated
PD-1 transcription. Based on this idea, we demonstrate that IFN-a administration 
in combination with PD-1 blockade in tumor-bearing mice effectively augments the 
antitumor immunity, and we propose this as a novel and rational approach for
cancer immunotherapy.

PMID: 21263073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Hepatology. 2011 Jan;53(1):32-41. doi: 10.1002/hep.23985. Epub 2010 Oct 26.

Ribavirin potentiates interferon action by augmenting interferon-stimulated gene 
induction in hepatitis C virus cell culture models.

Thomas E(1), Feld JJ, Li Q, Hu Z, Fried MW, Liang TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2011 Apr;53(4):1400-1; author reply 1402.

The combination of pegylated interferon (PEG-IFN) and ribavirin is the standard
treatment for chronic hepatitis C. Our recent clinical study suggests that
ribavirin augments the induction of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) in
patients treated for hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection. In order to further
characterize the mechanisms of action of ribavirin, we examined the effect of
ribavirin treatment on ISG induction in cell culture. In addition, the effect of 
ribavirin on infectious HCV cell culture systems was studied. Similar to
interferon (IFN)-a, ribavirin potently inhibits JFH-1 infection of Huh7.5.1 cells
in a dose-dependent manner, which spans the physiological concentration of
ribavirin in vivo. Microarray analysis and subsequent quantitative polymerase
chain reaction assays demonstrated that ribavirin treatment resulted in the
induction of a distinct set of ISGs. These ISGs, including IFN regulatory factors
7 and 9, are known to play an important role in anti-HCV responses. When
ribavirin is used in conjunction with IFN-a, induction of specific ISGs is
synergistic when compared with either drug applied separately. Direct
up-regulation of these antiviral genes by ribavirin is mediated by a novel
mechanism different from those associated with IFN signaling and intracellular
double-stranded RNA sensing pathways such as RIG-I and MDA5. RNA interference
studies excluded the activation of the Toll-like receptor and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B
pathways in the action of ribavirin.CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that
ribavirin, acting by way of a novel innate mechanism, potentiates the anti-HCV
effect of IFN. Understanding the mechanism of action of ribavirin would be
valuable in identifying novel antivirals.

Copyright © 2010 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3498496
PMID: 21254160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Immunol. 2011 Feb 1;186(3):1685-93. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1001359. Epub 2010
Dec 22.

A novel role for IFN-stimulated gene factor 3II in IFN-<U+03B3> signaling and induction 
of antiviral activity in human cells.

Morrow AN(1), Schmeisser H, Tsuno T, Zoon KC.

Author information: 
(1)Cytokine Biology Section, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Type I (e.g., IFN-a, IFN-ß) and type II IFNs (IFN-<U+03B3>) have antiviral,
antiproliferative, and immunomodulatory properties. Both types of IFN signal
through the Jak/STAT pathway to elicit antiviral activity, yet IFN-<U+03B3> is thought
to do so only through STAT1 homodimers, whereas type I IFNs activate both STAT1- 
and STAT2-containing complexes such as IFN-stimulated gene factor 3. In this
study, we show that IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 containing unphosphorylated
STAT2 (ISGF3(II)) also plays a role in IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated antiviral activity in
humans. Using phosphorylated STAT1 as a marker for IFN signaling, Western blot
analysis of IFN-a2a-treated human A549 cells revealed that phospho-STAT1 (Y701)
levels peaked at 1 h, decreased by 6 h, and remained at low levels for up to 48
h. Cells treated with IFN-<U+03B3> showed a biphasic phospho-STAT1 response with an
early peak at 1-2 h and a second peak at 15-24 h. Gene expression microarray
following IFN-<U+03B3> treatment for 24 h indicated an induction of antiviral genes that
are induced by IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 and associated with a type I IFN
response. Induction of these genes by autocrine type I and type III IFN signaling
was ruled out using neutralizing Abs to these IFNs in biological assays and by
quantitative RT-PCR. Despite the absence of autocrine IFNs, IFN-<U+03B3> treatment
induced formation of ISGF3(II). This novel transcription factor complex binds to 
IFN-stimulated response element promoter sequences, as shown by chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis of the protein kinase R promoter. STAT2 and IFN
regulatory factor 9 knockdown in A549 cells reversed IFN-<U+03B3>-mediated
IFN-stimulated response element induction and antiviral activity, implicating
ISGF3(II) formation as a significant component of the cellular response and
biological activity of IFN-<U+03B3>.

PMCID: PMC3417313
PMID: 21178011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Hepatol. 2011 Aug;55(2):289-98. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.11.019. Epub 2010 Dec 
13.

IL28B inhibits hepatitis C virus replication through the JAK-STAT pathway.

Zhang L(1), Jilg N, Shao RX, Lin W, Fusco DN, Zhao H, Goto K, Peng LF, Chen WC,
Chung RT.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Warren 1007, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
armzhang@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The combination of pegylated interferon (IFN) a and ribavirin 
(RBV) is the standard therapy for patients with chronic HCV infection. However,
it produces a sustained virologic response (SVR) in only half of the treated
individuals and is associated with significant side effects. Recently, several
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) near the IL28B locus, also known as IFN<U+03BB>3,
were identified to be strong predictors of SVR in patients receiving PEG-IFN and 
RBV. We sought to determine whether IL28B was capable of inhibiting HCV
replication and to determine the pathway by which IL28B exhibits anti-HCV
activity.
METHODS: Using the full-length HCV replicon OR6 and the infectious HCV clones
JFH1 and Jc1, we assessed the anti-HCV effect of IL28B on HCV and characterized
the key steps of the JAK-STAT pathway by real time PCR, luciferase assay, and
Western blot. Finally, we evaluated the anti-HCV effect of IL28B in the presence 
of JAK-STAT pathway inhibitors such as blocking antibodies, a pharmacological
inhibitor, and siRNAs.
RESULTS: We found that IL28B inhibits HCV replication in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Like IFNa, IL28B induces the phosphorylation of STAT1 and 
STAT2, ISRE-driven transcription, and expression of known ISGs. The anti-HCV
effects of IL28A, IL28B, and IL29 were abrogated by an IL10R2 blocking antibody, 
a pharmacological inhibitor of JAK1/TYK2, and by siRNA against IL28R1, STAT1,
STAT2, and IRF9.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate that IL28A, IL28B, and IL29 signal through the 
JAK-STAT pathway to inhibit HCV. These data suggest possible applications of new 
approaches in HCV treatment.

Copyright © 2010 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3068235
PMID: 21147189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Neuroimmunol. 2011 Jan;230(1-2):153-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jneuroim.2010.10.033.
Epub 2010 Nov 24.

Gene expression in IFNß signalling pathway differs between monocytes, CD4 and CD8
T cells from MS patients.

Oliver-Martos B(1), Órpez T, Pinto-Medel MJ, Mayorga C, García-León JA,
Maldonado-Sanchez R, Suardíaz M, Guerrero M, Luque G, Leyva L, Fernández O.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory, Hospital Civil, 29009 Málaga, Spain. begoliver@gmail.com

IFNß exerts its activity through the interaction with IFNAR, through activation
of the JAK/STAT pathway. We analyzed the changes in IFNAR1, IFNAR2, STAT1, STAT2,
Tyk2, JAK1, IRF9 and MxA gene expressions after prolonged IFNß treatment, in
isolated mononuclear-cell subpopulations from MS patients, by real time PCR. The 
effect of IFNß on gene expression differed depending on the subpopulation
assessed. The data suggest that CD8+ T cells are the most influenced by prolonged
IFNß therapy as IFNAR2, Tyk2, IRF9 and Jak1 expressions were decreased, whereas
MxA expression was increased in these cells.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21106255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Placenta. 2011 Jan;32(1):33-43. doi: 10.1016/j.placenta.2010.10.010. Epub 2010
Nov 13.

Genome-wide expression profile of first trimester villous and extravillous human 
trophoblast cells.

Apps R(1), Sharkey A, Gardner L, Male V, Trotter M, Miller N, North R, Founds S, 
Moffett A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Centre for Trophoblast Research, University of
Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2 1QP, UK.

We have examined the transcriptional changes associated with differentiation from
villous to extravillous trophoblast using a whole genome microarray. Villous
trophoblast (VT) is in contact with maternal blood and mediates nutrient exchange
whereas extravillous trophoblast (EVT) invades the decidua and remodels uterine
arteries. Using highly purified first trimester trophoblast we identified over
3000 transcripts that are differentially expressed. Many of these transcripts
represent novel functions and pathways that show co-ordinated up-regulation in VT
or EVT. In addition we identify new players in established functions such as
migration, immune modulation and cytokine or angiogenic factor secretion by EVT. 
The transition from VT to EVT is also characterised by alterations in
transcription factors such as STAT4 and IRF9, which may co-ordinate these
changes. Transcripts encoding several members of the immunoglobulin-superfamily, 
which are normally expressed on leukocytes, were highly transcribed in EVT but
not expressed as protein, indicating specific control of translation in EVT.
Interactions of trophoblast with decidual leukocytes are involved in regulating
EVT invasion. We show that decidual T-cells, macrophages and NK cells express the
inhibitory collagen receptor LAIR-1 and that EVT secrete LAIR-2, which can block 
this interaction. This represents a new mechanism by which EVT can modulate
leukocyte function in the decidua. Since LAIR-2 is detectable in the urine of
pregnant, but not non-pregnant women, trophoblast-derived LAIR-2 may also have
systemic effects during pregnancy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3065343
PMID: 21075446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Feb 15;317(4):513-20. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.10.025. Epub
2010 Nov 5.

Intact JAK-STAT signaling pathway is a prerequisite for STAT1 to reinforce the
expression of RIG-G gene.

Lou YJ(1), Zhang ZL, Pan XR, Xu GP, Jia PM, Li D, Tong JH.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology and State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics,
Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, 197 Ruijin
Road II, Shanghai 200025, China.

We previously reported that IRF-9/STAT2 functional interaction could drive the
expression of retinoic acid-induced gene G (RIG-G), independently of STAT1 and
the classical JAK-STAT pathway, providing a novel alternative pathway for
interferons (IFN) to mediate their multiple biological properties. In addition,
we also found that IRF-1 could regulate RIG-G induction as well as the expression
of IRF-9 and STAT2 in some cases. But the mechanisms by which IRF-1 exerted its
action remained to be elucidated. Here, we showed that STAT1 could significantly 
enhance the effects of the IRF-9/STAT2 complex or IRF-1 on RIG-G induction
through an activated JAK-STAT pathway, though it was not essential for RIG-G
expression. In STAT1-deficient U3A cells, IRF-1 could induce RIG-G expression via
the IFN-stimulated response elements in the RIG-G gene promoter, but it failed to
upregulate IRF-9 and STAT2 unless the U3A cells were reconstituted by exogenous
STAT1. In STAT1-expressing cells, IRF-1 indirectly activated RIG-G expression
through an IRF-9/STAT2-dependent manner. Taken together, we concluded that the
expression of RIG-G was independent on the classical JAK-STAT pathway, but could 
be greatly increased by it. This work will be of great benefit to us for a better
understanding of the mechanisms on RIG-G gene expression regulation.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21056555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. FEBS J. 2010 Nov;277(22):4741-54. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07880.x. Epub
2010 Oct 21.

Combining theoretical analysis and experimental data generation reveals IRF9 as a
crucial factor for accelerating interferon a-induced early antiviral signalling.

Maiwald T(1), Schneider A, Busch H, Sahle S, Gretz N, Weiss TS, Kummer U,
Klingmüller U.

Author information: 
(1)Heidelberg University, Department Modeling of Biological Processes,
BIOQUANT/Institute of Zoology, Germany.

Type I interferons (IFN) are important components of the innate antiviral
response. A key signalling pathway activated by IFNa is the Janus kinase/signal
transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT) pathway. Major components of
the pathway have been identified. However, critical kinetic properties that
facilitate accelerated initiation of intracellular antiviral signalling and
thereby promote virus elimination remain to be determined. By combining
mathematical modelling with experimental analysis, we show that control of
dynamic behaviour is not distributed among several pathway components but can be 
primarily attributed to interferon regulatory factor 9 (IRF9), constituting a
positive feedback loop. Model simulations revealed that increasing the initial
IRF9 concentration reduced the time to peak, increased the amplitude and enhanced
termination of pathway activation. These model predictions were experimentally
verified by IRF9 over-expression studies. Furthermore, acceleration of signal
processing was linked to more rapid and enhanced expression of IFNa target genes.
Thus, the amount of cellular IRF9 is a crucial determinant for amplification of
early dynamics of IFNa-mediated signal transduction.

© 2010 The Authors Journal compilation © 2010 FEBS.

PMID: 20964804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Virol. 2010 Dec;84(24):12982-94. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01224-10. Epub 2010 Oct 13.

The early whole-blood transcriptional signature of dengue virus and features
associated with progression to dengue shock syndrome in Vietnamese children and
young adults.

Hoang LT(1), Lynn DJ, Henn M, Birren BW, Lennon NJ, Le PT, Duong KT, Nguyen TT,
Mai LN, Farrar JJ, Hibberd ML, Simmons CP.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford University Clinical Research Unit, Hospital for Tropical Diseases, 190 
Ben Ham Tu, District 5, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.

Dengue is a pantropic public health problem. In children, dengue shock syndrome
(DSS) is the most common life-threatening complication. The ability to predict
which patients may develop DSS may improve triage and treatment. To this end, we 
conducted a nested case-control comparison of the early host transcriptional
features in 24 DSS patients and 56 sex-, age-, and virus serotype-matched
uncomplicated (UC) dengue patients. In the first instance, we defined the "early 
dengue" profile. The transcriptional signature in acute rather than convalescent 
samples (=72 h post-illness onset) was defined by an overabundance of
interferon-inducible transcripts (31% of the 551 overabundant transcripts) and
canonical gene ontology terms that included the following: response to virus,
immune response, innate immune response, and inflammatory response. Pathway and
network analyses identified STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, IRF7, IRF9, IRF1, CEBPB, and SP1
as key transcriptional factors mediating the early response. Strikingly, the only
difference in the transcriptional signatures of early DSS and UC dengue cases was
the greater abundance of several neutrophil-associated transcripts in patients
who progressed to DSS, a finding supported by higher plasma concentrations of
several canonical proteins associated with neutrophil degranulation
(bactericidal/permeability-increasing protein [BPI], elastase 2 [ELA2], and
defensin 1 alpha [DEF1A]). Elevated levels of neutrophil-associated transcripts
were independent of the neutrophil count and also of the genotype of the
infecting virus, as genome-length sequences of dengue virus serotype 1 (DENV-1)
(n = 15) and DENV-2 (n = 3) sampled from DSS patients were phylogenetically
indistinguishable from those sampled from uncomplicated dengue patients (32
DENV-1 and 9 DENV-2 sequences). Collectively, these data suggest a hitherto
unrecognized association between neutrophil activation, pathogenesis, and the
development of DSS and point to future strategies for guiding prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3004338
PMID: 20943967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 31;285(53):42013-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.165936. Epub
2010 Oct 13.

Transcription factor redundancy ensures induction of the antiviral state.

Schmid S(1), Mordstein M, Kochs G, García-Sastre A, Tenoever BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

The transcriptional response to virus infection is thought to be predominantly
induced by interferon (IFN) signaling. Here we demonstrate that, in the absence
of IFN signaling, an IFN-like transcriptome is still maintained. This
transcriptional activity is mediated from IFN-stimulated response elements
(ISREs) that bind to both the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) as well as to 
IFN response factor 7 (IRF7). Through a combination of both in vitro biochemistry
and in vivo transcriptional profiling, we have dissected what constitutes
IRF-specific, ISGF3-specific, or universal ISREs. Taken together, the data
presented here suggest that IRF7 can induce an IFN-like transcriptome in the
absence of type-I or -III signaling and therefore provides a level of redundancy 
to cells to ensure the induction of the antiviral state.

PMCID: PMC3009927
PMID: 20943654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Virol J. 2010 Oct 12;7:265. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-7-265.

Intracellular expression of IRF9 Stat fusion protein overcomes the defective
Jak-Stat signaling and inhibits HCV RNA replication.

Poat B(1), Hazari S, Chandra PK, Gunduz F, Alvarez X, Balart LA, Garry RF, Dash
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Tulane University Health
Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Avenue, New Orleans, LA-70112, USA.

Interferon alpha (IFN-a) binds to a cell surface receptor that activates the
Jak-Stat signaling pathway. A critical component of this pathway is the
translocation of interferon stimulated gene factor 3 (a complex of three proteins
Stat1, Stat2 and IRF9) to the nucleus to activate antiviral genes. A stable
sub-genomic replicon cell line resistant to IFN-a was developed in which the
nuclear translocation of Stat1 and Stat2 proteins was prevented due to the lack
of phosphorylation; whereas the nuclear translocation of IRF9 protein was not
affected. In this study, we sought to overcome defective Jak-Stat signaling and
to induce an antiviral state in the IFN-a resistant replicon cell line by
developing a chimera IRF9 protein fused with the trans activating domain (TAD) of
either a Stat1 (IRF9-S1C) or Stat2 (IRF9-S2C) protein. We show here that
intracellular expression of fusion proteins using the plasmid constructs of
either IRF9-S1C or IRF9-S2C, in the IFN-a resistant cells, resulted in an
increase in Interferon Stimulated Response Element (ISRE) luciferase promoter
activity and significantly induced HLA-1 surface expression. Moreover, we show
that transient transfection of IRF9-S1C or IRF9-S2C plasmid constructs into IFN-a
resistant replicon cells containing sub-genomic HCV1b and HCV2a viruses resulted 
in an inhibition of viral replication and viral protein expression independent of
IFN-a treatment. The results of this study indicate that the recombinant fusion
proteins of IRF9-S1C, IRF9-S2C alone, or in combination, have potent antiviral
properties against the HCV in an IFN-a resistant cell line with a defective
Jak-Stat signaling.

PMCID: PMC2964675
PMID: 20939906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Virol. 2010 Nov;84(21):11045-55. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00655-10. Epub 2010 Aug 25.

Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus inhibits type I interferon
signaling by blocking STAT1/STAT2 nuclear translocation.

Patel D(1), Nan Y, Shen M, Ritthipichai K, Zhu X, Zhang YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Virology Laboratory, VA-MD Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Maryland, 8075 Greenmead Drive, College Park, MD 20742, USA.

Erratum in
    J Virol. 2011 Jun;85(11):5705.

Type I interferons (IFNs) IFN-a/ß play an important role in innate immunity
against viral infections by inducing antiviral responses. Porcine reproductive
and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) inhibits the synthesis of type I IFNs.
However, whether PRRSV can inhibit IFN signaling is less well understood. In the 
present study, we found that PRRSV interferes with the IFN signaling pathway. The
transcript levels of IFN-stimulated genes ISG15 and ISG56 and protein level of
signal transducer and activator of transcription 2 (STAT2) in PRRSV
VR2385-infected MARC-145 cells were significantly lower than those in
mock-infected cells after IFN-a treatment. IFN-induced phosphorylation of both
STAT1 and STAT2 and their heterodimer formation in the PRRSV-infected cells were 
not affected. However, the majority of the STAT1/STAT2/IRF9 (IFN regulatory
factor 9) heterotrimers remained in the cytoplasm of PRRSV-infected cells, which 
indicates that the nuclear translocation of the heterotrimers was blocked.
Overexpression of NSP1ß of PRRSV VR2385 inhibited expression of ISG15 and ISG56
and blocked nuclear translocation of STAT1, which suggests that NSP1ß might be
the viral protein responsible for the inhibition of IFN signaling. PRRSV
infection in primary porcine pulmonary alveolar macrophages (PAMs) also inhibited
IFN-a-stimulated expression of the ISGs and the STAT2 protein. In contrast, a
licensed low-virulence vaccine strain, Ingelvac PRRS modified live virus (MLV),
activated expression of IFN-inducible genes, including those of chemokines and
antiviral proteins, in PAMs without the addition of external IFN and had no
detectable effect on IFN signaling. These findings suggest that PRRSV interferes 
with the activation and signaling pathway of type I IFNs by blocking ISG factor 3
(ISGF3) nuclear translocation.

PMCID: PMC2953160
PMID: 20739522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;30(19):4564-74. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00146-10. Epub 2010 Aug 
2.

The type I interferon signaling pathway is a target for glucocorticoid
inhibition.

Flammer JR(1), Dobrovolna J, Kennedy MA, Chinenov Y, Glass CK, Ivashkiv LB,
Rogatsky I.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Immunology and Microbial Pathogenesis, Weill Cornell
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 1300 York Avenue, New York, New York 10021, 
USA.

Type I interferon (IFN) is essential for host defenses against viruses; however, 
dysregulated IFN signaling is causally linked to autoimmunity, particularly
systemic lupus erythematosus. Autoimmune disease treatments rely on
glucocorticoids (GCs), which act via the GC receptor (GR) to repress
proinflammatory cytokine gene transcription. Conversely, cytokine signaling
through cognate Jak/STAT pathways is reportedly unaffected or even stimulated by 
GR. Unexpectedly, we found that GR dramatically inhibited IFN-stimulated gene
(ISG) expression in macrophages. The target of inhibition, the heterotrimeric
STAT1-STAT2-IRF9 (ISGF3) transcription complex, utilized the GR cofactor
GRIP1/TIF2 as a coactivator. Consequently, GRIP1 knockdown, genetic ablation, or 
depletion by GC-activated GR attenuated ISGF3 promoter occupancy, preinitiation
complex assembly, and ISG expression. Furthermore, this regulatory loop was
restricted to cell types such as macrophages expressing the GRIP1 protein at
extremely low levels, and pharmacological disruption of the GR-GRIP1 interaction 
or transient introduction of GRIP1 restored RNA polymerase recruitment to target 
ISGs and the subsequent IFN response. Thus, type I IFN is a cytokine uniquely
controlled by GR at the levels of not only production but also signaling through 
antagonism with the ISGF3 effector function, revealing a novel facet of the
immunosuppressive properties of GCs.

PMCID: PMC2950533
PMID: 20679482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Pharmaceuticals (Basel). 2010 Mar 30;3(4):994-1015.

Antiproliferative Properties of Type I and Type II Interferon.

Bekisz J(1), Baron S, Balinsky C, Morrow A, Zoon KC.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The clinical possibilities of interferon (IFN) became apparent with early studies
demonstrating that it was capable of inhibiting tumor cells in culture and in
vivo using animal models. IFN gained the distinction of being the first
recombinant cytokine to be licensed in the USA for the treatment of a malignancy 
in 1986, with the approval of IFN-a2a (Hoffman-La Roche) and IFN-a2b
(Schering-Plough) for the treatment of Hairy Cell Leukemia. In addition to this
application, other approved antitumor applications for IFN-a2a are AIDS-related
Kaposi's Sarcoma and Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia (CML) and other approved
antitumor applications for IFN-a2b are Malignant Melanoma, Follicular Lymphoma,
and AIDS-related Kapoisi's Sarcoma. In the ensuing years, a considerable number
of studies have been conducted to establish the mechanisms of the induction and
action of IFN's anti-tumor activity. These include identifying the role of
Interferon Regulatory Factor 9 (IRF9) as a key factor in eliciting the
antiproliferative effects of IFN-a as well as identifying genes induced by IFN
that are involved in recognition of tumor cells. Recent studies also show that
IFN-activated human monocytes can be used to achieve >95% eradication of select
tumor cells. The signaling pathways by which IFN induces apoptosis can vary. IFN 
treatment induces the tumor suppressor gene p53, which plays a role in apoptosis 
for some tumors, but it is not essential for the apoptotic response. IFN-a also
activates phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), which is associated with cell
survival. Downstream of PI3K is the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) which,
in conjunction with PI3K, may act in signaling induced by growth factors after
IFN treatment. This paper will explore the mechanisms by which IFN acts to elicit
its antiproliferative effects and more closely examine the clinical applications 
for the anti-tumor potential of IFN.

PMCID: PMC2907165
PMID: 20664817  [PubMed]


108. Immunity. 2010 Jul 23;33(1):25-34. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.07.001.

Nonconventional initiation complex assembly by STAT and NF-kappaB transcription
factors regulates nitric oxide synthase expression.

Farlik M(1), Reutterer B, Schindler C, Greten F, Vogl C, Müller M, Decker T.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, Department of Genetics, Microbiology and
Immunobiology, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9/4, A1030 Vienna, Austria.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Jul 23;33(1):1-2.

Transcriptional regulation of the Nos2 gene encoding inducible nitric oxide
synthase (iNOS) requires type I interferon (IFN-I) signaling and additional
signals emanating from pattern recognition receptors. Here we showed sequential
and cooperative contributions of the transcription factors ISGF3 (a complex
containing STAT1, STAT2, and IRF9 subunits) and NF-kappaB to the transcriptional 
induction of the Nos2 gene in macrophages infected with the intracellular
bacterial pathogen Listeria monocytogenes. NF-kappaB preceded ISGF3 at the Nos2
promoter and generated a transcriptional memory effect by depositing basal
transcription factor TFIIH with the associated CDK7 kinase for serine 5
phosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II (pol II) carboxyterminal domain (CTD).
Subsequent to TFIIH deposition by NF-kappaB, ISGF3 attracted the pol II enzyme
and phosphorylation at CTD S5 occurred. Thus, STATs and NF-kappaB cooperate
through pol II promoter recruitment and the phosphorylation of its CTD,
respectively, as a prerequisite for productive elongation of iNOS mRNA.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2914224
PMID: 20637660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Mol Immunol. 2010 Aug;47(14):2295-302. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2010.05.289. Epub
2010 Jun 22.

The combination of gene perturbation assay and ChIP-chip reveals functional
direct target genes for IRF8 in THP-1 cells.

Kubosaki A(1), Lindgren G, Tagami M, Simon C, Tomaru Y, Miura H, Suzuki T, Arner 
E, Forrest AR, Irvine KM, Schroder K, Hasegawa Y, Kanamori-Katayama M, Rehli M,
Hume DA, Kawai J, Suzuki M, Suzuki H, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho,
Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Gene regulatory networks in living cells are controlled by the interaction of
multiple cell type-specific transcription regulators with DNA binding sites in
target genes. Interferon regulatory factor 8 (IRF8), also known as interferon
consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP), is a transcription factor expressed
predominantly in myeloid and lymphoid cell lineages. To find the functional
direct target genes of IRF8, the gene expression profiles of siRNA knockdown
samples and genome-wide binding locations by ChIP-chip were analyzed in THP-1
myelomonocytic leukemia cells. Consequently, 84 genes were identified as
functional direct targets. The ETS family transcription factor PU.1, also known
as SPI1, binds to IRF8 and regulates basal transcription in macrophages. Using
the same approach, we identified 53 direct target genes of PU.1; these overlapped
with 19 IRF8 targets. These 19 genes included key molecules of IFN signaling such
as OAS1 and IRF9, but excluded other IFN-related genes amongst the IRF8
functional direct target genes. We suggest that IRF8 and PU.1 can have both
combined, and independent actions on different promoters in myeloid cells.

(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20573402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Immunol. 2010 Jul 15;185(2):1258-64. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901753. Epub 2010
Jun 18.

Injury-induced type I IFN signaling regulates inflammatory responses in the
central nervous system.

Khorooshi R(1), Owens T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense,
Denmark.

Innate glial response is critical for the induction of inflammatory mediators and
recruitment of leukocytes to sites of the injury in the CNS. We have examined the
involvement of type I IFN signaling in the mouse hippocampus following sterile
injury (transection of entorhinal afferents). Type I IFNs signal through a
receptor (IFNAR), which involves activation of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)9,
leading to the induction of IFN-stimulated genes including IRF7, that in turn
enhances the induction of type I IFN. Axonal transection induced upregulation of 
IRF7 and IRF9 in hippocampus. Induction of IRF7 and IRF9 mRNAs was IFNAR
dependent. Double-labeling immunofluorescence showed that IRF7 selectively was
induced in Mac-1/CD11b(+) macrophages/microglia in hippocampus after axonal
transection. IRF7 mRNA was also detected in microglia sorted by flow cytometry.
Lack of type I IFN signaling resulted in increased leukocyte infiltration into
the lesion-reactive hippocampus. Axonal lesion-induced CXCL10 gene expression was
abrogated, whereas matrix metalloproteinase 9 mRNA was elevated in
IFNAR-deficient mice. Our findings point to a role for type I IFN signaling in
regulation of CNS response to sterile injury.

PMID: 20562259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 23;5(4):e10335. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010335.

Community dynamics in the mouse gut microbiota: a possible role for
IRF9-regulated genes in community homeostasis.

Thompson CL(1), Hofer MJ, Campbell IL, Holmes AJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences, University of Sydney, Sydney,
Australia. claire.thompson@mpi-marburg.mpg.de

BACKGROUND: Gut microbial communities of mammals are thought to show stable
differences between individuals. This means that the properties imparted by the
gut microbiota become a unique and constant characteristic of the host.
Manipulation of the microbiota has been proposed as a useful tool in health care,
but a greater understanding of mechanisms which lead to community stability is
required. Here we have examined the impact of host immunoregulatory phenotype on 
community dynamics.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis was used to analyse
the faecal bacterial community of BALB/c and C57BL/6 mice and C57BL/6 mice
deficient for either type I interferon (IFN) signalling (IRF9 KO mice) or type I 
and type II IFN signalling (STAT1 KO mice). Temporal variation was found in all
mouse strains. A measure of the ability for a community structure characteristic 
of the host to be maintained over time, the individuality index, varied between
mouse strains and available data from pigs and human models. IRF9 KO mice had
significantly higher temporal variation, and lower individuality, than other
mouse strains. Examination of the intestinal mucosa of the IRF9 KO mice revealed 
an increased presence of T-cells and neutrophils in the absence of inflammation.
SIGNIFICANCE: The high temporal variation observed in the gut microbiota of
inbred laboratory mice has implications for their use as experimental models for 
the human gut microbiota. The distinct IRF9 and STAT1 phenotypes suggest a role
for IRF9 in immune regulation within the gut mucosa and that further study of
interferon responsive genes is necessary to understand host-gut microbe
relationships.

PMCID: PMC2859068
PMID: 20428250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 4;107(18):8369-74. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0909951107. Epub 2010 Apr 19.

Divergent susceptibilities of human herpesvirus 6 variants to type I interferons.

Jaworska J(1), Gravel A, Flamand L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology-Infectiology-Immunology, Axe Infectiologie et
Immunologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec Research Center, Laval
University, Quebec, Canada.

Two distinct human herpesvirus 6 (HHV-6) variants infect humans. HHV-6B is the
etiologic agent of roseola and is associated with life-threatening neurological
diseases, such as encephalitis, as well as organ transplant failure. The
epidemiology and disease association for HHV-6A remain ill-defined. Specific
anti-HHV-6 drugs do not exist and classic antiherpes drugs have secondary effects
that are often problematic for transplant patients. Clinical trials using IFN
were also performed with inconclusive results. We investigated the efficacy of
type I IFN (alpha/beta) in controlling HHV-6 infection. We report that cells
infected with laboratory strains and primary isolates of HHV-6B are resistant to 
IFN-alpha/beta antiviral actions as a result of improper IFN-stimulated gene
(ISGs) expression. In contrast, HHV-6A-infected cells were responsive to
IFN-alpha/beta with pronounced antiviral effects observed. Type II IFN
(gamma)-signaling was unaltered in cells infected by either variant. The HHV-6B
immediate-early 1 (IE1) physically interacts with STAT2 and sequestrates it to
the nucleus. As a consequence, IE1B prevents the binding of ISGF3 to
IFN-responsive gene promoters, resulting in ISG silencing. In comparison, HHV-6A 
and its associated IE1 protein displayed marginal ISG inhibitory activity
relative to HHV-6B. The ISG inhibitory domain of IE1B mapped to a 41 amino acid
region absent from IE1A. Transfer of this IE1B region resulted in a gain of
function that conferred ISG inhibitory activity to IE1A. Our work is unique in
demonstrating type I IFN signaling defects in HHV-6B-infected cells and
highlights a major biological difference between HHV-6 variants.

PMCID: PMC2889514
PMID: 20404187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;32(2):88-92.

[A novel molecular mechanism of interferon alpha-regulated expression of retinoic
acid-induced gene G].

[Article in Chinese]

Lou YJ(1), Pan XR, Jia PM, Li D, Zhang ZL, Xu GP, Tong JH.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular mechanisms by which IFN-alpha regulated
retinoic acid-induced gene G (RIG-G) expression.
METHODS: The expression of STAT1, p-STAT1 and RIG-G in IFN-alpha-treated NB4
cells was detected by Western blot. The roles of STAT1, STAT2 and IRF-9 in
IFN-alpha-induced RIG-G expression were analyzed in STAT1-null U3A cells by cell 
transfection, reporter gene assay, co-immunoprecipitation and chromatin
immunoprecipitaion.
RESULTS: In U3A cells, only when STAT2 and IRF-9 were co-transfected, the
luciferase activities of RIG-G promoter-containing reporter gene could be highly 
increased about 8-fold compared with that in the control group. Moreover, in the 
absence of IFN-alpha, similar effects were observed in either IRF-9
co-transfected with wild type or mutant form of STAT2, whereas IFN-alpha could
increase the transactivation activity of wild type STAT2 and IRF-9 by 6-fold
compared with that without IFN-alpha, but had no effect on mutant STAT2. In
addition, STAT2 could interact with IRF-9 and bind to the RIG-G promoter.
CONCLUSION: STAT2 may interact with IRF-9 in a STAT1-independent manner. The
complex STAT2/IRF-9 is the key factor mediating the expression of RIG-G gene
regulated by IFN-alpha. This is a novel signal transduction cascade for IFN which
is different from the classical JAK-STAT pathway.

PMID: 20403236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Clin Invest. 2010 May;120(5):1645-62. doi: 10.1172/JCI39481. Epub 2010 Apr 12.

NOD1 contributes to mouse host defense against Helicobacter pylori via induction 
of type I IFN and activation of the ISGF3 signaling pathway.

Watanabe T(1), Asano N, Fichtner-Feigl S, Gorelick PL, Tsuji Y, Matsumoto Y,
Chiba T, Fuss IJ, Kitani A, Strober W.

Author information: 
(1)Mucosal Immunity Section, Laboratory of Host Defenses, National Institute of
Allergy and Infectious Diseases, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.
tmhrwtnb@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain 1 (NOD1) is an intracellular epithelial
cell protein known to play a role in host defense at mucosal surfaces. Here we
show that a ligand specific for NOD1, a peptide derived from peptidoglycan,
initiates an unexpected signaling pathway in human epithelial cell lines that
results in the production of type I IFN. Detailed analysis revealed the
components of the signaling pathway. NOD1 binding to its ligand triggered
activation of the serine-threonine kinase RICK, which was then able to bind TNF
receptor-associated factor 3 (TRAF3). This in turn led to activation of
TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1) and IkappaB kinase epsilon (IKKepsilon) and the
subsequent activation of IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7). IRF7 induced IFN-beta
production, which led to activation of a heterotrimeric transcription factor
complex known as IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) and the subsequent
production of CXCL10 and additional type I IFN. In vivo studies showed that mice 
lacking the receptor for IFN-beta or subjected to gene silencing of the ISGF3
component Stat1 exhibited decreased CXCL10 responses and increased susceptibility
to Helicobacter pylori infection, phenotypes observed in NOD1-deficient mice.
These studies thus establish that NOD1 can activate the ISGF3 signaling pathway
that is usually associated with protection against viral infection to provide
mice with robust type I IFN-mediated protection from H. pylori and possibly other
mucosal infections.

PMCID: PMC2860924
PMID: 20389019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Feb;18(1):31-5.

[Regulation mechanism for rig-g gene expression induced by all-trans retinoic
acid].

[Article in Chinese]

Pan XR(1), Lou YJ, Zhang ZL, Xu GP, Jia PM, Tong JH.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

To investigate the molecular mechanisms of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)-induced
rig-g gene expression and to better understand the signal transduction of ATRA
during acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cell differentiation, the luciferase
reporter assay, co-immunoprecipitation and chromatin immunoprecipitation were
used to clarify the basic transcriptional factors, which directly initiated the
expression of rig-g gene. The results showed that the expression of STAT2, IRF-9 
and IRF-1 could be upregulated by ATRA with different kinetics in NB4 cells.
IRF-9 was able to interact with STAT2 to form a complex, which could bind the
rig-g gene promoter and trigger the rig-g expression. IRF-1 alone could also
activate the reporter gene containing rig-g gene promoter, but C/EBPalpha could
strongly inhibit this transcription activity of IRF-1. It is concluded that
during ATRA-induced APL cell differentiation, IRF-1 is first upregulated by ATRA,
and then IRF-1 increases the protein levels of IRF-9 and STAT2 with the
downregulation of C/EBPalpha. The complex of IRF-9 and STAT2 is the primary
transcriptional factor for rig-g gene induction. This study will be helpful for
better understanding the signal transduction networks of ATRA during the course
of APL cell differentiation.

PMID: 20137113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Neurosci. 2010 Jan 20;30(3):1149-57. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3711-09.2010.

The type I interferon-alpha mediates a more severe neurological disease in the
absence of the canonical signaling molecule interferon regulatory factor 9.

Hofer MJ(1), Li W, Lim SL, Campbell IL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular and Microbial Biosciences and Bosch Institute, University 
of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia.

Type I interferons (IFN) are crucial in host defense but also are implicated as
causative factors for neurological disease. Interferon regulatory factor (IRF9)
is involved in type I IFN-regulated gene expression where it associates with
STAT1:STAT2 heterodimers to form the transcriptional complex ISGF3. The role of
IRF9 in cellular responses to type I IFN is poorly defined in vivo and hence was 
examined here. While transgenic mice (termed GIFN) with chronic production of low
levels of IFN-alpha in the CNS were relatively unaffected, the same animals
lacking IRF9 [GIFNxIRF9 knock-out (KO)] had cataracts, became moribund, and died 
prematurely. The brain of GIFNxIRF9 KO mice showed calcification with pronounced 
inflammation and neurodegeneration whereas inflammation and retinal degeneration 
affected the eyes. In addition, IFN-gamma-like gene expression in the CNS in
association with IFN-gamma mRNA and increased phosphotyrosine-STAT1 suggested a
role for IFN-gamma. However, GIFNxIRF9 KO mice deficient for IFN-gamma signaling 
developed an even more severe and accelerated disease, indicating that IFN-gamma 
was protective. In IRF9-deficient cultured mixed glial cells, IFN-alpha induced
prolonged activation of STAT1 and STAT2 and induced the expression of
IFN-gamma-like genes. We conclude that (1) type I IFN signaling and cellular
responses can occur in vivo in the absence of IRF9, (2) IRF9 protects against the
pathophysiological actions of type I IFN in the CNS, and (3) STAT1 and possibly
STAT2 participate in alternative IRF9-independent signaling pathways activated by
IFN-alpha in glial cells resulting in enhanced IFN-gamma-like responses.

PMID: 20089923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 15;184(4):1784-92. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0902005. Epub 2010
Jan 18.

Critical role of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex in TLR-mediated
IL-27p28 gene expression revealing a two-step activation process.

Molle C(1), Goldman M, Goriely S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Immunology, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels,
Belgium.

In myeloid dendritic cells, activation of the IL-27p28 gene is selectively
induced by ligands of TLR4 or TLR3, both coupled to the Toll/IL-1R-related
domain-containing adaptor-inducing IFN/IFN regulatory factor (IRF)3 pathway. In
response to both ligands, autocrine type 1 IFN production was required for
optimal IL-27p28 expression. Type I IFN signaling was necessary for sustained
IRF1 activation and formation of the IRF9-containing IFN-stimulated gene factor 3
complex. Indeed, we demonstrated that IRF1 and IRF9 are sequentially activated
and recruited to the IL-27p28 IFN-stimulated regulatory element site. Involvement
of IRF1 and IRF9 in the induction of IL-27p28 was confirmed in vitro and upon in 
vivo exposure to TLR ligands. Thus, in response to TLR4 or TLR3 ligation, the
initial induction of the IL-27p28 gene depends on the recruitment of IRF1 and
IRF3, whereas transcriptional amplification requires recruitment of the
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex. These results highlight the complex
molecular interplay between TLRs and type I IFNs for the control of IL-27
synthesis.

PMID: 20083668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Viruses. 2010 Jan;2(1):298-313. doi: 10.3390/v2010298. Epub 2010 Jan 22.

Dual Role of p53 in Innate Antiviral Immunity.

Rivas C(1), Aaronson SA, Munoz-Fontela C.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Nacional de Biotecnologia, CSIC, Darwin 3, Campus Universidad Autónoma,
Madrid 28049, Spain; E-Mail: crivas@cnb.csic.es (C.R.).

Tumor suppressor p53 is widely known as 'the guardian of the genome' due to its
ability to prevent the emergence of transformed cells by the induction of cell
cycle arrest and apoptosis. However, recent studies indicate that p53 is also a
direct transcriptional target of type I interferons (IFNs) and thus, it is
activated by these cytokines upon viral infection. p53 has been shown to
contribute to virus-induced apoptosis, therefore dampening the ability of a wide 
range of viruses to replicate and spread. Interestingly, recent studies also
indicate that several IFN-inducible genes such as interferon regulatory factor 9 
(IRF9), IRF5, IFN-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15) and toll-like receptor 3 (TLR3) are 
in fact, p53 direct transcriptional targets. These findings indicate that p53 may
play a key role in antiviral innate immunity by both inducing apoptosis in
response to viral infection, and enforcing the type I IFN response, and provide a
new insight into the evolutionary reasons why many viruses encode p53
antagonistic proteins.

PMCID: PMC3185551
PMID: 21994612  [PubMed]


119. J Immunother. 2009 Oct;32(8):803-16. doi: 10.1097/CJI.0b013e3181ad4092.

IRF9 is a key factor for eliciting the antiproliferative activity of IFN-alpha.

Tsuno T(1), Mejido J, Zhao T, Schmeisser H, Morrow A, Zoon KC.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

A number of tumors are still resistant to the antiproliferative activity of human
interferon (IFN)-alpha. The Janus kinases/Signal Transducers and Activators of
Transcription (JAK-STAT) pathway plays an important role in initial IFN
signaling. To enhance the antiproliferative activity of IFN-alpha, it is
important to elucidate which factors in the JAK-STAT pathway play a key role in
eliciting this activity. In human ovarian adenocarcinoma OVCAR3 cells sensitive
to both IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma, only IFN regulatory factor 9 (IRF9)-RNA
interference (RNAi) completely inhibited the antiproliferative activity of
IFN-alpha among the intracellular JAK-STAT pathway factors. Conversely,
Stat1-RNAi did not inhibit the antiproliferative activity of IFN-alpha, whereas
it partially inhibited that of IFN-gamma. As a cell death pathway, it is reported
that tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) induces
apoptosis through TRAIL-receptor (R) 1 and TRAIL-R2. In IFN-alpha-treated OVCAR3 
cells, IRF9-RNAi inhibited transcription of TRAIL whereas Stat1-RNAi did not,
suggesting that the transcription of TRAIL induced by IFN-alpha predominantly
required IRF9. Furthermore, IFN-stimulated response element-like motifs of TRAIL 
bound to IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) complex after IFN-alpha treatment. 
Subsequently, TRAIL-R2-RNAi inhibited both antiproliferative activities of
IFN-alpha and TRAIL, suggesting that TRAIL-R2 mediated both IFN-alpha and TRAIL
signals to elicit their antiproliferative activities. Finally, IRF9
overexpression facilitated IFN-alpha-induced apoptosis in T98G (human
glioblastoma multiforme) cells, which were resistant to IFN-alpha. Thus, this
study suggests that IRF9 is the key factor for eliciting the antiproliferative
activity of IFN-alpha and TRAIL may be one of the potential mediators.

PMCID: PMC2796296
PMID: 19752753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Oncogene. 2009 Nov 5;28(44):3903-14. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.249. Epub 2009 Aug 31.

The EBV-encoded latent membrane proteins, LMP2A and LMP2B, limit the actions of
interferon by targeting interferon receptors for degradation.

Shah KM(1), Stewart SE, Wei W, Woodman CB, O'Neil JD, Dawson CW, Young LS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Institute for Cancer Studies, The Medical School,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

Although frequently expressed in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive malignancies, 
the role that latent membrane protein 2A and 2B (LMP2A and LMP2B) have in the
oncogenic process remains obscure. Here we show a novel function for these
proteins in epithelial cells, namely, their ability to modulate signalling from
type I/II interferon receptors (IFNRs). We show that LMP2A- and LMP2B-expressing 
epithelial cells show decreased responsiveness to interferon (IFN)alpha and
IFNgamma, as assessed by STAT1 phosphorylation, ISGF3 and GAF-mediated binding to
IFN-stimulated response element and IFNgamma-activated factor sequence elements
and luciferase reporter activation. Transcriptional profiling highlighted the
extent of this modulation, with both viral proteins impacting 'globally' on
IFN-stimulated gene expression. Although not affecting the levels of cell-surface
IFNRs, LMP2A and LMP2B accelerated the turnover of IFNRs through processes
requiring endosome acidification. This function may form part of EBV's strategy
to limit anti-viral responses and define a novel function for LMP2A and LMP2B in 
modulating signalling from receptors that participate in innate immune responses.

PMCID: PMC2774296
PMID: 19718044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2009 Sep;29(9):609-19. doi: 10.1089/jir.2009.0064.

Multifaceted evasion of the interferon response by cytomegalovirus.

Marshall EE(1), Geballe AP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109-1024, USA.

Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), which infects the majority of the population
worldwide, causes few, if any, symptoms in otherwise healthy people but is
responsible for considerable morbidity and mortality in immunocompromised
patients and in congenitally infected newborns. The evolutionary success of HCMV 
depends in part on its ability to evade host defense systems. Here we review
recent progress in elucidating the remarkable assortment of mechanisms employed
by HCMV and the related beta-herpesviruses, murine cytomegaloviruses (MCMV) and
rhesus cytomegaloviruses (RhCMV), for counteracting the host interferon (IFN)
response. Very early after infection, cellular membrane sensors such as the
lymphotoxin beta receptor initiate the production of antiviral cytokines
including type I IFNs. However, virion factors, such as pp65 (ppUL83) and viral
proteins made soon after infection including the immediate early gene 2 protein
(pUL122), repress this response by interfering with steps in the activation of
IFN regulatory factor 3 and NF-kappaB. CMVs then exert a multi-pronged attack on 
downstream IFN signaling. HCMV infection results in decreased accumulation and
phosphorylation of the IFN signaling kinases Jak1 and Stat2, and the MCMV protein
pM27 mediates Stat2 down-regulation, blocking both type I and type II IFN
signaling. The HCMV immediate early gene 1 protein (pUL123) interacts with Stat2 
and inhibits transcriptional activation of IFN-regulated genes. Infection also
causes reduction in the abundance of p48/IRF9, a component of the ISGF3
transcription factor complex. Furthermore, CMVs have multiple genes involved in
blocking the function of IFN-induced effectors. For example, viral
double-stranded RNA-binding proteins are required to prevent the shutoff of
protein synthesis by protein kinase R, further demonstrating the vital importance
of evading the IFN response at multiple levels during infection.

PMCID: PMC2743745
PMID: 19708810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2009 Sep;29(9):559-67. doi: 10.1089/jir.2009.0072.

Rotavirus and reovirus modulation of the interferon response.

Sherry B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, USA.
barbara_sherry@ncsu.edu

The mammalian reoviruses and rotaviruses have evolved specific mechanisms to
evade the Type I interferon (IFN) antiviral response. Rotavirus likely represses 
the IFN response by at least 4 mechanisms. First, the rotavirus protein NSP1,
most likely functioning as an E3 ligase, can induce proteasome-dependent
degradation of the transcription factors IRF3, IRF5, and IRF7 to prevent their
induction of IFN. Second, NSP1 can induce proteasome-dependent degradation of the
ubiquitin ligase complex protein beta-TrCP, resulting in stabilization of I
kappaB and concomitant failure of virus to activate NF-kappaB for induction of
IFN. Third, rotavirus may sequester NF-kappaB in viroplasms. And fourth,
rotavirus can prevent STAT1 and STAT2 nuclear translocation. The predominant
mechanism for rotavirus inhibition of the IFN response is likely both rotavirus
strain-specific and cell type-specific. The mammalian reoviruses also display
strain-specific differences in their modulation of the IFN response. Reovirus
activates RIG-I and IPS-1 for phosphorylation of IRF3. Reovirus-induced
activation of MDA5 also participates in induction if IFN-beta, perhaps through
activation of NF-kappaB. Reovirus likely inhibits the IFN response by at least 3 
virus strain-specific mechanisms. First, the reovirus mu2 protein can induce an
unusual nuclear accumulation of IRF9 and repress IFN-stimulated gene (ISG)
expression, most likely by disrupting IRF9 function as part of the heterotrimeric
transcription factor complex, ISGF3. Second, the reovirus sigma 3 protein can
bind dsRNA and prevent activation of the latent antiviral effector protein PKR.
And third, genetic approaches have identified the reovirus lambda 2 and sigma 2
proteins in virus strain-specific modulation of the IFN response, but the
significance remains unclear. In sum, members of the family Reoviridae have
evolved a variety of mechanisms to subvert the host's innate protective response.

PMCID: PMC2956631
PMID: 19694545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010 Feb;18(2):314-21. doi: 10.1038/oby.2009.246. Epub
2009 Aug 13.

Increased expression of DNA methyltransferase 3a in obese adipose tissue: studies
with transgenic mice.

Kamei Y(1), Suganami T, Ehara T, Kanai S, Hayashi K, Yamamoto Y, Miura S, Ezaki
O, Okano M, Ogawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Metabolism, Medical Research Institute,
Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Epigenetic mechanisms are likely to be involved in the development of obesity.
This study was designed to examine the role of a DNA methyltransferase (Dnmt3a), 
in obese adipose tissue. The gene expression of Dnmts was examined by
quantitative real-time PCR analysis. Transgenic mice overexpressing Dnmt3a in the
adipose tissue driven by the aP2 promoter were created (Dnmt3a mice). DNA
methylation of downregulated genes was examined using bisulfite DNA methylation
analysis. Dnmt3a mice were fed a methyl-supplemented or high-fat diet, and
subjected to body weight measurement and gene expression analysis of the adipose 
tissue. Expression of Dnmt3a was markedly upregulated in the adipose tissue of
obese mice. The complementary DNA (cDNA) microarray analysis of Dnmt3a mice
revealed a slight decrease in the gene expression of secreted frizzled-related
protein 1 (SFRP1) and marked increase in that of interferon responsive factor 9
(IRF9). In the SFRP1 promoter, DNA methylation was not markedly increased in
Dnmt3a mice relative to wild-type mice. In experiments with a high-fat diet or
methyl-supplemented diet, body weight did not differ significantly with the
genotypes. Gene expression levels of inflammatory cytokines such as tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) 
were higher in Dnmt3a mice than in wild-type mice on a high-fat diet. This study 
suggests that increased expression of Dnmt3a in the adipose tissue may contribute
to obesity-related inflammation. The data highlight the potential role of Dnmt3a 
in the adult tissue as well as in the developing embryo and cancer.

PMID: 19680236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Virology. 2009 Sep 30;392(2):186-95. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2009.07.006. Epub 2009 
Aug 8.

Activation of the interferon-induced STAT pathway during an adenovirus type 12
infection.

Zhao H(1), Boije H, Granberg F, Pettersson U, Svensson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

We have previously described a temporal regulation of host cell gene expression
during adenovirus type 2 infection (Ad2) of primary human fibroblasts. Among the 
eleven percent of genes deregulated by Ad2, a large fraction included genes
involved in cell cycle, growth control and antiviral defense, consistent with the
capacity of Ad2 to efficiently master the infected cell and cause an effectively 
productive infection. Adenovirus type 12 (Ad12), which belongs to the highly
oncogenic subgroup, is characterised by slow progression, less cytopathic effect 
and lower virus yield compared to the non-oncogenic Ad2. Microarray analysis of
host cell gene expression in Ad12 infected human lung fibroblasts (IMR90)
demonstrated a quantitatively and qualitatively less impact on host cell gene
expression, compared to Ad2. Of the relatively few genes up regulated during the 
course of Ad12 infection only two (5%) were identified as potential E2F targets, 
compared to the significant activation of E2F-dependent transcription observed
during an Ad2 infection. Although approximately 30% of the genes deregulated by
Ad12 were previously identified in Ad2-infected cells, a distinct difference was 
observed in a group of interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs). G1P2, IFI6, IFI16,
IFIT1, IFIT2, IFITM1 and IRF9 were activated during the very late stage of
infection, and a consistent induction of IFNbeta gene expression, preceding
induction of the ISGs, was demonstrated by quantitative real-time PCR analysis.
An activated JAK/STAT signalling pathway was also indicated by the accumulation
of all components (STAT1, STAT2 and IRF9) of the ISGF3 transcription factor.
Significantly, none of these ISGs was activated in Ad2 infected IMR90 cells.
Thus, the inability of Ad12 to evade the interferon response might explain its
restricted virulence.

PMID: 19665745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;69(8):3673-80. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4922. Epub
2009 Apr 7.

IRF-9/STAT2 [corrected] functional interaction drives retinoic acid-induced gene 
G expression independently of STAT1.

Lou YJ(1), Pan XR, Jia PM, Li D, Xiao S, Zhang ZL, Chen SJ, Chen Z, Tong JH.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Hematology and State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics,
Rui-Jin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2009 May 15;69(10):4553.

Retinoic acid-induced gene G (RIG-G), a gene originally identified in all-trans
retinoic acid-treated NB4 acute promyelocytic leukemia cells, is also induced by 
IFNalpha in various hematopoietic and solid tumor cells. Our previous work showed
that RIG-G possessed a potent antiproliferative activity. However, the mechanism 
for the transcriptional regulation of RIG-G gene remains unknown. Here, we report
that signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 2 together with IFN 
regulatory factor (IRF)-9 can effectively drive the transcription of RIG-G gene
by their functional interaction through a STAT1-independent manner, even without 
the tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT2. The complex IRF-9/STAT2 is both necessary 
and sufficient for RIG-G gene expression. In addition, IRF-1 is also able to
induce RIG-G gene expression through an IRF-9/STAT2-dependent or
IRF-9/STAT2-independent mechanism. Moreover, the induction of RIG-G by retinoic
acid in NB4 cells resulted, to some extent, from an IFNalpha autocrine pathway, a
finding that suggests a novel mechanism for the signal cross-talk between
IFNalpha and retinoic acid. Taken together, our results provide for the first
time the evidence of the biological significance of IRF-9/STAT2 complex, and
furnish an alternative pathway modulating the expression of IFN-stimulated genes,
contributing to the diversity of IFN signaling to mediate their multiple
biological properties in normal and tumor cells.

PMID: 19351818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Virol. 2009 May;83(10):5056-66. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02516-08. Epub 2009 Mar 11.

A Kaposi's sarcoma-associated herpesvirus protein that forms inhibitory complexes
with type I interferon receptor subunits, Jak and STAT proteins, and blocks
interferon-mediated signal transduction.

Bisson SA(1), Page AL, Ganem D.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and GW Hooper Foundation, Department of
Microbiology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Type I interferons (IFNs) are important mediators of innate antiviral defense and
function by activating a signaling pathway through their cognate type I receptor 
(IFNAR). Here we report that lytic replication of Kaposi's sarcoma-associated
herpesvirus (KSHV) efficiently blocks type I IFN signaling and that an important 
effector of this blockade is the viral protein RIF, the product of open reading
frame 10. RIF blocks IFN signaling by formation of inhibitory complexes that
contain IFNAR subunits, the Janus kinases Jak1 and Tyk2, and the STAT2
transcription factor. Activation of both Tyk2 and Jak1 is inhibited, and abnormal
recruitment of STAT2 to IFNAR1 occurs despite the decrement in Tyk2 activity. As 
a result of these actions, phosphorylation of both STAT2 and STAT1 is impaired,
with subsequent failure of ISGF3 accumulation in the nucleus. The presence in the
viral genome of potent inhibitors of type I IFN signaling, along with several
viral genes that block IFN induction, highlights the importance of the IFN
pathway in the control of this human tumor virus infection.

PMCID: PMC2682077
PMID: 19279093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 May 1;382(2):331-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.03.018. Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Influenza A virus induces p53 accumulation in a biphasic pattern.

Shen Y(1), Wang X, Guo L, Qiu Y, Li X, Yu H, Xiang H, Tong G, Ma Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural
Science, Shanghai, PR China.

Tumor suppressor p53, the major cellular defense against tumor development, has
recently been implicated in host antiviral defense. Previous studies have shown
that p53 was induced at the apoptotic stage of influenza virus-infected cells.
However, we found that p53 was induced not only at the apoptotic stage but also
at the beginning phase of infection, showing a biphasic pattern with a first
transient elevation apparent at the beginning phase of infection and a second
elevation observable at the middle-late phase of infection. This up-regulation of
p53 was independent of increased p53 transcription, but dependent on virus
adsorption and replication. The increased p53 was active and able to
transactivate its downstream target genes, such as interferon regulatory factor 9
(IRF9) and Bax. To our knowledge, this is the first report to describe a biphasic
pattern of p53 accumulation in influenza virus-infected cells.

PMID: 19275889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Leukemia. 2009 May;23(5):856-62. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.372. Epub 2009 Jan 8.

A new molecular network comprising PU.1, interferon regulatory factor proteins
and miR-342 stimulates ATRA-mediated granulocytic differentiation of acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells.

De Marchis ML(1), Ballarino M, Salvatori B, Puzzolo MC, Bozzoni I, Fatica A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Molecular Biology, Institute Pasteur
Cenci-Bolognetti, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy.

In the acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) bearing the t(15;17),
all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) treatment induces granulocytic maturation and
complete remission of leukemia. We identified miR-342 as one of the microRNAs
(miRNAs) upregulated by ATRA during APL differentiation. This miRNA emerged as a 
direct transcriptional target of the critical hematopoietic transcription factors
PU.1 and interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and IRF-9. IRF-1 maintains miR-342 
at low levels, whereas the binding of PU.1 and IRF-9 in the promoter region
following retinoic ATRA-mediated differentiation, upregulates miR-342 expression.
Moreover, we showed that enforced expression of miR-342 in APL cells stimulated
ATRA-induced differentiation. These data identified miR-342 as a new player in
the granulocytic differentiation program activated by ATRA in APL.

PMID: 19151778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Virol. 2009 Mar;83(5):2178-87. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01787-08. Epub 2008 Dec 24.

Reovirus mu2 protein inhibits interferon signaling through a novel mechanism
involving nuclear accumulation of interferon regulatory factor 9.

Zurney J(1), Kobayashi T, Holm GH, Dermody TS, Sherry B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27606, USA.

The secreted cytokine alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) binds its receptor
to activate the Jak-STAT signal transduction pathway, leading to formation of the
heterotrimeric IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) transcription complex for
induction of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) and establishment of an antiviral state.
Many viruses have evolved countermeasures to inhibit the IFN pathway, thereby
subverting the innate antiviral response. Here, we demonstrate that the mildly
myocarditic reovirus type 1 Lang (T1L), but not the nonmyocarditic reovirus type 
3 Dearing, represses IFN induction of a subset of ISGs and that this repressor
function segregates with the T1L M1 gene. Concordantly, the T1L M1 gene product, 
mu2, dramatically inhibits IFN-beta-induced reporter gene expression.
Surprisingly, T1L infection does not degrade components of the ISGF3 complex or
interfere with STAT1 or STAT2 nuclear translocation as has been observed for
other viruses. Instead, infection with T1L or reassortant or recombinant viruses 
containing the T1L M1 gene results in accumulation of interferon regulatory
factor 9 (IRF9) in the nucleus. This effect has not been previously described for
any virus and suggests that mu2 modulates IRF9 interactions with STATs for both
ISGF3 function and nuclear export. The M1 gene is a determinant of virus
strain-specific differences in the IFN response, which are linked to virus
strain-specific differences in induction of murine myocarditis. We find that
virus-induced myocarditis is associated with repression of IFN function,
providing new insights into the pathophysiology of this disease. Together, these 
data provide the first report of an increase in IRF9 nuclear accumulation
associated with viral subversion of the IFN response and couple virus
strain-specific differences in IFN antagonism to the pathogenesis of viral
myocarditis.

PMCID: PMC2643726
PMID: 19109390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Sci. 2009 Mar;100(3):449-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2008.01051.x. Epub
2008 Dec 14.

Critical role for constitutive type I interferon signaling in the prevention of
cellular transformation.

Chen HM(1), Tanaka N, Mitani Y, Oda E, Nozawa H, Chen JZ, Yanai H, Negishi H,
Choi MK, Iwasaki T, Yamamoto H, Taniguchi T, Takaoka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Interferons-alpha/beta, which are produced upon viral infection, are key soluble 
factors for the establishment of an antiviral state, but are also produced at low
levels in the absence of infection. Herein, we demonstrate that a weak signal by 
these constitutively produced IFN-alpha/beta show a preventive role in cellular
transformation. Ifnar1-deficient (Ifnar1(-/-)) MEF, which are devoid of
IFN-alpha/beta signal, undergo a spontaneous transformation during long-term cell
culture. Similar to Irf1(-/-) MEF, primary Ifnar1(-/-) MEF become tumorigenic in 
nude mice by the expression of activated c-Ha-Ras oncoprotein. However,
Ifnar1(-/-) MEF do not show any abnormal growth properties. A similar observation
is made in Ifnb(-/-) MEF that fail to produce constitutive IFN-alpha/beta,
whereas such a transforming property is not found in MEF that lack any of the IFN
receptor downstream molecules including Stat1, IRF9 and IRF1. Furthermore,
Ifnar1(-/-) mice develop chemically-induced skin papilloma more severely than
wild-type mice. In addition, the expression levels of IFNAR1 mRNA are
significantly decreased in human gastric cancer tissues. These results suggest a 
cell-intrinsic role of the weak signal by constitutively produced IFN-alpha/beta 
to prevent cells from transformation, which may be mediated by a hitherto-unknown
pathway(s) downstream of the IFN-alpha/beta receptor.

PMID: 19076978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2009 Feb 27;299(2):252-60. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.10.025.
Epub 2008 Oct 30.

Interferon regulatory factor 6 (IRF6) is expressed in the ovine uterus and
functions as a transcriptional activator.

Fleming JA(1), Song G, Choi Y, Spencer TE, Bazer FW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics and Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843, USA.

Interferon tau (IFNT), the maternal recognition of pregnancy signal in sheep and 
other ruminants, is secreted by the conceptus and regulates the expression of a
number of genes in a cell-specific manner within the uterus. The response of
different endometrial cell types to IFNT appears to be specified by IFN
regulatory factors (IRFs). IRF2, a potent repressor of gene transcription, is
expressed only by luminal (LE) and superficial glandular epithelia (sGE), whereas
IRF1 and IRF9, activators of gene transcription, are expressed only in GE and
stromal cells of the uterus during early pregnancy. In the present study, IRF6
was found to be expressed in LE/sGE and middle GE of the ovine uterine
endometrium as well as conceptus trophectoderm. IRF family members can regulate
transcription via IFN-stimulated response elements (ISREs). Transient
transfection analyses found that IRF6 enhanced basal activity of ISRE-containing 
promoters, but did not enhance IFNT stimulation of ISRE-containing promoters in
variety of different cell types. Further, IRF6 did not cooperate with IRF1 or
reduce IRF2 repression of ISRE-containing promoter activity. These results
establish that IRF6 is a transcriptional activator that is preferentially
expressed in the endometrial epithelia and conceptus trophectoderm. IRF6 is
hypothesized to play critical roles in endometrial gene expression as well as in 
conceptus trophectoderm growth and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2655364
PMID: 19022341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Exp Med. 2008 Aug 4;205(8):1929-38. doi: 10.1084/jem.20080383. Epub 2008 Jul
28.

Transcriptional role of p53 in interferon-mediated antiviral immunity.

Muñoz-Fontela C(1), Macip S, Martínez-Sobrido L, Brown L, Ashour J, García-Sastre
A, Lee SW, Aaronson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, 
NY 10029, USA.

Tumor suppressor p53 is activated by several stimuli, including DNA damage and
oncogenic stress. Previous studies (Takaoka, A., S. Hayakawa, H. Yanai, D.
Stoiber, H. Negishi, H. Kikuchi, S. Sasaki, K. Imai, T. Shibue, K. Honda, and T. 
Taniguchi. 2003. Nature. 424:516-523) have shown that p53 is also induced in
response to viral infections as a downstream transcriptional target of type I
interferon (IFN) signaling. Moreover, many viruses, including SV40, human
papillomavirus, Kaposi's sarcoma herpesvirus, adenoviruses, and even RNA viruses 
such as polioviruses, have evolved mechanisms designated to abrogate p53
responses. We describe a novel p53 function in the activation of the IFN pathway.
We observed that infected mouse and human cells with functional p53 exhibited
markedly decreased viral replication early after infection. This early inhibition
of viral replication was mediated both in vitro and in vivo by a p53-dependent
enhancement of IFN signaling, specifically the induction of genes containing
IFN-stimulated response elements. Of note, p53 also contributed to an increase in
IFN release from infected cells. We established that this p53-dependent
enhancement of IFN signaling is dependent to a great extent on the ability of p53
to activate the transcription of IFN regulatory factor 9, a central component of 
the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex. Our results demonstrate that p53
contributes to innate immunity by enhancing IFN-dependent antiviral activity
independent of its functions as a proapoptotic and tumor suppressor gene.

PMCID: PMC2525597
PMID: 18663127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Immunol. 2008 Jul 15;181(2):1052-62.

IFN-alpha induces transcription of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha to inhibit
proliferation of human endothelial cells.

Gerber SA(1), Pober JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Interdepartmental Program in Vascular Biology and
Therapeutics, School of Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06509-8089, USA.

Expression of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha, a transcription factor
subunit increased by protein stabilization in response to hypoxia, is increased
in human endothelial cells (ECs) by IFN-alpha under normoxic conditions.
IFN-alpha increases HIF-1alpha transcript levels within 2 h by up to 50% and
doubles HIF-1alpha protein expression. Based on pharmacological inhibition
studies, the increase in HIF-1alpha mRNA involves new transcription, is
independent of new protein synthesis, and requires JAK signaling. Protein
knockdown by small interfering RNA confirms the involvement of JAK1 and TYK2, as 
well of IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). IFN-gamma does not significantly
induce HIF-1alpha mRNA, but increases the magnitude and duration of the IFN-alpha
effect. IFN-alpha-induced HIF-1alpha protein translocates to the nucleus and can 
bind to hypoxia response elements in DNA. However, IFN-alpha treatment fails to
induce transcription of several prototypic HIF-responsive genes (VEGF-A,
PPARgamma, and prostacyclin synthase) due to an insufficient increase in
HIF-1alpha protein levels. Although certain other HIF-responsive genes (PHD3 and 
VEGF-C) are induced following IFN-alpha and/or IFN-gamma treatment, these
responses are not inhibited by siRNA knockdown of HIF-1alpha. Additionally,
IFN-alpha induction of ISGF3-dependent genes involved in innate immunity
(viperin, OAS2, and CXCL10) are also unaffected by knockdown of HIF-1alpha.
Interestingly, knockdown of HIF-1alpha significantly reduces the capacity of
IFN-alpha to inhibit endothelial cell proliferation. We conclude that IFN-alpha
induces the transcription of HIF-1alpha in human endothelial cells though a
JAK-ISGF3 pathway under normoxic conditions, and that this response contributes
to the antiproliferative activity of this cytokine.

PMCID: PMC2737178
PMID: 18606657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Jul 1;105(26):8944-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0801794105. Epub 2008 Jun 23.

Recruitment of Stat1 to chromatin is required for interferon-induced serine
phosphorylation of Stat1 transactivation domain.

Sadzak I(1), Schiff M, Gattermeier I, Glinitzer R, Sauer I, Saalmüller A, Yang E,
Schaljo B, Kovarik P.

Author information: 
(1)Max F. Perutz Laboratories, University of Vienna, Dr. Bohr-Gasse 9, A-1030
Vienna, Austria.

The transcription factor Stat1 plays an essential role in responses to
interferons (IFNs). Activation of Stat1 is achieved by phosphorylation on Y701
that is followed by nuclear accumulation. For full transcriptional activity and
biological function Stat1 must also be phosphorylated on S727. The molecular
mechanisms underlying the IFN-induced S727 phosphorylation are incompletely
understood. Here, we show that both Stat1 Y701 phosphorylation and nuclear
translocation are required for IFN-induced S727 phosphorylation. We further show 
that Stat1 mutants lacking the ability to stably associate with chromatin are
poorly serine-phosphorylated in response to IFN-gamma. The S727 phosphorylation
of these mutants is restored on IFN-beta treatment that induces the formation of 
the ISGF3 complex (Stat1/Stat2/Irf9) where Irf9 represents the main DNA binding
subunit. These findings indicate that Stat1 needs to be assembled into
chromatin-associated transcriptional complexes to become S727-phosphorylated and 
fully biologically active in response to IFNs. This control mechanism, which may 
be used by other Stat proteins as well, restricts the final activation step to
the chromatin-tethered transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC2435588
PMID: 18574148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cell Signal. 2008 Jul;20(7):1400-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2008.03.006. Epub 2008
Mar 21.

Nuclear transit of the intracellular domain of the interferon receptor subunit
IFNaR2 requires Stat2 and Irf9.

El Fiky A(1), Pioli P, Azam A, Yoo K, Nastiuk KL, Krolewski JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, School of Medicine,
University of California, IRVINE, Irvine, CA 92679, United States.

Regulated intramembrane proteolysis (RIP) is the primary signaling mechanism for 
some receptors, such as Notch and the amyloid precursor protein. In addition,
some receptor type tyrosine kinases, such as HER4, are able to signal via both
kinase activation and regulated receptor proteolysis. Previously, we showed that 
the IFNaR2 subunit of the type I interferon receptor can be cleaved in a two step
process that resembles RIP and that the IFNaR2 intracellular domain (IFNaR2-ICD) 
can mediate gene transcription in a Stat2 dependent manner. Here, we demonstrate 
that IFNaR2-ICD, Stat2 and Irf9 form a ternary complex. Furthermore, Stat2 and
Irf9 are required for the nuclear transit of a GFP-linked IFNaR2-ICD construct
(GFP-ICD). Additional experiments monitoring the nuclear localization of GFP-ICD 
demonstrate that Stat2 serves an adaptor role, mediating the interaction between 
the IFNaR2-ICD and Irf9, while the bipartite nuclear localization signal within
Irf9 is the primary determinant driving nuclear transit of the ICD containing
complex. Overall, the data suggest that liberation of the IFNaR2-ICD by regulated
proteolysis could trigger a novel mechanism for moving the transcription factor
Stat2 to the nucleus.

PMCID: PMC2494602
PMID: 18456457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Immunol. 2008 Apr 15;180(8):5250-6.

Neutralizing type I IFN antibodies trigger an IFN-like response in endothelial
cells.

Moll HP(1), Freudenthaler H, Zommer A, Buchberger E, Brostjan C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery Research Laboratories, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna General Hospital, Vienna, Austria.

Neutralizing Abs to type I IFNs are of therapeutic significance, i.e., are
currently evaluated for the treatment of autoimmune diseases with pathogenic
IFN-alpha production such as for systemic lupus erythematosus. Unexpectedly, we
observed that several neutralizing Abs reportedly known to counteract IFN-alpha
or IFN-beta activity triggered an "IFN-like" response in quiescent primary human 
endothelial cells leading to activation of the transcription factor
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 and the expression of IFN-responsive genes.
Furthermore, these Abs were found to enhance rather than inhibit type I IFN
signals, and the effect was also detectable for distinct other cell types such as
PBMCs. The stimulatory capacity of anti-IFN-alpha/beta Abs was mediated by the
constitutive autocrine production of "subthreshold" IFN levels, involved the type
I IFNR and was dependent on the Fc Ab domain, as Fab or F(ab')(2) fragments
potently inhibited IFN activity. We thus propose that a combined effect of IFN
recognition by the Ab paratope and the concomitant engagement of the Fc domain
may trigger an IFN signal via the respective type I IFNR, which accounts for the 
observed IFN-like response to the neutralizing Abs. With respect to clinical
applications, the finding may be of importance for the design of recombinant Abs 
vs Fab or F(ab')(2) fragments to efficiently counteract IFN activity without
undesirable activating effects.

PMCID: PMC3242033
PMID: 18390705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2008 Jan;28(1):13-23. doi: 10.1089/jir.2007.0062.

IFN-beta-mediated inhibition of IL-8 expression requires the ISGF3 components
Stat1, Stat2, and IRF-9.

Laver T(1), Nozell SE, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
AL 35294-0005, USA.

Interleukin-8 (IL-8) is a key component of the innate immune response because of 
its ability to recruit inflammatory cells to sites of inflammation. Although the 
effects of IL-8 are largely beneficial, aberrant expression of IL-8 is known to
contribute to a number of pathologic states. Interferon-beta (IFN-beta), an
antiviral cytokine, is known to inhibit the expression of IL-8, although the
exact mechanism by which this occurs has yet to be elucidated. In this study, we 
dissect the role of each member of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3)
signaling complex in contributing to IFN-beta inhibition of IL-8 gene expression.
To date, no IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) (the DNA binding target for
ISGF3) has been identified within the promoter region of the IL-8 gene. We
conclude, through use of cell lines deficient for ISGF3 components, that all
three members of this complex, Stat1, Stat2, and IFN regulatory factor-9 (IRF-9),
are required for IFN-beta-mediated inhibition of IL-8 expression. In contrast to 
positive signaling by ISGF3 to activate gene expression, we find that the
transactivation domains of Stat1 and Stat2 are not essential to IFN-beta
inhibition of IL-8. Taken together, these data define the role of the ISGF3
members in IFN-beta inhibitory signaling.

PMID: 18370868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Clin Invest. 2008 Apr;118(4):1417-26. doi: 10.1172/JCI30065.

IRF9 and STAT1 are required for IgG autoantibody production and B cell expression
of TLR7 in mice.

Thibault DL(1), Chu AD, Graham KL, Balboni I, Lee LY, Kohlmoos C, Landrigan A,
Higgins JP, Tibshirani R, Utz PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Immunology and Rheumatology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

A hallmark of SLE is the production of high-titer, high-affinity,
isotype-switched IgG autoantibodies directed against nucleic acid-associated
antigens. Several studies have established a role for both type I IFN (IFN-I) and
the activation of TLRs by nucleic acid-associated autoantigens in the
pathogenesis of this disease. Here, we demonstrate that 2 IFN-I signaling
molecules, IFN regulatory factor 9 (IRF9) and STAT1, were required for the
production of IgG autoantibodies in the pristane-induced mouse model of SLE. In
addition, levels of IgM autoantibodies were increased in pristane-treated Irf9
-/- mice, suggesting that IRF9 plays a role in isotype switching in response to
self antigens. Upregulation of TLR7 by IFN-alpha was greatly reduced in Irf9 -/- 
and Stat1 -/- B cells. Irf9 -/- B cells were incapable of being activated through
TLR7, and Stat1 -/- B cells were impaired in activation through both TLR7 and
TLR9. These data may reveal a novel role for IFN-I signaling molecules in both
TLR-specific B cell responses and production of IgG autoantibodies directed
against nucleic acid-associated autoantigens. Our results suggest that IFN-I is
upstream of TLR signaling in the activation of autoreactive B cells in SLE.

PMCID: PMC2267033
PMID: 18340381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Liver Transpl. 2008 Mar;14(3):292-8. doi: 10.1002/lt.21358.

Differential effects of calcineurin inhibitors, tacrolimus and cyclosporin a, on 
interferon-induced antiviral protein in human hepatocyte cells.

Hirano K(1), Ichikawa T, Nakao K, Matsumoto A, Miyaaki H, Shibata H, Eguchi S,
Takatsuki M, Ikeda M, Yamasaki H, Kato N, Kanematsu T, Ishii N, Eguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmaceutics, Nagasaki University, Nagasaki, Japan.

Comment in
    Liver Transpl. 2008 Mar;14(3):265-7.

The premise of our study is that selective inhibition of interferon (IFN) by
calcineurin inhibitors contribute to the increased severity of hepatitis C virus 
(HCV) posttransplantation. Therefore, we examined the influence of calcineurin
inhibitors in the human hepatocyte cell line on IFN-alpha-induced phosphorylation
of Janus kinase (Jak) and signal transducers and activators of transcription
(STAT), nuclear translocation of IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF-3),
IFN-stimulated regulatory element (ISRE)-contained promoter activity, and the
expressions of antiviral proteins. Tacrolimus (Tac), but not cyclosporin A (CyA),
had an inhibitory effect on IFN-alpha-induced double-stranded ribonucleic acid
(RNA)-dependent protein kinase (PKR) in a dose-dependent manner. STAT-1 also
acted in a similar fashion to PKR. IFN-alpha combined with Tac attenuated the
ISRE-containing promoter gene activity as compared with IFN-alpha alone. In
contrast, its expression in pretreated CyA was slightly attenuated. In pretreated
Tac, but not CyA, the levels of IFN-alpha-induced tyrosine phosphorylated STAT-1 
and -2 were clearly lower than those induced by IFN-alpha alone. Tac and CyA did 
not decrease the IFN-alpha-induced JAK-1 phosphorylation. The nuclear
translocation rate of tyrosine phosphorylated STAT-1 was inhibited by
pretreatment of both Tac and CyA by western blotting and immunohistochemistry. In
an HCV replicon system, pretreated Tac diminished the replication inhibitory
effect of IFN-alpha. In this study, we show that calcineurin inhibitors,
especially Tac, are the negative regulators of IFN signaling in the hepatocyte;
the greatest cause of such inhibition is the phosphorylation disturbance of
STAT-1, next to inhibition of the nuclear translocation of STAT-1. In conclusion,
disturbance of tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT-1 resulted in diminished
ISRE-containing promoter activity and a decline in antiviral protein expression. 
Moreover, the replication of HCV was activated. This phenomenon is detrimental to
IFN therapy after liver transplantation, and the selection of calcineurin
inhibitors may warrant further discussion depending on the transplant situation.

PMID: 18306331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 18;283(16):10793-803. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706816200. Epub
2008 Feb 20.

Suppression of interferon (IFN)-inducible genes and IFN-mediated functional
responses in BCR-ABL-expressing cells.

Katsoulidis E(1), Sassano A, Majchrzak-Kita B, Carayol N, Yoon P, Jordan A,
Druker BJ, Fish EN, Platanias LC.

Author information: 
(1)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center and Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Northwestern University Medical School and Lakeside Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The interferons (IFNs) are cytokines that play key roles in host defense against 
viral infections and immune surveillance against cancer. We report that BCR-ABL
transformation of hematopoietic cells results in suppression of IFN-dependent
responses, including transcription of IFN-inducible genes and generation of
IFN-mediated antiviral effects. BCR-ABL transformation suppresses expression of
several IFN-regulated genes containing IFN-sensitive response element (ISRE) or
GAS elements in their promoters, including Isg15, Irf1, Irf9, and Ifit2
(interferon-induced protein with tetratricopeptide repeats 2). Suppression of
transcription of ISRE-containing genes is also seen in cells expressing various
BCR-ABL kinase domain mutants, including T315I, H396P, Y253F, and E255K, but not 
kinase-defective BCR-ABL. Such effects are associated with impaired IFN-dependent
phosphorylation of Stat1 on Tyr(701) and Stat3 on Tyr(705) and defective binding 
of Stat complexes to ISRE or GAS elements. Beyond suppression of Stat activities,
BCR-ABL inhibits IFN-inducible phosphorylation/activation of the p38 MAPK,
suggesting a dual mechanism by which this abnormal fusion protein blocks IFN
transcriptional responses. The inhibitory activities of BCR-ABL ultimately result
in impaired IFNalpha-mediated protection against encephalomyocarditis virus
infection and reversal of IFN-dependent growth suppression. Altogether, our data 
provide evidence for a novel mechanism by which BCR-ABL impairs host defenses and
promotes malignant transformation, involving dual suppression of IFN-activated
signaling pathways.

PMCID: PMC2447623
PMID: 18287094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Hepatology. 2008 Apr;47(4):1136-49. doi: 10.1002/hep.22176.

Potential contribution of tumor suppressor p53 in the host defense against
hepatitis C virus.

Dharel N(1), Kato N, Muroyama R, Taniguchi H, Otsuka M, Wang Y, Jazag A, Shao RX,
Chang JH, Adler MK, Kawabe T, Omata M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Infection by hepatitis C virus (HCV) usually results into chronic hepatitis that 
can ultimately lead to cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Type 1 interferons
(IFN-alpha/beta) constitute the primary cellular defense against viral infection 
including HCV. IFN binding to their receptors activates associated Jak1 and Tyk2 
kinases, which ultimately leads to phosphorylation and assembly of a signal
transducer and activator of transcription protein (STAT)1-STAT2-interferon
regulatory factor (IRF)9 trimetric complex called interferon-stimulated gene
factor 3 that translocates into the nucleus and binds to the interferon-
stimulated response elements (ISRE), leading to transcriptional induction of
several antiviral genes, including double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase
(PKR), 2',5'- oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS), and myxovirus resistance protein A
(MxA). Understanding the mechanisms of how the virus evades this cellular innate 
defense and establishes a chronic infection is the key for the development of
better therapeutics against HCV infection. Here, we demonstrate that p53 could
have a crucial role in the cellular innate defense against HCV. We observed
significantly higher levels of HCV RNA replication and viral protein expression
in the Huh7 cells when their p53 expressions were knocked down. Moreover, IFN
treatment was less effective in inhibiting the HCV RNA replication in the
p53-knocked-down (p53kd) Huh7 cells. In fact, the activation of the ISRE and the 
induction of ISGs were significantly attenuated in the p53kd Huh7 cells and p53
was found to directly interact with IRF9.CONCLUSION: These observations
underscore the potential contributions of the tumor suppressor p53 in cellular
antiviral immunity against HCV with possible therapeutic implications.

PMID: 18220274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. FEBS J. 2007 Dec;274(24):6456-68. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

The interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 complex mediates the inhibitory effect of
interferon-beta on matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression.

Zhao X(1), Nozell S, Ma Z, Benveniste EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, AL
53294-0005, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) displays a preference for a broad range of
substrates including extracellular matrix proteins and cytokines. MMP-9 plays an 
important role in physiological processes, as well as in inflammatory diseases
and numerous cancers. Interferon-beta is a pleiotropic cytokine with antiviral,
antiproliferative and immunomodulatory activities. Interferon-beta positively
regulates gene expression, predominantly through the Janus kinase-signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) pathway. However, little is
known about the mechanisms used by interferon-beta to negatively regulate gene
expression. In the present study, we show that interferon-beta inhibits MMP-9
gene expression at the transcriptional level. Using cell lines deficient in three
components of the interferon-beta-activated interferon-stimulated gene factor 3
(ISGF3) complex (i.e. STAT-1, STAT-2 and interferon regulatory factor 9), the
results of our study indicate that all three members are required for
interferon-beta inhibition. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that
interferon-beta reduces recruitment of transcriptional activators and
coactivators, such as nuclear factor kappa B p65, Sp1, CREB-binding protein and
p300, to the MMP-9 promoter, and decreases the degree of histone acetylation at
the MMP-9 promoter. This occurs in the absence of an association of the ISGF3
complex with the MMP-9 promoter. Taken together, these data define the role of
interferon-beta and the ISGF3 members in suppressing MMP-9 gene expression.

PMID: 18028425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Virol. 2007 Dec;81(24):13668-80. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Basal expression levels of IFNAR and Jak-STAT components are determinants of
cell-type-specific differences in cardiac antiviral responses.

Zurney J(1), Howard KE, Sherry B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27606, USA.

Viral myocarditis is an important human disease, and reovirus-induced murine
myocarditis provides an excellent model system for study. Cardiac myocytes, like 
neurons in the central nervous system, are not replenished, yet there is no
cardiac protective equivalent to the blood-brain barrier. Thus, cardiac myocytes 
may have evolved a unique antiviral response relative to readily replenished cell
types, such as cardiac fibroblasts. Our previous comparisons of these two cell
types revealed a conundrum: reovirus T3D induces more beta-interferon (IFN-beta) 
mRNA in cardiac myocytes, yet there is a greater induction of IFN-stimulated
genes (ISGs) in cardiac fibroblasts. Here, we investigated possible underlying
molecular determinants. We found that greater basal expression of IFN-beta in
cardiac myocytes results in greater basal activated nuclear STAT1 and STAT2 and
greater basal ISG mRNA expression and provides greater basal antiviral protection
relative to cardiac fibroblasts. Conversely, cardiac fibroblasts express greater 
basal IFN-alpha/beta receptor 1 (IFNAR1) and greater basal cytoplasmic Jak1,
Tyk2, STAT2, and IRF9, leading to a greater increase in reovirus T3D- or
IFN-induced nuclear activated STAT1 and STAT2 and greater induction of ISGs for a
greater IFN-induced antiviral protection relative to cardiac myocytes. Our
results suggest that high basal IFN-beta expression in cardiac myocytes prearms
this vulnerable, nonreplenishable cell type, while high basal expression of
IFNAR1 and latent Jak-STAT components in adjacent cardiac fibroblasts renders
these cells more responsive to IFN and prevents them from inadvertently serving
as a reservoir for viral replication and spread to cardiac myocytes. These
studies provide the first indication of an integrated network of
cell-type-specific innate immune components for organ protection.

PMCID: PMC2168836
PMID: 17942530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cell. 2007 Oct 5;131(1):93-105.

Acetylation-dependent signal transduction for type I interferon receptor.

Tang X(1), Gao JS, Guan YJ, McLane KE, Yuan ZL, Ramratnam B, Chin YE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brown University Medical School, Rhode Island Hospital,
593 Eddy Street, Providence, RI 02903, USA.

Cytokine-activated receptors initiate intracellular signaling by recruiting
protein kinases that phosphorylate the receptors on tyrosine residues, thus
enabling docking of SH2 domain-bearing activating factors. Here we report that in
response to type 1 interferon (IFNalpha), IFNalpha receptors recruit cytoplasmic 
CREB-binding protein (CBP). By binding to IFNalphaR2 within the region where two 
adjacent proline boxes bear phospho-Ser364 and phospho-Ser384, CBP acetylates
IFNalphaR2 on Lys399, which in turn serves as the docking site for interferon
regulatory factor 9 (IRF9). IRF9 interacts with the acetyl-Lys399 motif by means 
of its IRF homology2 (IH2) domain, leading to formation of the ISGF3 complex that
includes IRF9, STAT1, and STAT2. All three components are acetylated by CBP.
Remarkably, acetylation within the DNA-binding domain (DBD) of both IRF9 and
STAT2 is critical for the ISGF3 complex activation and its associated antiviral
gene regulation. These results have significant implications concerning the
central role of acetylation in cytokine receptor signal transduction.

PMID: 17923090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2008 Nov;23(11):1747-61. Epub 2007 Jun 7.

Role of ISGF3 in modulating the anti-hepatitis B virus activity of
interferon-alpha in vitro.

Zhang Q(1), Wang Y, Wei L, Jiang D, Wang JH, Rao HY, Zhu L, Chen H, Fei R, Cong
X.

Author information: 
(1)Hepatology Institute, Peking University People's Hospital, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Although interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) is an effective
treatment for hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection, its precise mechanism of action 
has not been identified. In this study, we investigated the role of signal
transduction pathways in the activation of anti-HBV responses mediated by
IFN-alpha.
METHODS: Using an oligo microarray, we found that four genes in the IFN-alpha
signal pathway were markedly upregulated by IFN-alpha in human hepatoma cells
regardless of whether they had been transfected with a plasmid containing the HBV
genome: signal transducers and activators of transcription 1 (STAT1), interferon 
regulatory factor-9 (IRF-9, also called ISGF3gamma or P48), IFN-alpha-inducible
protein 15 (IFI-15) and IFN-alpha-inducible protein 6-16 (IFI-6-16). We also
investigated the role of IFN-stimulated gene factor3 (ISGF3) complex in
IFN-alpha-mediated anti-HBV responses in human hepatoma cells by measuring the
mRNA of the three genes within ISGF3 (STAT1, STAT2 and IRF-9) using
semiquantitative reverse-transcription PCR (RT-PCR), and expression of the three 
proteins by western blot, and the mRNA and protein of dsRNA-dependent protein
kinase (PKR).
RESULTS: STAT1, STAT2, IRF-9 and PKR mRNA as well as protein levels were
upregulated by IFN-alpha treatment. When cells were pretreated with genistein,
STAT1, STAT2 and IRF-9 mRNA levels remained unchanged after IFN-alpha
stimulation, but PKR mRNA levels decreased, and the expression of the STAT1,
P-STAT2, IRF-9 and PKR proteins decreased. Levels of HBV DNA decreased in the
supernatants of cells treated with IFN-alpha, while ISGF3 levels increased. The
quantity of HBV DNA remained unchanged by pretreating with genistein.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations suggested that the Janus tyrosine kinase-STAT
(JAK-STAT) pathway may play a major role in mediating the effects of IFN-alpha
against HBV, and that ISGF3 might be a key factor.

PMID: 17559358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Virol. 2007 Apr;81(8):4255-63. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

The nucleocytoplasmic rabies virus P protein counteracts interferon signaling by 
inhibiting both nuclear accumulation and DNA binding of STAT1.

Vidy A(1), El Bougrini J, Chelbi-Alix MK, Blondel D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Mixte de Virologie Moléculaire et Structurale, UMR 2472, CNRS, 91198 Gif
sur Yvette Cedex, France.

Rabies virus P protein inhibits alpha interferon (IFN-alpha)- and
IFN-gamma-stimulated Jak-STAT signaling by retaining phosphorylated STAT1 in the 
cytoplasm. Here, we show that P also blocks an intranuclear step that is the
STAT1 binding to the DNA promoter of IFN-responsive genes. As P is a
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling protein, we first investigated the effect of the
cellular distribution of P on the localization of STAT1 and consequently on IFN
signaling. We show that the localization of STAT1 is correlated with the
localization of P: in cells expressing a nuclear form of P (the short P3 isoform 
or the complete P in the presence of the export inhibitor leptomycin B), STAT1 is
nuclear, whereas in cells expressing a cytoplasmic form of P, STAT1 is
cytoplasmic. However, the expression of nuclear forms of P inhibits the signaling
of both IFN-gamma and IFN-alpha, demonstrating that the retention of STAT1 in the
cytoplasm is not the only mechanism involved in the inhibition of IFN signaling. 
Electrophoretic mobility shift analysis indicates that P expression in the cell
extracts of infected cells or in stable cell lines prevents IFN-induced DNA
binding of STAT1. The loss of the DNA binding of STAT1 and ISGF3 was also
observed when purified recombinant P or P3 was added to the extracts of
IFN-gamma- or IFN-alpha-treated cells, indicating that P directly affects the DNA
binding activity of STAT1. Then products of the rabies virus P gene are able to
counteract IFN signaling by creating both cytoplasmic and nuclear blocks for
STAT1.

PMCID: PMC1866157
PMID: 17287281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Cancer. 2007 May 15;120(10):2119-26.

Genetic redundancy in human cervical carcinoma cells: identification of cells
with "normal" properties.

Bachmann A(1), Zawatzky R, Rösl F.

Author information: 
(1)Forschungsschwerpunkt Angewandte Tumorvirologie, Abteilung Virale
Transformationsmechanismen, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum, Im Neuenheimer Feld
242, 69120 Heidelberg, Federal Republic of Germany.

Although it is generally assumed that cancer arises from a singular cell, a tumor
must be considered as a dynamic and emergent biological structure, whose
organizing principle is determined by genetic and epigenetic modifications,
occurring variably in response to microenvironmental selection conditions. As
previously shown, HPV-positive cervical carcinoma cells have lost their ability
to induce IFN-beta upon TNF-alpha treatment. However, regarding cancer as a
non-linear system, which may, even in the absence of an apparent selection
pressure, fluctuate between different "metastable" phenotypes, we demonstrate
that TNF-alpha mediated IFN-beta induction is not irreversibly disturbed in all
cells. Using the IFN-beta sensitive Encephalomyocarditis virus (EMCV) as a tool
to monitor antiviral activity in long-term established malignant HeLa cells, rare
IFN-beta expressing clones were rescued from a population of non-responsive and
EMCV-sensitive cells. Antiviral activity was mediated by the re-expression of
IRF-1 and p48 (IRF-9), both key regulatory molecules normally found to be
suppressed in cervical carcinoma cells. Upon inoculating of selected clones into 
immunocompromised animals, a reduced or even an absence of tumorigenicity of
initially highly malignant cells could be discerned. These data indicate that
both the absence of interferon signaling and the ability to form tumors were
reversed in a minority of cells. We provide a paradigm for the existence of
innate genetic redundancy mechanisms, where a particular phenotype persists and
can be isolated without application of drugs generally changing the epigenetic
context.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17266037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Immunol. 2007 Jan 1;178(1):253-61.

Multiple NF-kappaB and IFN regulatory factor family transcription factors
regulate CCL19 gene expression in human monocyte-derived dendritic cells.

Pietilä TE(1), Veckman V, Lehtonen A, Lin R, Hiscott J, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Immunology, National Public Health Institute,
Helsinki, Finland. taija.pietila@ktl.fi

CCL19 chemokine has a central role in dendritic cell (DC) biology regulating DC
traffic and recruitment of naive T cells to the vicinity of activated DCs. In
this study, we have analyzed the regulation of CCL19 gene expression in human
monocyte-derived DCs. DCs infected with Salmonella enterica or Sendai virus
produced CCL19 at late times of infection. The CCL19 promoter was identified as
having two putative NF-kappaB binding sites and one IFN-stimulated response
element (ISRE). Transcription factor binding experiments demonstrated that
Salmonella or Sendai virus infection increased the binding of classical p50+p65
and alternative p52+RelB NF-kappaB proteins to both of the CCL19 promoter
NF-kappaB elements. Interestingly, Salmonella or Sendai virus infection also
increased the binding of multiple IFN regulatory factors (IRFs), STAT1, and
STAT2, to the ISRE element. Enhanced binding of IRF1, IRF3, IRF7, and IRF9 to the
CCL19 promoter ISRE site was detected in Salmonella or Sendai virus-infected cell
extracts. The CCL19 promoter in a luciferase reporter construct was activated by 
the expression of NF-kappaB p50+p65 or p52+RelB dimers. IRF1, IRF3, and IRF7
proteins also activated CCL19 promoter in the presence of Sendai virus infection.
CCL19 promoter constructs mutated at NF-kappaB and/or ISRE sites were only weakly
activated. Ectopic expression of RIG-I (DeltaRIG-I, CARDIF) or TLR3/4 (TRIF,
MyD88, IKKepsilon, or TBK1) signaling pathway components induced CCL19 promoter
activity, suggesting that these pathways are important in CCL19 gene expression. 
Our experiments reveal that expression of the CCL19 gene is regulated by a
combined action of several members of the NF-kappaB, IRF, and STAT family
transcription factors.

PMID: 17182562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nat Genet. 2006 Nov;38(11):1335-40. Epub 2006 Oct 15.

Abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial morphogenesis in mice deficient for
interferon regulatory factor 6 (Irf6).

Ingraham CR(1), Kinoshita A, Kondo S, Yang B, Sajan S, Trout KJ, Malik MI,
Dunnwald M, Goudy SL, Lovett M, Murray JC, Schutte BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Transcription factor paralogs may share a common role in staged or overlapping
expression in specific tissues, as in the Hox family. In other cases, family
members have distinct roles in a range of embryologic, differentiation or
response pathways (as in the Tbx and Pax families). For the interferon regulatory
factor (IRF) family of transcription factors, mice deficient in Irf1, Irf2, Irf3,
Irf4, Irf5, Irf7, Irf8 or Irf9 have defects in the immune response but show no
embryologic abnormalities. Mice deficient for Irf6 have not been reported, but in
humans, mutations in IRF6 cause two mendelian orofacial clefting syndromes, and
genetic variation in IRF6 confers risk for isolated cleft lip and palate. Here we
report that mice deficient for Irf6 have abnormal skin, limb and craniofacial
development. Histological and gene expression analyses indicate that the primary 
defect is in keratinocyte differentiation and proliferation. This study describes
a new role for an IRF family member in epidermal development.

PMCID: PMC2082114
PMID: 17041601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. J Virol. 2006 Sep;80(18):9082-92.

Altered central nervous system gene expression caused by congenitally acquired
persistent infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus.

Kunz S(1), Rojek JM, Roberts AJ, McGavern DB, Oldstone MB, de la Torre JC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Integrative Neurosciences Department (MIND) IMM6, The Scripps
Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Neonatal infection of most mouse strains with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus 
(LCMV) leads to a life-long persistent infection characterized by high virus
loads in the central nervous system (CNS) in the absence of inflammation and
tissue destruction. These mice, however, exhibit impaired learning and memory.
The occurrence of cognitive defects in the absence of overt CNS pathology led us 
to the hypothesis that chronic virus infection may contribute to neuronal
dysfunction by altering the host's gene expression profile. To test this
hypothesis, we examined the impact of LCMV persistence on host gene expression in
the CNS. To model the natural route of human congenital CNS infection observed
with a variety of viruses, we established a persistently infected mouse colony
where the virus was maintained via vertical transmission from infected mothers to
offspring (LCMV-cgPi). LCMV-cgPi mice exhibited a lifelong persistent infection
involving the CNS; the infection was associated with impaired spatial-temporal
learning. Despite high viral loads in neurons of the brains of adult LCMV-cgPi
mice, we detected changes in the host's CNS gene expression for only 75 genes, 56
and 19 being significantly induced and reduced, respectively. The majority of the
genes induced in the brain of LCMV-cgPi mice were interferon (IFN)-stimulated
genes (ISGs) and included the transcription factors STAT1 and IRF9, the ISG15
protease UBP43, and the glucocorticoid attenuated-response genes GARG16 and
GARG49. Based on their crucial role in antiviral defense, these ISGs may play an 
important role in limiting viral spread and replication. However, since IFNs have
also been implicated in adverse effects on neuronal function, the chronic
induction of some ISGs may also contribute to the observed cognitive impairment.

PMCID: PMC1563940
PMID: 16940520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Nat Rev Immunol. 2006 Aug;6(8):602-12.

Tracking STAT nuclear traffic.

Reich NC(1), Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New 
York 11777, USA. nancy.reich@stonybrook.edu

Accurate cellular localization is crucial for the effective function of most
signalling molecules and nuclear translocation is central to the function of
transcription factors. The passage of large molecules between the cytoplasm and
nucleus is restricted, and this restriction affords a mechanism to regulate
transcription by controlling the access of transcription factors to the nucleus. 
In this Review, we focus on the signal transducer and activator of transcription 
(STAT) family of transcription factors. The regulation of the nuclear trafficking
of STAT-family members is diverse. Some STAT proteins constitutively shuttle
between the nucleus and cytoplasm, whereas others require tyrosine
phosphorylation for nuclear localization. In either case, the regulation of
nuclear trafficking can provide a target for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 16868551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2006 Apr;14(4):277-80.

[Reconstructing the JAK/STATs signal pathway restored the anti-proliferative
response of MHCC97 on interferon alpha].

[Article in Chinese]

Wu WZ(1), Sun HC, Gao YQ, Wang L, Tang ZY, Liu KD.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the roles of JAK/STATs signal pathway on
anti-proliferative effects induced by IFN-alpha in MHCC97.
METHODS: An IRF9 expression vector was transfected into MHCC97 with Dosper. The
expression of IRF9, cycle regulating proteins and the forming of ISGF3 complex
were detected using Western blot and EMSA, respectively. Cell proliferation and
distribution were monitored using MTT and flow cytometry.
RESULTS: High expression of IRF9 restored the anti-proliferative response of
MHCC97 on IFN-alpha treatment and delayed the cell transition from S phase to G2 
phase induced by IFN-alpha.
CONCLUSION: The integrity and functions of JAK/STATs signal pathway played an
important role in mediating the anti-proliferative effects of IFN-alpha in
MHCC97.

PMID: 16635297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Hepatol. 2006 Aug;45(2):271-9. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

Oxidative stress inhibits IFN-alpha-induced antiviral gene expression by blocking
the JAK-STAT pathway.

Di Bona D(1), Cippitelli M, Fionda C, Cammà C, Licata A, Santoni A, Craxì A.

Author information: 
(1)Cattedra e Unità Operativa di Gastroenterologia, Dipartimento Biomedico e di
Medicina Specialistica, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy. dibona@ibim.cnr.it

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Unresponsiveness to IFN-alpha is common in chronic hepatitis C. 
Since conditions associated with an increased oxidative stress (advanced age,
steatosis, fibrosis, iron overload, and alcohol consumption) reduce the
likelihood of response, we hypothesized that oxidative stress may affect the
antiviral actions of IFN-alpha.
METHODS: We examined in a human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line (Huh-7) the
effect of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), as a generator of oxidative stress, on the
IFN-alpha signaling pathway.
RESULTS: Pretreatment of Huh-7 cells with 0.5-1 mM H2O2 resulted in the
suppression of the IFN-alpha-induced antiviral protein MxA and of IRF-9 mRNA
expression. The reduced expression of these genes was associated to H2O2
-mediated suppression of the IFN-alpha-induced assembly of signal transducer and 
activator of transcription (STAT) factors to specific promoter motifs on
IFN-alpha-inducible genes. This was accomplished by preventing the
IFN-alpha-induced tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT-1 and STAT-2 through the
inactivation of the upstream receptor associated tyrosine kinases, JAK-1 and
Tyk-2. The suppression was fast, occurring within 5mins of pretreatment with
H2O2, and did not require protein synthesis.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, oxidative stress impairs IFN-alpha signaling and
might cause resistance to the antiviral action of IFN-alpha in chronically HCV
infected patients with high level of oxidative stress in the liver.

PMID: 16595158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Cell Sci. 2006 Mar 15;119(Pt 6):1092-104. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

IFN-type-I-mediated signaling is regulated by modulation of STAT2 nuclear export.

Frahm T(1), Hauser H, Köster M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Regulation and Differentiation, GBF--German Research Centre
for Biotechnology, Mascheroder Weg 1, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.

Signaling through the IFN type I receptor is mediated by assembly of the ISGF3
complex consisting of STAT1, STAT2 and IRF9. Whereas STAT1 is instrumentalized by
many cytokines, STAT2 is specifically used by type I IFNs. Here, we report that
the main regulatory mechanism of nuclear accumulation of STAT2 is nuclear export.
We determined the kinetics of nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of STAT2 in living
cells. In the absence of IFN, a virtually exclusive cytoplasmic localisation of
STAT2 can be detected. Nevertheless, STAT2 is permanently and rapidly shuttling
between the cytoplasm and the nucleus. The steady-state localization is explained
by a very efficient nuclear export. Our studies indicate that at least two
pathways (one of which is CRM1-dependent, the other not yet identified) are
responsible for clearing the nucleus from STAT2. The constitutive
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of STAT2 does neither depend on the presence of IRF9 
or STAT1, nor does it require tyrosine phosphorylation. Upon treatment with IFN
type I, nuclear export of STAT2 is completely abolished in cells used within this
study, whereas nuclear import is functioning. This explains the observed nuclear 
accumulation of STAT2. We have identified a region in the C-terminus of STAT2
that is essential for its almost exclusively cytoplasmic localization in the
absence of IFN and responsible for CRM1-specific export. In comparative studies
we show that nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of STAT2 is significantly different from
that of STAT1. STAT1 is also shuttling in the absence of IFN, but the exchange
rate in unstimulated cells is more than ten times lower. We further show that the
latent STAT2 protein has stronger intrinsic nuclear-export activity than STAT1.
Together, these observations lead to a model for IFN-type-I-induction in which
the receptor-mediated heterodimerization overcomes the slow nuclear import of
STAT1 and blocks the strong STAT2 export activity that leads to the accumulation 
of both signal transducers in the nucleus.

PMID: 16507591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 7;103(10):3840-5. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

A human cytomegalovirus antagonist of type I IFN-dependent signal transducer and 
activator of transcription signaling.

Paulus C(1), Krauss S, Nevels M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene, Forschungszentrum,
Universität Regensburg, D-93047 Regensburg, Germany.

Type I IFNs are crucial components of the innate immune response to viral attack.
They are rapidly synthesized and secreted after infection with human
cytomegalovirus (CMV) and trigger a signal transduction pathway that involves
successive activation and nuclear translocation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and STAT2. The activated STATs, together
with the IFN regulatory factor 9 protein, form a trimeric transcription complex
(IFN-stimulated gene factor 3) that stimulates expression of numerous
IFN-responsive genes, many of which exhibit antiviral activity. Here we
demonstrate that the viral 72-kDa IE1 protein (IE1-72kDa) confers partial
resistance to the antiviral activity of type I IFNs upon CMV. Accordingly,
IFN-responsive transcripts accumulate to substantially increased levels after
infection with an IE1-deficient mutant as compared with wild-type virus, and
ectopic expression of the viral protein in stably transfected cells is sufficient
to block their induction. We further show that IE1-72kDa forms a physical complex
with STAT1 and STAT2 in nuclei of infected cells and in vitro and prevents
association of STAT1, STAT2, and IFN regulatory factor 9 with promoters of
IFN-responsive genes in vivo. Our results indicate that the viral protein blocks 
an intranuclear step after nuclear translocation and before DNA binding of
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3, presumably by interfering with the integrity and/or
correct subnuclear localization of the protein complex. This study identifies the
CMV IE1-72kDa protein as a viral antagonist of the cellular innate immune
response, inhibiting IFN-dependent STAT signaling by means of an unprecedented
molecular mechanism.

PMCID: PMC1533784
PMID: 16497831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Ethnopharmacol. 2006 May 24;105(3):346-51. Epub 2006 Jan 6.

Effects of Scutellariae Radix on gene expression in HEK 293 cells using cDNA
microarray.

Chen CS(1), Chen NJ, Lin LW, Hsieh CC, Chen GW, Hsieh MT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Chinese Medical Sciences, China Medical University, 91 Hsueh Shih
Road, Taichung 404, Taiwan, ROC.

The aim of the present study was to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying
the anti-inflammatory effect of Scutellaria Radix (SR). The complementary DNA
(cDNA) microarray method was used to survey the effects of SR on the changes of
gene expression profile in HEK293 cells. Based on differential expression, 66
genes were selected for further analysis from 9,600 candidate genes in the
microarray; 23 genes were validated by RT-PCR. The broad spectrum of the
differentially expressed genes, including those associated with inflammation,
immune response, energy metabolism, as well as others, such as ISGF3G, IL6ST,
CD98, ATP5G2, PHKG2, YB-1 and SLC7A4, indicate overall cellular response to SR
treatment. Our results suggest that the anti-inflammatory effect of SR may be
related to IL6ST down-expression, and over-expression of CD98. Moreover,
SR-related improvement in immune response may be related to the ISGF3G
over-expression.

PMID: 16406416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Eur Arch Otorhinolaryngol. 2006 Feb;263(2):127-34. Epub 2005 Dec 28.

Differential gene expression in a paclitaxel-resistant clone of a head and neck
cancer cell line.

Schmidt M(1), Schler G, Gruensfelder P, Hoppe F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Würzburg,
Josef-Schneider-Strasse 11, 97080, Würzburg, Germany.
marianne.schmidt@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de

The anti-neoplastic drug paclitaxel (taxol), which is known to block cells in the
G2/M phase of the cell cycle through stabilization of microtubules, is meanwhile 
commonly used for chemotherapy of advanced head and neck cancer. Chemotherapy is 
primarily used in order to preserve laryngeal and/or pharyngeal structures.
Although paclitaxel generally seems to be a powerful agent, it failed to reach a 
loco-regional tumor control in a sufficient percentage of patients. In order to
investigate molecular resistance mechanisms, we have established a
paclitaxel-resistant subline originating from the larynx carcinoma cell line
HLaC79, which seemed to be partially dependent on taxol. The original and the
descendant cell line were characterized by growth inhibition assays. We used
western blotting and the cDNA subtraction (SSH) technique to identify genes
differentially expressed in the taxol-resistant cell clone. cDNA subtraction
revealed increased expression of six genes, including clathrin heavy chain,
alpha3-tubulin, a neuroblastoma-specific Thymosin beta, the ribosomal protein
L7a, HLA-B associated transcript 3 and collagen IIIalpha1 in the taxol-resistant 
cell line. Furthermore, western blots showed an overexpression of MDR-1 in the
taxol-resistant clone, while alpha- and beta-tubulins and p48/IRF9 were expressed
in equal amounts in both cell lines.

PMID: 16380805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2005 Nov;25(11):666-73.

Development of monoclonal antibodies against GBF1 and their use in studying its
functions.

Roy SK(1), Hu J, Meng Q, Hu J, Reddy SP, Kalvakolanu DV.

Author information: 
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, 655 W.
Baltimore Street, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201,
USA.

Interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) regulates a number of cellular genes using a variety
of cellular signaling pathways. Previously, we identified a novel IFN-regulated
element, IFN-gamma-activated transcriptional element (GATE), in the promoter of
the murine IFN regulatory factor-9 (IRF-9) gene. This element binds to novel
factors. We have recently characterized a novel regulatory factor, GATE binding
factor 1 (GBF1), which promoted IFN-gamma-induced transcription. Although GBF1
was a potent inducer of transcription, it did not bind to DNA well in vitro. To
understand its role in IFN-gamma-induced actions, we raised monoclonal antibodies
(mAb) against GBF1. These antibodies are highly useful in Western,
immunoprecipitation, and immunocytochemical analyses. Employing these antibodies,
we show that GBF1 is recruited to the endogenous IRF-9 promoter. We also show
GBF1 interacts with CAAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta (C/EBP-beta), the other
GATE binding factor. Furthermore, other cytokines, such as interleukin-1 (IL-1)
and IL-6, induced the expression of GBF1. These antibodies may be useful tools
for investigating the role of GBF1 in cytokine-induced responses.

PMID: 16318580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Oct 11;102(41):14611-6. Epub 2005 Sep 29.

Apical role for BRG1 in cytokine-induced promoter assembly.

Ni Z(1), Karaskov E, Yu T, Callaghan SM, Der S, Park DS, Xu Z, Pattenden SG,
Bremner R.

Author information: 
(1)Toronto Western Research Institute, University Health Network, Department of
Ophthalmology and Vision Science, Vision Science Research Program, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5T 2S8.

IFN-gamma induction of the CIITA (class II transactivator) promoter (pIV)
requires Brahma-related gene 1 (BRG1), a chromatin-remodeling enzyme. However,
the events that lead to pIV activation are only partially understood, and the
point at which BRG1 acts is unknown. The first IFN-gamma-induced event triggers
nuclear translocation of STAT1 (signal transducer and activator of transcription 
1), which binds IFN-gamma-responsive promoters. BRG1 is recruited after activator
binding at several other inducible loci, and STAT family members are known to
bind BRG1, suggesting that BRG1 might act downstream of STAT1. Here, we delineate
a comprehensive view of factor assembly and detailed histone modifications at pIV
and show that all events, even STAT1 binding, require BRG1 at CIITA pIV and other
IFN-gamma target promoters. Recruitment of IFN-stimulated gene factor-3 (ISGF3)
[STAT1/STAT2/IFN regulatory factor 9 (IRF9)] to several IFN-alpha-responsive
promoters is also BRG1-dependent. In contrast, constitutive BRG1 association at
IFN targets is STAT1-independent. Furthermore, BRG1 is required for IFN-induced
restriction enzyme and DNase I accessibility at promoters. Thus, BRG1 has an
apical role in cytokine-induced promoter assembly, acting upstream of STAT
complexes at multiple IFN target loci.

PMCID: PMC1253546
PMID: 16195385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Gastroenterology. 2005 Aug;129(2):713-7.

Analysis of the biliary transcriptome in experimental biliary atresia.

Carvalho E(1), Liu C, Shivakumar P, Sabla G, Aronow B, Bezerra JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and Department of Pediatrics,
University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Discovery of the pathogenic mechanisms of biliary atresia has 
been limited by the inability to study extrahepatic biliary tissues from patients
at early phases of disease. Here, we used a rotavirus-induced model of biliary
atresia to investigate the entire biliary transcriptome for molecular networks
activated at the onset and different phases of progression to duct obstruction.
METHODS: We injected Balb/c mice with saline or rotavirus intraperitoneally
within 24 hours of birth, microdissected the gallbladder and extrahepatic bile
ducts en bloc 3, 7, and 14 days later, generated biotinylated RNA pools, and
hybridized them against microarrays containing 45,101 gene products.
RESULTS: Data filtering, cluster analysis, and functional assignment of the gene 
expression platform revealed 2 unique patterns of expression. The first was an
overarching expression of genes regulating immunity, enzymes, and structural
proteins at all phases of atresia. Within this pattern, the sequential expression
of the interferon inducers Irf7 and Irf9 at the onset of injury, and
interferon-gamma and interferon-gamma-activated genes (Stat1, Igtp, Cxcl9,
Cxcl10) at the time of duct obstruction, pointed to a prominent proinflammatory
circuit. The second was the time-restricted expression of genes regulating
biological networks previously unrecognized in biliary atresia, such as the
complement components C3ar-1 and C1q-alpha/beta.
CONCLUSIONS: The coordinate expression of functionally related genes in the
biliary transcriptome underscores a predominant proinflammatory footprint and
provides a basis for identification of gene groups that may play regulatory roles
in the pathogenesis of duct injury and obstruction in experimental biliary
atresia.

PMID: 16083724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Apr;63 Suppl 4:193-201.

[Class II cytokine receptors and their ligands].

[Article in Japanese]

Takaoka A(1), Yanai H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo.

PMID: 15861656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Jan;63 Suppl 1:87-95.

[Immune and skeletal systems].

[Article in Japanese]

Takayanagi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School, Center of
Excellence Program, Tokyo Medical and Dental University.

PMID: 15799324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Oncology. 2004;67(5-6):428-40.

Reduction in p48-ISGFgamma levels confers resistance to interferon-alpha2a in
MHCC97 cells.

Wu WZ(1), Sun HC, Gao YQ, Li Y, Wang L, Zhou K, Liu KD, Iliakis G, Tang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute and Zhongshan Hospital, Shanghai, P.R. China.

OBJECTIVES: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent
malignancies in China and, due to the limited efficacy of currently available
therapies, is responsible for a large number of deaths. IFN-alpha therapy has
shown promise in the treatment of various forms of human cancer and is considered
in the treatment of HCC. Previous results from our group showed that high doses
of IFN-alpha exert a significant antiproliferative effect on MHCC97 human
xenografts in nude mice, but not on MHCC97 cells when tested in vitro. Here we
present experiments designed to characterize the molecular mechanism underlying
the defective response of MHCC97 cells to IFN-alpha. Elucidation of the mechanism
underlying the defective response of MHCC97 to IFN-alpha may help to explain and 
possibly to overcome clinical failures of this form of tumor therapy.
METHODS: IFN-alpha(2a) was administered between 3,000 and 10,000 IU/ml, a range
strongly inhibiting proliferation in other cell lines. Gene expression profiles
of MHCC97 cells were obtained before and after treatment with IFN-alpha(2a) using
cDNA microarray analysis. The transcriptional activity of relevant genes
responding to IFN-alpha(2a) in the cDNA microarray experiments was confirmed by
RT-PCR and Northern blot analysis. Transient transfection with an expression
vector was used to restore p48-ISGFgamma (IRF9) protein levels. Cell
proliferation was evaluated using the MTT assay.
RESULTS: Although IFN-alpha treatment caused the activation of several signal
transduction pathways in MHCC97 cells, the lack of an antiproliferative effect
was found to mainly derive from a defect in the activation of the transcription
factor ISGF3 required for Jak/STATS signaling. We show that the defect in ISGF3
activation is mainly caused by the absence of one of its essential components,
the protein p48-ISGFgamma from MHCC97 cells. Indeed, transient expression of
p48-ISGFgamma restores sensitivity to IFN-alpha(2a). Although the mRNA levels of 
p48-ISGFgamma were normal in MHCC97 cells, mutations could be detected in the
gene coding for the protein. We hypothesize, therefore, that these mutations
alter the message or protein stability, leading to the reduced protein levels
observed.
CONCLUSION: Our results confirm the important role of Jak/STATS signaling in the 
antiproliferative effects of IFN-alpha in tumor cells and indicate that defects
in ISGF3 can cause resistance to IFN-alpha(2a) treatment.

Copyright (c) 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 15714000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12262-70. Epub 2005 Jan 21.

Regulation of the transcriptional activity of the IRF7 promoter by a pathway
independent of interferon signaling.

Ning S(1), Huye LE, Pagano JS.

Author information: 
(1)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Genes containing an interferon (IFN)-stimulated response element (ISRE) can be
divided into two groups according to their inducibility by IFN and virus
infection: one induced only by IFN and the other induced by both IFN and virus
infection. Although it is now clear that IFN regulatory factor 7 (IRF7) is a
multifunctional gene essential for induction of type I IFNs, regulation of the
IRF7 promoter (IRF7p) is poorly understood. The IRF7 gene includes two IFN
responsive elements, an IRF-binding element (IRFE) in the promoter region and an 
ISRE in the first intron, and is induced by the IFN-triggered Jak-STAT pathway by
binding of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) complex to the ISRE. In this 
study, we demonstrate that IRF3 and IRF7, which with the coactivators
CREB-binding protein and P300 form the virus-activated factor (VAF) complex upon 
Sendai virus infection, bind to the IRF7 ISRE and IRFE and can directly activate 
IRF7 transcription. Promoter reporter assays show that both the ISRE and IRFE are
responsive to activation by IRF7 and IRF3. In cells transiently expressing IRF7
or/and IRF3, the VAF level and binding of VAF are clearly increased after Sendai 
virus infection. Studies with Jak1 kinase inactive 293 cells that were stably
transfected with a Jak1 kinase dead dominant negative construct, and the mutant
cell lines SAN (IFNalpha-/beta-), U2A (IRF9-), U4A (Jak1-), and DKO (IRF1-/IRF2-)
show that the IRF7 transcription activated directly by VAF is distinct from and
independent of the IFN signaling pathway. Thus, IRF7 transcription is
autoregulated by binding of the IRF7-containing VAF to its own ISRE and IRFE. The
results show two distinct mechanisms for the activation of the IRF7 promoter, by 
IFN and by virus infection. A regulatory network between type I IFNs and IRF7 is 
proposed. The distinct pathways may reflect special roles for an efficient
antiviral response at different stages of virus infection.

PMID: 15664995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Virology. 2005 Feb 5;332(1):130-44.

Molecular profiling of early stage liver fibrosis in patients with chronic
hepatitis C virus infection.

Bièche I(1), Asselah T, Laurendeau I, Vidaud D, Degot C, Paradis V, Bedossa P,
Valla DC, Marcellin P, Vidaud M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire-UPRES EA 3618, Faculté des Sciences
Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Université Paris V, Paris, France.
ivan.bieche@univ-paris5.fr

The molecular mechanisms of acute hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection, end-stage
hepatitis (cirrhosis), and hepatocellular carcinoma have been extensively
studied, but little is known of the changes in liver gene expression during the
early stages of liver fibrosis associated with chronic HCV infection, that is,
the transition from normal liver (NL) of uninfected patients to the first stage
of liver fibrosis (F1-CH-C). To obtain insight into the molecular pathogenesis of
F1-CH-C, we used real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) to study the mRNA expression of 240 selected genes in liver
tissue with F1-CH-C, in comparison with NL. The expression of 54 (22.5%) of the
240 genes was significantly different between F1-CH-C and NL; 46 genes were
upregulated and 8 were downregulated in F1-CH-C. The most noteworthy changes in
gene expression mainly affected the transcriptional network regulated by
interferons (IFNs), including both IFN-alpha/beta-inducible genes (STAT1, STAT2, 
ISGF3G/IRF9, IFI27, G1P3, G1P2, OAS2, MX1) and IFN-gamma-inducible genes (CXCL9, 
CXCL10, CXCL11). Interesting, upregulation of IFN-alpha/beta-inducible genes (but
not IFN-gamma-inducible genes) was independent of histological scores (grade and 
stage of fibrosis) and HCV characteristics (hepatic HCV mRNA levels and the HCV
genotype), and was specific to HCV (as compared to hepatitis B virus (HBV)).
Other genes dysregulated in F1-CH-C, albeit less markedly than IFN-alpha/beta-
and IFN-gamma-inducible genes, were mainly involved in the activation of
lymphocytes infiltrating the liver (IFNG, TNF, CXCL6, IL6, CCL8, CXCR3, CXCR4,
CCR2), cell proliferation (p16/CDKN2A, MKI67, p14/ARF), extracellular matrix
remodeling (MMP9, ITGA2), lymphangiogenesis (XLKD1/LYVE), oxidative stress
(CYP2E1), and cytoskeleton microtubule organization (STMN2/SCG10). Thus, a
limited number of signaling pathways, and particularly the transcriptional
network regulated by interferons, are dysregulated in the first stage of
HCV-induced liver fibrosis. Some of the genes identified here could form the
basis for new approaches aimed at refining IFN-based therapies for chronic HCV
infection.

PMID: 15661146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 18;280(11):10001-10. Epub 2005 Jan 11.

Activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase (MKK) 3 and MKK6 by type I 
interferons.

Li Y(1), Batra S, Sassano A, Majchrzak B, Levy DE, Gaestel M, Fish EN, Davis RJ, 
Platanias LC.

Author information: 
(1)Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center and Division of
Hematology-Oncology, Northwestern University Medical School, 710 North Fairbanks 
St., Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):10651.

There is accumulating evidence that the p38 MAP kinase pathway plays important
roles in Type I interferon (IFN) signaling, but the mechanisms regulating p38
activation during engagement of the Type I IFN receptor remain to be defined. We 
sought to identify the events that lead to activation of the p38 MAP kinase in
response to Type I IFNs. Our data demonstrate that treatment of sensitive cell
lines with IFNalpha results in activation of both MAP kinase kinase 3 (MKK3) and 
MAP kinase kinase 6 (MKK6). Such IFN-inducible activation of MKK3 and MKK6 is
essential for downstream phosphorylation and activation of the p38 MAP kinase, as
shown by studies using mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) with targeted
disruption of the Mkk3 and Mkk6 genes (MKK3-/- MKK6-/-). Similarly, IFN-dependent
activation of the downstream effectors of p38, MAPKAPK-2 and MAPKAPK-3, is not
detectable in cells lacking Mkk3 and Mkk6, demonstrating that the function of
these MAP kinase kinases is required for full activation of the p38 pathway. To
define the functional relevance of MKK3/6 engagement in Type I IFN signaling,
IFN-inducible gene transcription was evaluated in the MKK3/MKK6 double knock-out 
cells. IFNalpha- and IFNbeta-dependent transcription via either
interferon-stimulated response element or IFNgamma activated site elements was
defective in MKK3 -/-/MKK6 -/- MEFs in luciferase reporter assays. In addition,
IFN-dependent induction of two genes known to be of importance in the generation 
of IFN responses, Isg15 and Irf-9, was diminished in the absence of Mkk3 and
Mkk6. The effects of Mkk3 and Mkk6 on IFN-dependent transcription were unrelated 
to any effects on the phosphorylation and activation of STAT proteins, indicating
the presence of a STAT-independent mechanism. Altogether, our findings
demonstrate that MKK3 and MKK6 are rapidly activated during engagement of the
Type I IFN receptor and play important roles in Type I IFN signaling and the
generation of IFN responses.

PMID: 15644321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Infect Dis. 2005 Jan 1;191(1):93-9. Epub 2004 Nov 29.

Hepatitis C virus core protein down-regulates transcription of interferon-induced
antiviral genes.

de Lucas S(1), Bartolome J, Carreno V.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación para el Estudio de las Hepatitis Virales, Madrid 28015, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Hepatitis C virus (HCV) proteins interfere with the interferon
(IFN)-alpha-induced Jak/signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
pathway. Which protein is responsible for this effect and whether this
interference results in down-regulation of IFN-induced genes remain
controversial. We analyzed the effect of HCV core (HCV-Co) protein on expression 
of IFN-induced antiviral genes.
METHODS: HepG2 cells were transfected with the plasmid pHCV-Co, and, after
treatment with IFN-alpha , levels of MxA, protein kinase R (PKR), and 2'-5'
oligoadenylate synthetase (2'-5'OAS) mRNA were determined. Chloramphenycol
acethyl transferase (CAT) analysis was performed on cells cotransfected with
pHCV-Co and pMx4CAT (containing the MxA gene promoter) and treated with IFN.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used, and Western-blot analysis of
STAT 1 and 2 was performed.
RESULTS: Levels of MxA mRNA in pHCV-Co-transfected cells decreased in a
dose-dependent manner, by down-regulation of the MxA gene promoter. HCV-Co
protein inhibits binding of IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) to the
IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE). Intracellular distribution of STAT 1 and 
2 was not modified after treatment with IFN. Expression of HCV-Co protein also
results in down-regulation of expression of PKR and 2'-5'OAS genes.
CONCLUSION: HCV-Co protein inhibits IFN-alpha-induced transcription of antiviral 
genes by decreasing binding of ISGF3 to the ISRE.

PMID: 15593009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Sci STKE. 2004 Nov 23;2004(260):tr10.

The Jak-STAT pathway stimulated by interferon alpha or interferon beta.

Horvath CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Evanston Northwestern Healthcare Research Institute,
IL 60208, USA. curt.horvath@mssm.edu <curt.horvath@mssm.edu>

Type I interferons, such as interferon alpha and interferon beta (IFN-alpha and
beta), signal through a Janus kinase (Jak) to signal transduction and activator
of transcription (STAT) pathway to stimulate gene expression. In response to
ligand binding, the receptors dimerize, Jaks phosphorylate STAT1 and STAT2, which
then dimerize and interact with a third transcriptional regulator IFN regulatory 
factor 9 (IRF9) to stimulate gene expression. IFN-alpha is the main innate
antiviral cytokine and is essential for effective immune response to viral
infection. The animation shows activation of STAT-responsive gene expression in
response to type I IFNs.

PMID: 15561979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Neurol. 2004 Oct;251(10):1215-9.

Suppression of immune system genes by methylprednisolone in exacerbations of
multiple sclerosis. Preliminary results.

Airla N(1), Luomala M, Elovaara I, Kettunen E, Knuutila S, Lehtimäki T.

Author information: 
(1)Tampere University Hospital, Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Laboratory of
Atherosclerosis Genetics Finn-Medi 2, 3rd Floor, P. O. Box 2000, 33521 Tampere,
Finland. nina.airla@uta.fi

Acute relapses of multiple sclerosis (MS) are treated with intravenous
methylprednisolone (IVMP), which speeds recovery from exacerbation. It is known
that IVMP suppresses the immunological activation which occurs during an acute
attack of MS. However, the specific target genes affected by this therapy remain 
obscure. A cDNA microarray for 448 genes was used to identify the target genes in
IVMP therapy. Total RNA was isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells
derived from six MS patients immediately before and after completion of therapy. 
IVMP significantly reduced mRNA levels for T-cell-specific transcription factor 7
(p=0.02), T-cell-specific protein-tyrosine kinase (p=0.02), T-cell surface
glycoprotein CD5 (p=0.05) and interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 gamma subunit
(p=0.04). Significantly increased expression was found for eosinophil-derived
neurotoxin (p=0.05). The suppression of expression of genes associated with
T-cell differentiation and antigen-specific T-cell activation detected in this
study may contribute to the beneficial effect of MP in relapses of MS.

PMID: 15503100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Gastroenterology. 2004 Sep;127(3):937-49.

PTF1alpha/p48 transcription factor couples proliferation and differentiation in
the exocrine pancreas [corrected].

Rodolosse A(1), Chalaux E, Adell T, Hagège H, Skoudy A, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Barcelona, Spain.

Erratum in
    Gastroenterology. 2004 Nov;127(5):1651.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor
pancreas-specific transcription factor 1alpha (PTF1alpha)/p48 is critical for
committing cells to a pancreatic fate and for the maintenance of the
differentiated state in acinar cells. The aim was to analyze the ability of p48
to modulate cell proliferation, its relationship with cell differentiation, and
the mechanisms involved therein.
METHODS: Pancreatic and nonpancreatic cells were transfected with p48 cDNA, and
the effects on cell proliferation were examined. The effects on cell cycle
regulators were analyzed by Western blotting and RT-PCR; transient transfection
assays were used to analyze promoter regulation.
RESULTS: p48 Inhibited proliferation of acinar and nonacinar cells by inducing a 
delay in G1-S progression through the up-regulation of p21 CIP1/WAF1 and p27 KIP1
and the down-regulation of cyclin D2. A 2-fold increase in p21 CIP1/WAF1 mRNA and
in the activity of the p21 CIP1/WAF1 promoter was observed. The growth inhibition
action of p48 was not associated with exocrine differentiation or with apoptosis.
The antiproliferative effects were dependent on the COOH-terminal region of p48
and did not require the bHLH domain. Loss of p48 expression occurring during
acinar-to-ductal transitions, characteristic of chronic pancreatitis, was
associated with an increase of cell proliferation in ductal complexes.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that p48 couples cell proliferation and cell
differentiation in the exocrine pancreas, thus contributing to tissue
homeostasis. These effects may play a role in the increased risk for pancreatic
cancer associated with chronic pancreatitis.

PMID: 15362048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2004 Aug;24(8):470-7.

A novel method for screening viral interferon-resistance genes.

Clarke DT(1), Irving AT, Lambley EH, Payne E, McMillan NA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Cancer Research, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia.

Many viruses have evolved mechanisms to antagonize the interferon (IFN) system,
targeting all the major components involved in receptor binding and signaling.
Although a number of these vital proteins are homologous to cellular proteins
involved in IFN downregulation (e.g., viral IFN regulatory factors [vIRFs]), many
share little resemblance to known proteins. To determine the IFN-blocking
properties of these proteins, functional assays are required. Here, we present a 
new and rapid functional screening method, based on the 2fTGH cell line, which is
able to determine viral gene products that inhibit the IFN-alpha/Jak-Stat
signaling pathway. Expression cloning of viral IFN-blocking genes into 2fTGH and 
consequent selection with IFN-alpha and 6-thioguanine result in the outgrowth of 
cells that are no longer responsive to IFN-alpha. We also demonstrate that
selection occurs if members of the Jak-Stat signaling pathway are lost. To show
the utility of our system, we have used a known suppressor of IFN signaling, the 
human papillomavirus (HPV) E7 gene. Expression of E7 causes the loss of ability
of 2fTGH cells to respond to IFN-alpha treatment because of a functional
disruption of the signaling pathway. This approach offers a new strategy for
identifying novel viral genes or new functions of already described viral genes
that have a role in IFN-alpha signaling inhibition.

PMID: 15320960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Jun 29;101(26):9578-83. Epub 2004 Jun 21.

Induction of interferon-stimulated gene expression and antiviral responses
require protein deacetylase activity.

Chang HM(1), Paulson M, Holko M, Rice CM, Williams BR, Marié I, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and NYU Cancer Institute, New York University School
of Medicine, 550 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016,USA.

Histone deacetylase (HDAC) activity, commonly correlated with transcriptional
repression, was essential for transcriptional induction of IFN-stimulated genes
(ISG). Inhibition of HDAC function led to global impairment of ISG expression,
with little effect on basal expression. HDAC function was not required for signal
transducer and activator of transcription tyrosine phosphorylation, nuclear
translocation, or assembly on chromatin, but it was needed for full activity of
the signal transducer and activator of transcription transactivation domain. HDAC
function was also required for gene induction driven by the IFN regulatory factor
3 transcription factor activated by virus infection, and it was essential for
establishment of an antiviral response against Flaviviridae, Rhabdoviridae, and
Picornaviridae. Requirement for HDAC function in transcriptional activation may
represent a general mechanism for rapid stimulation of ISG transcription.

PMCID: PMC470717
PMID: 15210966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 24;279(39):40362-7. Epub 2004 Jun 11.

Histone deacetylase activity is required to recruit RNA polymerase II to the
promoters of selected interferon-stimulated early response genes.

Sakamoto S(1), Potla R, Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

Posttranslational modification of histones by acetylation, methylation or
phosphorylation has emerged as a major mechanism to modify chromatin structure
and gene expression. In most cases, transcriptionally active genes display
enhanced binding of acetylated histones in their promoters. Activation of histone
acetyltransferases or inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) allows chromatin
to assume a more open state permitting transcriptional activators to form a
preinitiation complex. To our surprise, treatment of cells with the HDAC
inhibitor, trichostatin A (TSA), inhibits selected interferon beta
(IFNbeta)-stimulated immediate early genes that are activated by the
transcription factors Stat1 and Stat2. However, IFNbeta activation of IRF-1,
which requires tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat1 homodimers binding to a gamma
interferon activation sequence in its promoter is not affected by TSA. Exposure
of cells to TSA does not alter tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat1 or Stat2. TSA
treatment of cells also does not alter the binding of Stat 1 or Stat2 to the
endogenous ISG54 promoter. However, IFNbeta-stimulated binding of RNA polymerase 
II to the ISG54 promoter is prevented by TSA. Interestingly, ectopic expression
of IRF9 reverses the inhibitory actions of TSA, suggesting that IRF9 functions to
recruit RNA polymerase II to the promoter of interferon-stimulated genes. This
particular function of IRF9 requires the activity of histone deacetylases.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMID: 15194680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Immunol. 2004 Jun 15;172(12):7368-76.

IL-12 pretreatments enhance IFN-alpha-induced Janus kinase-STAT signaling and
potentiate the antitumor effects of IFN-alpha in a murine model of malignant
melanoma.

Lesinski GB(1), Badgwell B, Zimmerer J, Crespin T, Hu Y, Abood G, Carson WE 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Cancer Genetics, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH
43210, USA.

IFN-alpha 2b (IFN-alpha) has been used to treat patients with metastatic
malignant melanoma and patients rendered disease-free via surgery but at high
risk for recurrence. We hypothesized that IL-12 pretreatments would result in
endogenous IFN-gamma production, and that this, in turn, would up-regulate levels
of Janus kinase-STAT signaling intermediates and lead to increased expression of 
genes regulated by IFN-alpha. Treatment of PBMCs with IL-12 stimulated a
significant and dose-dependent production of IFN-gamma. Pretreatment of PBMCs and
tumor cells with IFN-gamma-containing supernatants from IL-12-stimulated PBMCs
led to up-regulation of STAT1, STAT2, and IFN regulatory factor 9 (IRF9) and
potentiated IFN-alpha-induced STAT signaling within PBMCs and tumor cells. These 
effects were abrogated by neutralization of IFN-gamma in the PBMC supernatants
with an anti-IFN-gamma Ab. Pretreatment of HT144 melanoma cells and PBMCs with
IFN-gamma or IFN-gamma-containing supernatants enhanced the actions of IFN-alpha 
at the transcriptional level, as measured by real-time RT PCR analysis of the
IFN-stimulated gene 15. Experiments in wild-type C57BL/6 and IFN-gamma receptor
knockout (B6.129S7-Ifngr(tm1Agt)) mice demonstrated that a regimen of IL-12
pretreatment, followed by IFN-alpha, could cure mice of i.p. B16F1 melanoma
tumors (p < 0.007), whereas mice treated with either agent alone or PBS succumbed
to fatal tumor burden. However, this treatment regimen did not significantly
prolong the survival of IFN-gamma-deficient (B6.129S7-Ifng(tm1Ts)) mice compared 
with mice treated with IFN-alpha alone. These results suggest that the response
to IFN-alpha immunotherapy can be significantly enhanced by IL-12 pretreatment,
and this effect is dependent upon endogenous IFN-gamma production and its actions
on melanoma cells.

PMID: 15187113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2004 Sep 17;279(38):39199-206. Epub 2004 Jun 1.

STAT2 nuclear trafficking.

Banninger G(1), Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics, Stony Brook University, New York 11794-8691,
USA.

STAT2 is a transcription factor critical to the signal transduction pathway of
type I interferons (e.g. IFNalpha). STAT2 resides primarily in the cytoplasm and 
is tyrosine-phosphorylated after IFNalpha binds to cell surface receptors. In
response to tyrosine phosphorylation STAT2 rapidly localizes to the nucleus and
acquires the ability to bind specific DNA targets in association with two other
proteins, STAT1 and IFN regulatory factor-9 (IRF-9). To elucidate the mechanisms 
that regulate cellular localization of STAT2, we investigated STAT2 nuclear
trafficking both prior to tyrosine phosphorylation and after phosphorylation.
Prior to phosphorylation, STAT2 is primarily resident in the cytoplasm, however, 
we found that it dynamically shuttles between nuclear and cytoplasmic
compartments. The nuclear translocation of latent unphosphorylated STAT2 was
found to be dependent on its constitutive association with IRF-9, and the export 
of STAT2 from the nucleus was contingent upon the function of an intrinsic
nuclear export signal within the carboxyl terminus of STAT2. STAT2 export could
be inhibited with leptomycin B, indicating a nuclear export signal within STAT2
is recognized by the CRM1 exportin carrier. In contrast, following tyrosine
phosphorylation, STAT2 dimerizes with phosphorylated STAT1 and accumulates in the
nucleus. In the absence of STAT1, STAT2 does not accumulate in the nucleus. In
addition, subsequent to nuclear import of phosphorylated STAT2, it redistributes 
to the cytoplasm within an hour coordinate with its dephosphorylation in the
nucleus. The regulation of STAT2 nuclear trafficking is distinct from the
previously characterized STAT1 factor.

PMID: 15175343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Liver Int. 2004 Apr;24(2):149-60.

Study of the effects of interferon a on several human hepatoma cell lines:
analysis of the signalling pathway of the cytokine and of its effects on
apoptosis and cell proliferation.

Legrand A(1), Vadrot N, Lardeux B, Bringuier AF, Guillot R, Feldmann G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, Unité 481 INSERM, Faculté de Médecine
Xavier Bichat, Université Paris 7, France.

BACKGROUND: Interferon alpha (IFNalpha), currently used for the treatment of
chronic viral hepatitis, is also known to prevent the development of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), the mechanism of this action being still
debatable.
AIMS: To study thoroughly in human hepatoma cell lines (HHL)--Hep3B, HepG2, HuH7,
SKHep1, and Chang-Liver--submitted to rhIFNalpha, the signalling pathway of
IFNalpha, the binding activity of the cytokine on specific gamma-activated
sequence (GAS) and interferon-stimulated regulatory element (ISRE) nuclear
sequences, and its effects on apoptosis and cell proliferation.
METHODS: The behaviour of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)1, STAT2, p48(IRF9) and the binding of nuclear proteins were investigated
by immunoblot and electro-mobility shift assay. Expression of some
IFNalpha-dependent proteins--p21/(WAF1), inducible nitric oxide synthase, IRF1
and 2--were studied by immunoblot. Apoptosis and the cell cycle were studied by
morphological and biochemical methods.
RESULTS: Transduction of INFalpha was unaltered, although there were some
variations in the different HHL. Nuclear protein binding to GAS or ISRE showed
that ISRE was mainly involved. Apoptosis did not occur. The cell cycle was
slightly modified in HuH7. Three GAS- and/or ISRE-dependent proteins increased,
suggesting that IFNalpha may have some biological effects on HHL.
CONCLUSIONS: The IFNalpha signalling pathway is functional in several HHL, but
the cytokine has no apoptotic effect and a moderate anti-proliferative effect.
This suggests that the preventive role of IFNalpha on HCC cannot be explained by 
an apoptotic and/or an anti-proliferative effect, but possibly by its action on
several specific nuclear sequences that protect liver cells from transformation.

Copyright Blackwell Munksgaard 2004

PMID: 15078480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Virol. 2004 Apr;78(8):4185-96.

Herpes simplex virus 1 gene products occlude the interferon signaling pathway at 
multiple sites.

Chee AV(1), Roizman B.

Author information: 
(1)The Marjorie B. Kovler Viral Oncology Laboratories, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Earlier studies have shown that herpes simplex virus 1 (HSV-1) blocks the
interferon response pathways, at least at two sites, by circumventing the effects
of activation of protein kinase R by double-stranded RNA and interferon and
through the degradation of promyelocytic leukemia protein (PML) since interferon 
has no antiviral effects in PML(-/-) cells. Here we report on two effects of
viral genes on other sites of the interferon signaling pathway. (i) In infected
cells, Jak1 kinase associated with interferon receptors and Stat2 associated with
the interferon signaling pathway rapidly disappear from infected cells. The level
of interferon alpha receptor is also reduced, albeit less drastically at times
after 4 h postinfection. Other members of the Stat family of proteins were either
decreased in amount or posttranslationally processed in a manner different from
those of mock-infected cells. The decrease in the levels of Jak1 and Stat2 may
account for the decrease in the formation of complexes consisting of Stat1 or
ISGF3 and DNA sequences containing the interferon-stimulated response elements
after exposure to interferon. (ii) The disappearance of Jak1 and Stat2 was
related at least in part to the function of the virion host shutoff protein, the 
product of the viral U(L)41 gene. Consistent with this observation, a mutant
lacking the U(L)41 gene and treated with interferon produced lesser amounts of a 
late protein (U(L)38) than the wild-type parent. We conclude that HSV-1 blocks
the interferon signaling pathways at several sites.

PMCID: PMC374303
PMID: 15047834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Infect Immun. 2004 Mar;72(3):1291-7.

Exogenous gamma and alpha/beta interferon rescues human macrophages from cell
death induced by Bacillus anthracis.

Gold JA(1), Hoshino Y, Hoshino S, Jones MB, Nolan A, Weiden MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Sackler Institute of
Biomedical Studies, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New York
10016, USA.

During the recent bioterrorism-related outbreaks, inhalational anthrax had a 45% 
mortality in spite of appropriate antimicrobial therapy, underscoring the need
for better adjuvant therapies. The variable latency between exposure and
development of disease suggests an important role for the host's innate immune
response. Alveolar macrophages are likely the first immune cells exposed to
inhalational anthrax, and the interferon (IFN) response of these cells comprises 
an important arm of the host innate immune response to intracellular infection
with Bacillus anthracis. Furthermore, IFNs have been used as immunoadjuvants for 
treatment of another intracellular pathogen, Mycobacterium tuberculosis. We
established a model of B. anthracis infection with the Sterne strain (34F(2))
which contains lethal toxin (LeTx). 34F(2) was lethal to murine and human
macrophages. Treatment with IFNs significantly improved cell viability and
reduced the number of germinated intracellular spores. Infection with 34F(2)
failed to induce the latent transcription factors signal transducer and
activators of transcription 1 (STAT1) and ISGF-3, which are central to the IFN
response. Furthermore, 34F(2) reduced STAT1 activation in response to exogenous
alpha/beta IFN, suggesting direct inhibition of IFN signaling. Even though 34F(2)
has LeTx, there was no mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 3 cleavage and p38
was normally induced, suggesting that these early effects of B. anthracis
infection in macrophages are independent of LeTx. These data suggest an important
role for both IFNs in the control of B. anthracis and the potential benefit of
using exogenous IFN as an immunoadjuvant therapy.

PMCID: PMC356021
PMID: 14977930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Jan;122(1):51-60.

In psoriasis lesional skin the type I interferon signaling pathway is activated, 
whereas interferon-alpha sensitivity is unaltered.

van der Fits L(1), van der Wel LI, Laman JD, Prens EP, Verschuren MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. c.vanderfits@erasmusmc.nl

Erratum in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2004 Aug;123(2):415.

The epidermal phenotype as observed in psoriatic skin results from inflammation
and abnormal proliferation and terminal differentiation of keratinocytes. Mice
deficient for interferon regulatory factor-2, a repressor of interferon
signaling, display psoriasis-like skin inflammation. The development of this
phenotype is strictly dependent on type I interferon (interferon-alpha/beta)
signaling. The aim of this study was to assess the involvement of
interferon-alpha/beta in the pathogenesis of human psoriasis. In psoriatic skin, 
we measured an increased expression of components that play central and crucial
roles in interferon-alpha/beta signal transduction. Culturing keratinocytes or
healthy skin biopsies with recombinant interferon-alpha stimulated this signaling
pathway; however, this did not induce the expression of markers that are
generally used to define the psoriasis phenotype. Furthermore, skin from
psoriasis patients responded identically to interferon-alpha stimulation,
demonstrating that psoriatic skin does not have an aberrant sensitivity to type I
interferon. We conclude that in psoriatic lesional skin the type I interferon
signaling pathway is activated, despite an unaltered interferon-alpha
sensitivity. Our data furthermore show that type I interferon, in contrast to
interferon-gamma, does not act directly on keratinocytes to induce a psoriatic
phenotype. Thus, if the observed activated type I interferon signaling is indeed 
functionally involved in the pathogenesis of psoriasis, its contribution might be
indirect, putatively involving other cell types besides keratinocytes.

PMID: 14962089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Seikagaku. 2003 Dec;75(12):1535-40.

[Signaling mechanism in the regulation of osteoclast differentiation by the
immune system].

[Article in Japanese]

Takayanagi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Physiological Chemistry, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University and COE Program, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8549, Japan.

PMID: 14748148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Virol. 2004 Feb;78(4):1706-17.

Innate cellular response to virus particle entry requires IRF3 but not virus
replication.

Collins SE(1), Noyce RS, Mossman KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada L8N 3Z5.

Mammalian cells respond to virus infections by eliciting both innate and adaptive
immune responses. One of the most effective innate antiviral responses is the
production of alpha/beta interferon and the subsequent induction of
interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs), whose products collectively limit virus
replication and spread. Following viral infection, interferon is produced in a
biphasic fashion that involves a number of transcription factors, including the
interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) 1, 3, 7, and 9. In addition, virus infection
has been shown to directly induce ISGs in the absence of prior interferon
production through the activation of IRF3. This process is believed to require
virus replication and results in IRF3 hyperphosphorylation, nuclear localization,
and proteasome-mediated degradation. Previously, we and others demonstrated that 
herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) induces ISGs and an antiviral response in
fibroblasts in the absence of both interferon production and virus replication.
In this report, we show that the entry of enveloped virus particles from diverse 
virus families elicits a similar innate response. This process requires IRF3, but
not IRF1, IRF7, or IRF9. Following virus replication, the large DNA viruses HSV-1
and vaccinia virus effectively inhibit ISG mRNA accumulation, whereas the small
RNA viruses Newcastle disease virus, Sendai virus, and vesicular stomatitis virus
do not. In addition, we found that IRF3 hyperphosphorylation and degradation do
not correlate with ISG and antiviral state induction but instead serve as a
hallmark of productive virus replication, particularly following a
high-multiplicity infection. Collectively, these data suggest that virus entry
triggers an innate antiviral response mediated by IRF3 and that subsequent virus 
replication results in posttranslational modification of IRF3, such as
hyperphosphorylation, depending on the nature of the incoming virus.

PMCID: PMC369475
PMID: 14747536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Oncogene. 2004 Mar 4;23(9):1693-703.

Differential protein synthesis and expression levels in normal and neoplastic
human prostate cells and their regulation by type I and II interferons.

Nagano K(1), Masters JR, Akpan A, Yang A, Corless S, Wood C, Hastie C, Zvelebil
M, Cramer R, Naaby-Hansen S.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Royal Free and University College London
Medical School, London, UK.

Protein expression and de novo synthesis in normal and prostate cancer cell lines
derived from the same patient were compared by proteomic analysis, and the
effects of INFalpha and INFgamma (INF=interferon) determined. The expressions of 
several INF-inducible proteins, including MxA, Nmi, PA28a and IFP53, were
downregulated in the cancer cells. INFgamma induced a more than twofold increase 
or decrease in the synthesis rates of almost twice as many proteins in the cancer
cell line. The positive regulator of INF-induced transcription ISGF3gamma was
upregulated in the cancer cells and inversely regulated by INFalpha and INFgamma 
in the normal and cancer cells. Moreover, ISGF3gamma's induction by INFgamma in
the cancer cells was more enhanced by simultaneous stimulation with EGF, than its
induction in the normal cells. In all, 31 differentially regulated proteins were 
identified by mass spectrometry analysis, several of which are involved in
chaperone-assisted protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) or in
regulated protein degradation. Our results suggest that the exclusion of proteins
by the ER quality control system, crosstalk between the EGF- and INF-induced
signalling pathways and the regulation of INF-inducible genes are all altered in 
the prostate cancer cells. The combination of upregulated activity in the
growth-promoting PI3K/Akt pathway, suppression of Nmi and overexpression of
hnRNP-K and c-myc proteins may explain why the prostate cancer cells were found
to be more resistant to the growth inhibitory effects of INFgamma.

PMID: 14647428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Dec 9;100(25):14742-7. Epub 2003 Nov 25.

Interferon-stimulated transcription and innate antiviral immunity require
deacetylase activity and histone deacetylase 1.

Nusinzon I(1), Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy
Place, Box 1630, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The use of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors has revealed an essential role
for deacetylation in transcription of IFN-responsive genes. The HDAC1 protein
associates with both signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1
and STAT2, and IFN-alpha stimulation induces deacetylation of histone H4.
Inhibition of HDAC1 by small interfering RNA (siRNA) decreases IFN-alpha
responsiveness whereas expression of HDAC1 augments the IFN-alpha response,
demonstrating that HDAC1 modulates IFN-alpha-induced transcription. Importantly, 
the innate antiviral response is inhibited in the absence of deacetylase
activity. The requirement for deacetylase is shared by IFN-gamma transcription
response and may represent a general requirement for STAT-dependent gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC299790
PMID: 14645718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 30;279(5):3245-53. Epub 2003 Nov 4.

Cells previously desensitized to type 1 interferons display different mechanisms 
of activation of stat-dependent gene expression from naïve cells.

Sakamoto S(1), Qin J, Navarro A, Gamero A, Potla R, Yi T, Zhu W, Baker DP,
Feldman G, Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA.

Over the past decade, a wealth of knowledge has been obtained concerning the
mechanisms by which interferons (IFNs) and other cytokines activate or
down-regulate immediate early genes via the Jak/Stat pathway. In contrast, little
information is available on interferon-activated gene expression in naïve cells
compared with cells that have been desensitized and subsequently resensitized to 
the actions of these cytokines. In naïve cells, the ISG54 gene is activated via
IFN beta-stimulated formation of ISGF3, a heterotrimeric DNA binding complex
consisting of p48 (IRF9) and tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat1 and Stat2. In
contrast, in previously desensitized cells IFN beta weakly stimulates the
assembly of an ISGF3-like complex that lacks Stat1, even though ISG54 mRNA
induction is the same as in naïve cells. The lack of Stat1 tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA binding is due to increased activity of a
protein-tyrosine phosphatase. In cells that do not express the tyrosine
phosphatase Tc-PTP, the rate of Stat1 dephosphorylation is the same in naïve and 
previously desensitized cells. These results implicate Tc-PTP in a novel role in 
the regulation of type 1 interferon-stimulated gene expression.

PMID: 14600148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Ryumachi. 2003 Oct;43(4):624-31.

[Crosstalk between the immune and skeletal system].

[Article in Japanese]

Takayanagi H.

PMID: 14598653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Gene. 2003 Oct 16;316:143-56.

Expression regulation and genomic organization of human polynucleotide
phosphorylase, hPNPase(old-35), a Type I interferon inducible early response
gene.

Leszczyniecka M(1), Su ZZ, Kang DC, Sarkar D, Fisher PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Herbert Irving
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University, 630 West 168th Street, New
York, NY 10032, USA.

An overlapping pathway screening (OPS) approach designed to identify and clone
genes displaying parallel expression profiles as a function of induction of
terminal differentiation and cellular senescence in human cells identified a
novel gene old-35. Sequence and functional analysis indicates that old-35 encodes
human polynucleotide phosphorylase, hPNPase(old-35). Polynucleotide
phosphorylases comprise a family of phosphate dependent 3'-5' RNA exonucleases
implicated in RNA regulation. Treatment of HO-1 human melanoma and additional
diverse normal and tumor-derived human cell types with Type I interferon (IFN),
IFN-beta or IFN-alpha, induces hPNPase(old-35) expression. To provide insights
into the regulation of hPNPase(old-35), we cloned and analyzed the promoter
region of this gene. These studies demonstrate that IFN-beta controls
hPNPase(old-35) expression by transcriptional modulation rather than by altering 
mRNA stability. Transcriptional activation of hPNPase(old-35) by IFN-beta is
primarily mediated by the interferon stimulatory response element (ISRE) present 
in its promoter. Analysis of hPNPase(old-35) expression in cell lines defective
in various IFN signaling molecules confirms that hPNPase(old-35) expression is
dependent upon the Janus activated kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators
of transcription (STAT) pathway. Furthermore, gel shift analyses document that
hPNPase(old-35) is a direct target of the interferon stimulated gene factor 3
(ISGF3) complex. The hPNPase(old-35) gene spans approximately 54 kb of genomic
DNA and is distributed on 28 exons and 27 introns. hPNPase(old-35) maps to
2p15-2p16.1, a region implicated in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer,
Carney complex, Doyne's honeycomb retinal dystrophy and several other diseases.
To provide insights into PNPase function in vivo, we have also cloned the mouse
PNPase(old-35) cDNA, mPNPase(old-35). Induction of hPNPase(old-35) by IFN
treatment as well as during differentiation and senescence suggest that this gene
may play a significant role in regulating cellular growth and that overlapping
gene expression changes, also induced by IFN, may contribute to these important
physiological processes.

PMID: 14563561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 21;278(47):46278-87. Epub 2003 Sep 12.

Oncogenic Ki-ras inhibits the expression of interferon-responsive genes through
inhibition of STAT1 and STAT2 expression.

Klampfer L(1), Huang J, Corner G, Mariadason J, Arango D, Sasazuki T, Shirasawa
S, Augenlicht L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Albert Einstein Cancer Center, Montefiore Medical
Center, 111 E. 210th Street, Bronx, NY 10467, USA. lklampf@aecom.yu.edu

Endogenous interferon gamma (IFNgamma) promotes the host response to primary
tumors, and IFNgamma-insensitive tumors display increased tumorigenicity and can 
evade tumor surveillance mechanisms. Here we demonstrate that activating
mutations of Ki-ras are sufficient to inhibit the expression of STAT1 and STAT2, 
transcription factors required for signaling by IFNs, providing a potential
mechanism for the insensitivity of tumors to IFNs. We demonstrated that colon
cancer cell lines with Ki-ras mutations display reduced expression of
IFN-responsive genes compared with the cell lines that have retained wild type
Ras and that inactivation of the mutant Ki-ras allele in the HCT116 colon cancer 
cell line is sufficient to restore the expression of STAT1, STAT2, and IRF-9.
Accordingly, the expression of 27 interferon-inducible genes was reduced in
HCT116 cells compared with the isogenic clones with targeted deletion of the
mutant Ki-ras allele, Hkh2 and Hke-3. The expression of IFNgamma receptors did
not differ among the isogenic cell lines. IFNgamma stimulated transcription of a 
STAT1-dependent reporter gene was impaired by RasV12, demonstrating a
transmodulation of IFN/STAT signaling by activated Ras. Finally, we demonstrated 
that the expression of RasV12 in 293T cells is sufficient to inhibit the
endogenous expression of STAT1 and STAT2, confirming the negative regulation of
IFN signaling by oncogenic Ras. Our data demonstrate that the signaling initiated
by activated Ki-ras interferes with the IFN/STAT signaling pathway and modulates 
the responsiveness of cancer cells to interferons. Furthermore, the data suggest 
that tumors harboring activating Ki-ras mutations may escape tumor surveillance
mechanisms due to reduced responsiveness to IFNgamma.

PMID: 12972432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Virology. 2003 Sep 1;313(2):553-66.

The PKR kinase promoter binds both Sp1 and Sp3, but only Sp3 functions as part of
the interferon-inducible complex with ISGF-3 proteins.

Ward SV(1), Samuel CE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Barbara 93106, USA.

The protein kinase regulated by RNA (PKR) is an important mediator of the
antiviral and antiproliferative actions of interferon (IFN). The promoter of the 
PKR gene contains a novel 15-bp element designated KCS that is required for both 
basal and IFN-inducible transcription, with KCS function dependent upon both
position and orientation relative to the ISRE element. Novel inducible protein
complexes (iKIBP1, iKIBP2) that require both the KCS and the ISRE element
sequences for their formation have been identified and characterized.
Transcription factors Sp1 and Sp3 were found to be KCS-binding proteins by
electrophoretic mobility shift analyses (EMSA) and Sepharose bead-KCS
oligonucleotide pull-down assays. However, only Sp3 but not Sp1 was a constituent
of the inducible iKIBP complexes. EMSA also identified STAT1, STAT2, and IRF-9 as
components of the iKIBP complexes, indicating that ISGF-3 participates in iKIBP
complex formation. Proteins bound at the KCS element in the absence of ISRE were 
able to recruit both STAT1 and STAT2 to the KCS element; recruitment was
dependent upon IFN-alpha treatment. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays revealed
that the binding of Sp3, similar to STAT1 and STAT2, at the PKR promoter in vivo 
was IFN-dependent, but that Sp1 binding was not dependent upon IFN treatment.
These results, taken together, strongly suggest a role for Sp1 in basal and Sp3
in inducible transcription of PKR and that a potential function of the KCS
element is to facilitate the recruitment of ISGF-3 complex components to the PKR 
promoter to stimulate transcription.

PMID: 12954221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nature. 2003 Jul 31;424(6948):516-23.

Integration of interferon-alpha/beta signalling to p53 responses in tumour
suppression and antiviral defence.

Takaoka A(1), Hayakawa S, Yanai H, Stoiber D, Negishi H, Kikuchi H, Sasaki S,
Imai K, Shibue T, Honda K, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine and Graduate School of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Swift elimination of undesirable cells is an important feature in tumour
suppression and immunity. The tumour suppressor p53 and interferon-alpha and
-beta (IFN-alpha/beta) are essential for the induction of apoptosis in cancerous 
cells and in antiviral immune responses, respectively, but little is known about 
their interrelationship. Here we show that transcription of the p53 gene is
induced by IFN-alpha/beta, accompanied by an increase in p53 protein level.
IFN-alpha/beta signalling itself does not activate p53; rather, it contributes to
boosting p53 responses to stress signals. We show examples in which p53 gene
induction by IFN-alpha/beta contributes to tumour suppression. Furthermore, we
show that p53 is activated in virally infected cells to evoke an apoptotic
response and that p53 is critical for antiviral defence of the host. Our study
reveals a hitherto unrecognized link between p53 and IFN-alpha/beta in tumour
suppression and antiviral immunity, which may have therapeutic implications.

PMID: 12872134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cancer Lett. 2003 Jul 10;196(2):207-16.

Transcriptional upregulation of interferon-induced protein kinase, PKR, in breast
cancer.

Nussbaum JM(1), Major M, Gunnery S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, New Jersey Medical School,
UMDNJ, MSB, E609, 185 South Orange Avenue, Newark NJ 07103-2714, USA.

PKR (double-stranded RNA activated protein kinase) is overexpressed and
overactive in human breast carcinoma (BC) cells. Here, we report that BC cells
also have higher PKR mRNA levels and exhibit increased transcription from the PKR
promoter. Mutational analysis of the PKR promoter indicated that the interferon
stimulation response element (ISRE) is responsible for the increased
transcription in BC cells. By gel retardation assay, ISRE-protein complexes
formed by BC and non-transformed nuclear extracts were compared. A BC-specific
ISRE-protein complex resembles the multimeric factor, ISGF3.

PMID: 12860279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Virol. 2003 Jul;77(13):7635-44.

STAT protein interference and suppression of cytokine signal transduction by
measles virus V protein.

Palosaari H(1), Parisien JP, Rodriguez JJ, Ulane CM, Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Pl.,
Box 1630, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Measles virus, a paramyxovirus of the Morbillivirus genus, is responsible for an 
acute childhood illness that infects over 40 million people and leads to the
deaths of more than 1 million people annually (C. J. Murray and A. D. Lopez,
Lancet 349:1269-1276, 1997). Measles virus infection is characterized by
virus-induced immune suppression that creates susceptibility to opportunistic
infections. Here we demonstrate that measles virus can inhibit cytokine responses
by direct interference with host STAT protein-dependent signaling systems.
Expression of the measles V protein prevents alpha, beta, and gamma
interferon-induced transcriptional responses. Furthermore, it can interfere with 
signaling by interleukin-6 and the non-receptor tyrosine kinase, v-Src. Affinity 
purification demonstrates that the measles V protein associates with cellular
STAT1, STAT2, STAT3, and IRF9, as well as several unidentified partners.
Mechanistic studies indicate that while the measles V protein does not interfere 
with STAT1 or STAT2 tyrosine phosphorylation, it causes a defect in IFN-induced
STAT nuclear accumulation. The defective STAT nuclear redistribution is also
observed in measles virus-infected cells, where some of the STAT protein is
detected in cytoplasmic bodies that contain viral nucleocapsid protein and
nucleic acids. Interference with STAT-inducible transcription may provide a novel
intracellular mechanism for measles virus-induced cytokine inhibition that links 
innate immune evasion to adaptive immune suppression.

PMCID: PMC164804
PMID: 12805463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cancer Ther. 2003 May;2(5):453-9.

Dominant negative signal transducer and activator of transcription 2 (STAT2)
protein: stable expression blocks interferon alpha action in skin squamous cell
carcinoma cells.

Clifford JL(1), Yang X, Walch E, Wang M, Lippman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. jclifford@mdanderson.org

We have demonstrated previously that suppression of some or all of the
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF-3) proteins in skin squamous cell carcinomas
is an early event in squamous skin carcinogenesis. This finding led to the
hypothesis that suppressed expression of ISGF-3 proteins may lead to reduced IFN 
responsiveness, which in turn may contribute to skin malignancy by conferring a
growth and/or survival advantage. To test this hypothesis, we have developed a
skin cell-based model for inhibiting the IFN-alpha signaling pathway through the 
forced expression of a dominant negative-acting signal transducer and activator
of transcription 2 (dnSTAT2) protein. Expression of dnSTAT2 suppressed cell
growth inhibition with a pharmacologically achievable concentration (100 IU/ml)
of IFN-alpha in the IFN-alpha-sensitive skin squamous cell carcinoma cell line
SRB12-p9. dnSTAT2 also suppressed the IFN-alpha-induced phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1 and STAT2, which are early
events following IFN-alpha treatment, but did not suppress the IFN-gamma-induced 
phosphorylation of STAT1. Finally, the dnSTAT2 protein suppressed the
up-regulation of several IFN-alpha-inducible genes that were identified in this
system by cDNA microarray screening. We conclude that the cell growth-inhibitory 
effect of IFN-alpha in skin cells requires an intact STAT2 protein and is
therefore mediated by the ISGF-3 complex. These results support STAT2 as an
important molecular target for skin cancer chemoprevention. Furthermore, we
propose that these dnSTAT2-expressing cells provide a novel in vitro model for
the study of type I IFN action in human skin cells.

PMID: 12748307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Infect Immun. 2003 May;71(5):2487-97.

Inhibition of response to alpha interferon by Mycobacterium tuberculosis.

Prabhakar S(1), Qiao Y, Hoshino Y, Weiden M, Canova A, Giacomini E, Coccia E,
Pine R.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Research Institute, Newark, New Jersey 07103, USA.

We previously reported that infection by Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the
causative agent of tuberculosis, leads to secretion of alpha/beta interferon
(IFN-alpha/beta). While IFN-alpha/beta ordinarily stimulates formation of signal 
transducer and stimulator of transcription-1 (STAT-1) homodimers and
IFN-stimulated gene factor-3 (ISGF-3), only ISGF-3 is found in infected human
monocytes and macrophages. We have now investigated the basis for this unusual
profile of transcription factor activation and its consequences for regulation of
transcription, as well as the impact of infection on response to IFN-alpha. After
infection, IFN-alpha stimulation of STAT-1 homodimers is inhibited in monocytes
and macrophages, while stimulation of ISGF-3 increases in monocytes but tends to 
decline in macrophages. Effects of infection on the abundance of ISGF-3 subunits,
STAT-1, STAT-2, and interferon regulatory factor 9, and on tyrosine
phosphorylation of STAT-1 and STAT-2 explain the observed changes in DNA-binding 
activity, which correlate with increased or inhibited transcription of genes
regulated by ISGF-3 and STAT-1. Infection by Mycobacterium bovis BCG does not
inhibit IFN-alpha-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT-1, formation of
homodimers, or transcription of genes regulated by STAT-1 homodimers, suggesting 
that inhibition of the response to IFN-alpha/beta by M. tuberculosis is an aspect
of pathogenicity. Thus, this well-known feature of infection by pathogenic
viruses may also be a strategy employed by pathogenic bacteria.

PMCID: PMC153238
PMID: 12704120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Infect Immun. 2003 Apr;71(4):2058-64.

Recombinant gamma interferon stimulates signal transduction and gene expression
in alveolar macrophages in vitro and in tuberculosis patients.

Condos R(1), Raju B, Canova A, Zhao BY, Weiden M, Rom WN, Pine R.

Author information: 
(1)Bellevue Chest Service and Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine,
Department of Medicine, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Tuberculosis is the seventh leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the
world, with eight million cases per year. Animal and human studies demonstrate an
enrichment of CD4 cells at sites of disease, with a more favorable clinical
course when there is a Th1 response with the presence of gamma interferon
(IFN-gamma). We previously treated patients who had multidrug-resistant
tuberculosis with recombinant IFN-gamma (rIFN-gamma) in aerosol form and were
able to convert smear-positive cases to smear negative with 12 treatments over 1 
month. We hypothesized that rIFN-gamma would induce signal transducer and
activator of transcription (STAT) and interferon regulatory factor (IRF) binding 
activity in alveolar macrophages (AM). AM treated in vitro showed clear
upregulation of STAT-1 and IRF-1 by rIFN-gamma. STAT-1 was not activated and
IRF-1 was only weakly induced after 1 day of infection by Mycobacterium
tuberculosis TN913. In bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells obtained from 10 of 10 
tuberculosis patients 10 +/- 2 days post-antituberculosis treatment, there was no
detectable STAT-1 or IRF-1 DNA-binding activity. After 4 weeks of treatment with 
rIFN-gamma aerosol in addition to the antituberculosis drugs, 10 of 10 patients
had increased STAT-1, IRF-1, and/or IRF-9 DNA-binding activity in BAL cells from 
lung segments shown radiographically to be involved and in those shown to be
uninvolved. Symptoms and chest radiographs improved, and amounts of macrophage
inflammatory cytokines and human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) viral
loads (in five of five HIV-1-coinfected patients) declined in the second BAL
specimens. rIFN-gamma aerosol induces signal transduction and gene expression in 
BAL cells and should be evaluated for efficacy in a randomized, controlled
clinical trial.

PMCID: PMC152019
PMID: 12654826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Virology. 2003 Feb 1;306(1):135-46.

Measles virus suppresses interferon-alpha signaling pathway: suppression of Jak1 
phosphorylation and association of viral accessory proteins, C and V, with
interferon-alpha receptor complex.

Yokota S(1), Saito H, Kubota T, Yokosawa N, Amano K, Fujii N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Chuo-ku, 060-8556, Sapporo, Japan.

To establish infections, viruses use various strategies to suppress the host
defense mechanism, such as interferon (IFN)-induced antiviral state. We found
that cells infected with a wild strain of measles virus (MeV) displayed nearly
complete suppression of IFN-alpha-induced antiviral state, but not
IFN-gamma-induced state. This phenomenon is due to the suppression of
IFN-alpha-inducible gene expression at a transcriptional level. In the IFN-alpha 
signal transduction pathway, Jak1 phosphorylation induced by IFN-alpha is
dramatically suppressed in MeV-infected cells; however, phosphorylation induced
by IFN-gamma is not. We performed immunoprecipitation experiments using
antibodies against type 1 IFN receptor chain 1 (INFAR1) and antibody against
RACK1, which is reported to be a scaffold protein interacting with type I IFN
receptor chain 2 and STAT1. These experiments indicated that IFNAR1 forms a
complex containing the MeV-accessory proteins C and V, RACK1, and STAT1 in
MeV-infected cells but not in uninfected cells. Composition of this complex in
the infected cells altered little by IFN-alpha treatment. These results indicate 
that MeV suppresses the IFN-alpha, but not IFN-gamma, signaling pathway by
inhibition of Jak1 phosphorylation. Our data suggest that functional disorder of 
the type I IFN receptor complex is due to "freezing" of the receptor through its 
association with the C and/or V proteins of MeV.

PMID: 12620806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Biol Chem. 2003 Apr 11;278(15):13033-8. Epub 2003 Feb 5.

A hybrid IRF9-STAT2 protein recapitulates interferon-stimulated gene expression
and antiviral response.

Kraus TA(1), Lau JF, Parisien JP, Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Center, The Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Type I interferon (IFN) signaling induces the heterotrimeric transcription
complex, IFN-stimulated gene factor (ISGF) 3, which contains STAT1, STAT2, and
the DNA binding subunit, interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 9. Because IRF9 is
targeted to the nucleus in the absence of IFN stimulation, the potential of IRF9 
protein for gene regulation was examined using a GAL4 DNA binding domain fusion
system. GAL4-IRF9 was transcriptionally active in reporter gene assays but not in
the absence of cellular STAT1 and STAT2. However, the inert IRF9 protein was
readily converted to a constitutively active ISGF3-like activator by fusion with 
the C-terminal transcriptional activation domain of STAT2 or the acidic
activation domain of herpesvirus VP16. The IRF9 hybrids are targeted to
endogenous ISGF3 target loci and can activate their transcription. Moreover,
expression of the IRF9-STAT2 fusion can recapitulate the type I IFN biological
response, producing a cellular antiviral state that protects cells from
virus-induced cytopathic effects and inhibits virus replication. The antiviral
state generated by regulated IRF9-STAT2 hybrid protein expression is independent 
of autocrine IFN signaling and inhibits both RNA and DNA viruses.

PMID: 12574168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(2):620-8.

Role of metazoan mediator proteins in interferon-responsive transcription.

Lau JF(1), Nusinzon I, Burakov D, Freedman LP, Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Center, The Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

The interferon (IFN)-induced signal transduction and transcription activation
complex, ISGF3, is assembled from three proteins, STAT1, STAT2, and IRF9. Of
these components, STAT2 provides a fundamental and essential transcriptional
activation function for ISGF3. In the present study, we show that ISGF3-mediated 
transcription is dependent on STAT2 interactions with DRIP150, a subunit of the
multimeric Mediator coactivator complex. Other Mediator subunits, DRIP77 and
DRIP130, were found either to bind STAT2 without augmenting ISGF3 transcriptional
activity or to enhance ISGF3 transcription without binding STAT2, but only
DRIP150 both enhanced IFN-dependent transcription and coimmunoprecipitated with
STAT2. Endogenous DRIP150 and STAT2 were able to interact in solution, and DNA
affinity chromatography and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated
that DRIP150 binds to the mature, activated ISGF3-DNA complex and is recruited to
target gene promoters in an IFN-dependent fashion. IFN-dependent recruitment of
DRIP130 to an ISGF3 target promoter and SRB10-STAT2 coprecipitation suggest
indirect association with a multisubunit Mediator complex. The site of STAT2
interaction was mapped to DRIP150 residues 188 to 566, which are necessary and
sufficient for interaction with STAT2. Expression of this DRIP150 fragment, but
not DRIP150 fragments outside the STAT2 interaction region, suppressed
ISGF3-mediated transcriptional activity in a dominant-negative fashion,
suggesting a direct functional role of this domain in mediating STAT2-DRIP150
interactions. These findings indicate that the IFN-activated ISGF3 transcription 
factor regulates transcription through contact with DRIP150 and implicate the
Mediator coactivator complex in IFN-activated gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC151539
PMID: 12509459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Leukoc Biol. 2002 Nov;72(5):1011-9.

CpG-DNA-induced IFN-alpha production involves p38 MAPK-dependent STAT1
phosphorylation in human plasmacytoid dendritic cell precursors.

Takauji R(1), Iho S, Takatsuka H, Yamamoto S, Takahashi T, Kitagawa H, Iwasaki H,
Iida R, Yokochi T, Matsuki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine, Fukui Medical University, Yochida-gun, Japan.

Human plasmacytoid or CD4(+)CD11c(-) type 2 dendritic cell precursors (PDC) were 
identified as natural type I interferon (IFN)-producing cells in response to
viral and bacterial infection. They represent effector cells of innate immunity
and link it to the distinct adaptive immunity by differentiating into mature DC. 
It has been reported that oligodeoxyribonucleotides containing unmethylated CpG
motifs (CpG DNA) stimulate PDC to produce IFN-alpha, but the molecular mechanisms
involved remain unknown. We found that CpG-DNA-induced IFN-alpha production in
PDC was completely impaired by the inhibitor of the p38 mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathway. Expression of IFN regulatory factor (IRF)-7 was enhanced
by CpG-DNA treatment, which was preceded by the phosphorylation of signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)1 on Tyr-701, as well as its
enhanced phosphorylation on Ser-727. All of these events were also suppressed by 
the p38 MAPK inhibitor. STAT1, STAT2, and IRF-9, components of IFN-stimulated
gene factor 3 (ISGF3), were recognized in the nuclear fraction of CpG-DNA-treated
cells. Neither anti-IFN-alpha/beta antibodies (Ab) nor anti-IFNAR Ab suppressed
STAT1 phosphorylation, enhancement of IRF-7 expression, or IFN-alpha production
in the early phase of the culture. These results suggest that CpG DNA induces p38
MAPK-dependent phosphorylation of STAT1 in a manner independent of
IFN-alpha/beta, which may cause ISGF3 formation to increase the transcription of 
the IRF-7 gene, thereby leading to IFN-alpha production in human PDC.

PMID: 12429724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Infect Immun. 2002 Nov;70(11):6140-6.

Role of interferon-stimulated gene factor 3gamma and beta interferon in HLA class
I enhancement in synovial fibroblasts upon infection with Chlamydia trachomatis.

Rödel J(1), Vogelsang H, Prager K, Hartmann M, Schmidt KH, Straube E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology. Institute of Clinical Chemistry, Friedrich 
Schiller University of Jena, D-07740 Jena, Germany.
juergen.roedel@med.uni-jena.de

Chlamydia trachomatis infection can cause reactive arthritis that is associated
with the persistence of chlamydial organisms in the joint. Fibroblasts of the
synovial membrane represent host cells for Chlamydia during articular infection. 
In this study we investigated the expression of HLA class I molecules in synovial
fibroblasts following infection with C. trachomatis D. The expression of HLA
class I heavy chain (HLA-I) was up-regulated in infected cultures as shown by
reverse transcription-PCR and immunoblotting. The increase in cell surface
expression of HLA-I and beta(2) microglobulin on infected fibroblasts was
demonstrated by flow cytometric analysis. Suppression of enhanced production of
interferon-stimulated gene factor 3gamma (ISGF3gamma) in infected cell cultures
by antisense oligonucleotide treatment reduced the level of HLA-I. Blocking
antibodies to beta interferon (IFN-beta) inhibited the Chlamydia-induced
enhancement of both ISGF3gamma and HLA-I. These findings show that the
up-regulation of HLA-I in synovial fibroblasts infected with C. trachomatis is
caused by the induction of IFN-beta, which in turn stimulates the synthesis of
ISGF3gamma, a transcription factor participating in the regulation of the HLA-I
gene. The IFN-beta-mediated expression of HLA-I on Chlamydia-infected cells may
be a regulatory factor in the immune response in chlamydial infections.

PMCID: PMC130350
PMID: 12379691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Blood. 2002 Oct 15;100(8):2926-31.

Constitutive expression of SOCS3 confers resistance to IFN-alpha in chronic
myelogenous leukemia cells.

Sakai I(1), Takeuchi K, Yamauchi H, Narumi H, Fujita S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine,
Ehime, Japan. ikusakai@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

Because suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins are negative regulators 
of cytokine-induced signaling, it has been hypothesized that aberrant SOCS
expression confers resistance against cytokine therapy. This study reports on the
constitutive expression of SOCS3 in most chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cell 
lines, which are resistant to treatment with interferon alpha (IFN-alpha). In
contrast, the KT-1/A3 cell line, in which constitutive expression of SOCS3 is
barely detectable, is sensitive to IFN-alpha treatment. Forced expression of
SOCS3 in the KT-1/A3 cell line confers resistance to IFN-alpha treatment.
Furthermore, most of the blast cells from patients in CML blast crisis, which are
usually resistant to IFN-alpha therapy, showed constitutive expression of SOCS3. 
These findings indicate that constitutive SOCS3 expression affects the IFN-alpha 
sensitivity of CML cell lines and blast cells from patients with CML blast
crisis.

PMID: 12351404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Hepatol. 2002 Oct;37(4):493-9.

p48 Overexpression enhances interferon-mediated expression and activity of
double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase in human hepatoma cells.

Tamada Y(1), Nakao K, Nagayama Y, Nakata K, Ichikawa T, Kawamata Y, Ishikawa H,
Hamasaki K, Eguchi K, Ishii N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Nagasaki University, 1-7-1 Sakamoto,
Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) is a key
factor involved in interferon (IFN)-induced antiviral actions. Since p48,
together with signal transducers and activators of transcription 1 and 2 (STAT1
and STAT2), is an indispensable mediator in IFN-alpha signaling pathways, we
investigated the effect of p48 gene transduction on PKR expression and its
activity in HuH-7 human hepatoma cells.
METHODS: HuH-7 cells were infected or transfected with p48 gene expression
adenoviral vector or plasmid vector, respectively, and incubated with or without 
IFN-alpha, then PKR expression and phosphorylation of alpha-subunit of eukaryotic
protein synthesis initiation factor-2 (eIF2alpha) in the cells were examined. In 
addition, PKR activity inhibiting protein translation was determined by the
decrease of chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene translation or
alpha-fetoprotein secretion.
RESULTS: p48 overexpression itself could not stimulate PKR expression. However,
p48 overexpression in combination with interferon-alpha treatment caused a marked
increase in PKR expression and augmented the phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, by
which the transfected CAT gene translation, as well as the endogenous
alpha-fetoprotein synthesis, was blocked without affecting their mRNA levels.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that p48 gene transduction may provide a
strategy to enhance the IFN-mediated PKR expression and its activity in
hepatocytes.

PMID: 12217603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Clin Cancer Res. 2002 Jul;8(7):2067-72.

Suppression of type I interferon signaling proteins is an early event in squamous
skin carcinogenesis.

Clifford JL(1), Walch E, Yang X, Xu X, Alberts DS, Clayman GL, El-Naggar AK,
Lotan R, Lippman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA. jclifford@mdanderson.org

PURPOSE: IFN-based therapy has been shown to be active in the treatmentof
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of the skin, the most aggressive form of
non-melanoma skin cancer. Based largely on this activity, we began
programmatically examining the expression of IFN-stimulated gene factor 3
(ISGF-3) proteins (signal transducers and activators of transcription
1alpha/beta, signal transducers and activators of transcription 2, and p48),
which are important mediators of IFN-alpha signaling, in skin premalignancy and
SCC. Our previous preliminary studies suggested suppression of some or all of the
ISGF-3 proteins in skin SCC.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: To determine the timing of the suppression of IFN-alpha
signaling proteins in squamous skin carcinogenesis, we have now compared ISGF-3
expression by immunohistochemical staining in biopsies of actinic keratosis, a
form of skin premalignancy, and matched normal skin.
RESULTS: We observed a significant decrease in expression of one or more ISGF-3
proteins in 76% of patients with actinic keratosis (19 of 25 patients). In
addition, we found a suppression of one or more ISGF-3 proteins in 67% of skin
SCC patients tested (12 of 18 patients), confirming our previous observations.
CONCLUSIONS: These data have led to the hypothesis that the suppressed expression
of ISGF-3 proteins and consequent reduction in responsiveness to endogenous IFN
likely are an early event in skin carcinogenesis.

PMID: 12114405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Virol. 2002 Jul;76(14):7114-24.

The amino-terminal half of Sendai virus C protein is not responsible for either
counteracting the antiviral action of interferons or down-regulating viral RNA
synthesis.

Kato A(1), Ohnishi Y, Hishiyama M, Kohase M, Saito S, Tashiro M, Nagai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Vaccine Control, National Institute of
Infectious Diseases, Musashi-Murayama, Tokyo 208-0011, Japan. akato@nih.go.jp

The Sendai virus C proteins, C', C, Y1, and Y2, are a nested set of independently
initiated carboxy-coterminal proteins translated from a reading frame overlapping
the P frame on the P mRNA. The C proteins are extremely versatile and have been
shown to counteract the antiviral action of interferons (IFNs), to down-regulate 
viral RNA synthesis, and to promote virus assembly. Using the stable cell lines
expressing the C, Y1, Y2, or truncated C protein, we investigated the region
responsible for anti-IFN action and for down-regulating viral RNA synthesis.
Truncation from the amino terminus to the middle of the C protein maintained the 
inhibition of the signal transduction of IFNs, the formation of IFN-stimulated
gene factor 3 (ISGF3) complex, the generation of the anti-vesicular stomatitis
virus state, and the synthesis of viral RNA, but further truncation resulted in
the simultaneous loss of all of these inhibitory activities. A relatively small
truncation from the carboxy terminus also abolished all of these inhibitory
activities. These data indicated that the activities of the C protein to
counteract the antiviral action of IFNs and to down-regulate viral RNA synthesis 
were not encoded within a region of at least 98 amino acids in its amino-terminal
half.

PMCID: PMC136303
PMID: 12072511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 May;22(5):603-13.

Resistance to interferons in melanoma cells does not correlate with the
expression or activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1
(Stat1).

Chawla-Sarkar M(1), Leaman DW, Jacobs BS, Tuthill RJ, Chatterjee-Kishore M, Stark
GR, Borden EC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Drug Discovery and Development, Taussig Cancer Center, Cleveland,
OH 44195, USA.

Defects in expression or activation signal transducer and activator of
transcription-1 (Stat1) in response to interferon-alpha2 (IFN-alpha2) have been
implicated as a mechanism for IFN resistance in melanoma cells. To further
determine the significance of this observation, 17 melanoma cell lines sensitive 
or resistant to the antiproliferative effects of IFN-alpha2 and IFN-beta, as well
as 30 melanoma patient samples, were analyzed for Stat1 levels by either Western 
blot analysis or immunohistochemistry. Although the expression level varied
between samples, all the cell lines except one and all melanoma biopsy specimens 
expressed Stat1. IFN-stimulated levels of Stat1 and Stat2, which constitute the
transcriptional activation complexes, such as, gamma activated factor (GAF) and
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), for IFN-stimulated gene (ISG) induction
were assessed in melanoma cell lines. Both IFN-alpha2 and INF-beta induced
equivalent amounts of Stat1 and Stat2 proteins in cell lines, although compared
with IFN-alpha2, IFN-beta had greater antiproliferative effects. No significant
differences were observed in tyrosine or serine phosphorylation of Stat1 or the
formation of GAF or ISGF3 complexes following IFN-alpha2 or IFN-beta treatment of
IFN-resistant or IFN-sensitive cell lines. Comparable induction of two ISGs,
ISG54 and IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1), was observed in both sensitive WM9 and
resistant A375 cells. Therefore, we report that defects in expression or
activation of Stat1 or Stat2 were infrequent in melanoma cell lines and tumor
samples and did not correlate with IFN resistance. Cellular resistance to IFNs
likely results from defective quantitative or qualitative expression of specific 
ISGs.

PMID: 12060499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 May 1;30(9):2068-75.

Functional characterization of the interferon regulatory element in the enhancer 
1 region of the hepatitis B virus genome.

Alcantara FF(1), Tang H, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

An interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE)/interferon regulatory element
(IRE) spanning nucleotide coordinates 1091-1100 is present in the enhancer 1/X
gene promoter region of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome. In the context of a
minimal promoter element, the enhancer 1/X gene promoter ISRE/IRE was shown to be
a functional regulatory site capable of mediating interferon alpha- (IFNalpha)
and interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3)-specific transcriptional
activation in transient transfection analysis. The enhancer 1/X gene promoter
ISRE/IRE was also shown to mediate interferon regulatory factor (IRF) 1 and IRF7 
activation of transcription from a minimal promoter construct. In contrast,
IFNalpha and the IRFs had minimal effect on HBV transcription and replication in 
the context of the viral genome in cell culture.

PMCID: PMC113846
PMID: 11972347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Virol. 2002 May;76(9):4190-8.

Selective STAT protein degradation induced by paramyxoviruses requires both STAT1
and STAT2 but is independent of alpha/beta interferon signal transduction.

Parisien JP(1), Lau JF, Rodriguez JJ, Ulane CM, Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Center, The Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

The alpha/beta interferon (IFN-alpha/beta)-induced STAT signal transduction
pathway leading to activation of the ISGF3 transcription complex and subsequent
antiviral responses is the target of viral pathogenesis strategies. Members of
the Rubulavirus genus of the Paramyxovirus family of RNA viruses have acquired
the ability to specifically target either STAT1 or STAT2 for proteolytic
degradation as a countermeasure for evading IFN responses. While type II human
parainfluenza virus induces STAT2 degradation, simian virus 5 induces STAT1
degradation. The components of the IFN signaling system that are required for
STAT protein degradation by these paramyxoviruses have been investigated in a
series of human somatic cell lines deficient in IFN signaling proteins. Results
indicate that neither the IFN-alpha/beta receptor, the tyrosine kinases Jak1 or
Tyk2, nor the ISGF3 DNA-binding subunit, IFN regulatory factor 9 (IRF9), is
required for STAT protein degradation induced by either virus. Nonetheless, both 
STAT1 and STAT2 are strictly required in the host cell to establish a
degradation-permissive environment enabling both viruses to target their
respective STAT protein. Complementation studies reveal that STAT
protein-activating tyrosine phosphorylation and functional src homology 2 (SH2)
domains are dispensable for creating a permissive STAT degradation environment in
degradation-incompetent cells, but the N terminus of the missing STAT protein is 
essential. Protein-protein interaction analysis indicates that V and STAT
proteins interact physically in vitro and in vivo. These results constitute
genetic and biochemical evidence supporting a virus-induced, IFN-independent STAT
protein degradation complex that contains at least STAT1 and STAT2.

PMCID: PMC155111
PMID: 11932384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Virology. 2002 Feb 15;293(2):205-9.

Dephosphorylation failure of tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT1 in IFN-stimulated
Sendai virus C protein-expressing cells.

Saito S(1), Ogino T, Miyajima N, Kato A, Kohase M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Viral Diseases and Vaccine Control, National Institute of
Infectious Diseases, 4-7-1 Gakuen, Musashimurayama, Tokyo 208-0011, Japan.
sakura@nih.go.jp

Sendai virus C protein (SeV C) has been reported to counteract the antiviral
activities of interferons (IFNs) by inhibiting the expression of IFN-stimulated
gene products. In SeV C-expressing cells, formation of an active ISGF3 complex
and translocation of STAT1 into the nucleus were not observed. STAT1 was
continuously phosphorylated at tyrosine 701 by IFN signaling; however, its serine
phosphorylation was suppressed. In addition, tyrosine-phosphorylated STAT1 grew
to form abnormally huge complexes. These findings suggest that the counteraction 
of IFN in SeV C-expressing cells is caused by disordered phosphorylation and
dephosphorylation of STAT1.

PMID: 11886239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Virology. 2001 Nov 10;290(1):1-10.

Measles virus activates NF-kappa B and STAT transcription factors and production 
of IFN-alpha/beta and IL-6 in the human lung epithelial cell line A549.

Helin E(1), Vainionpää R, Hyypiä T, Julkunen I, Matikainen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 13, FIN-20520
Turku, Finland. eija.helin@utu.fi

Epithelial cells of the respiratory tract are the primary targets of measles
virus (MV) infection. In this work we have studied the effect of MV infection on 
the activation of transcription factors nuclear factor (NF)-kappa B and signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) and the production of cytokines 
in the lung epithelial A549 cell line. NF-kappa B and STAT activation were
induced by MV in A549 cells as analyzed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay. 
NF-kappa B activation was rapid and it was not inhibited by the protein synthesis
inhibitor cycloheximide, suggesting that MV directly activates NF-kappa B. In
contrast, Stat1, Stat3, and interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) DNA
binding was induced by MV infection with delayed kinetics compared to NF-kappa B 
activation. MV infection also resulted in an efficient interferon
(IFN)-alpha/beta and interleukin-6 production. Cycloheximide and neutralizing
anti-IFN-alpha/beta antibodies inhibited MV-induced activation of Stat1, Stat3,
and ISGF3 DNA binding in A549 cells. In conclusion, the results suggest that MV
infection activates transcription factors involved in the initiation of innate
immune responses in epithelial cells by two different mechanisms: directly by
leading to NF-kappa B activation and indirectly via IFN-alpha/beta leading to
STAT activation.

PMID: 11882993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2002 Jan;22(1):103-9.

Nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of IRFs in response to viral infection or
interferon stimulation.

Reich NC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony
Brook, NY 11794, USA. nreich@notes.cc.sunysb.edu

Members of the interferon (IFN) regulatory factor (IRFs) family of transcription 
factors play diverse roles in immunity and cellular response to viral infections.
Their biologic effects result from their ability to regulate either constitutive,
inducible, or tissue-specific gene expression. All characterized IRFs contain
nuclear localization signals that allow their translocation to the nucleus.
However, certain IRFs reside in a latent state in the cytoplasm of the cell and
only redistribute to the nucleus following an activating trigger. IRF-3 and IRF-9
are examples of IRFs that are regulated by cellular redistribution. These IRFs
use distinct mechanisms that regulate nuclear/cytoplasmic localization, and both 
depend on strong interaction with non-IRF subunits of multimeric transcription
complexes. This review compares the activation of IRF-3 and IRF-9 and their
respective physiologic impacts.

PMID: 11846981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. FEBS Lett. 2002 Jan 30;511(1-3):41-5.

A non-classical ISRE/ISGF3 pathway mediates induction of RANTES gene
transcription by type I IFNs.

Cremer I(1), Ghysdael J, Vieillard V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Immunologie Cellulaire et Clinique, INSERM U255, Université
Paris-6, 75005 Paris, France.

RANTES (regulated upon activation normal T cell expressed and secreted) is a
chemoattractant cytokine important in the generation of inflammatory responses
and human immunodeficiency virus resistance. In hematopoietic cells, RANTES is
over-expressed by type I interferons (IFN-alpha and IFN-beta). The upstream
region of the RANTES gene promoter contains a distal low affinity IFN-stimulated 
response element (ISRE). Specific mutagenesis in this ISRE-like motif abolished
the activation of RANTES transcription by type I IFNs. Examination of the ISRE
binding factors strongly suggested that signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat)-2 and p48/IFN-stimulated gene factor 3gamma (ISGF3gamma) are
not required for the induction of RANTES by type I IFNs. The specific requirement
of Stat-1 was demonstrated using Stat-1-deficient U3A cells. These results
revealed a non-classical ISRE/ISGF3 signal transduction pathway for the induction
of RANTES by type I IFNs.

PMID: 11821046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biol Reprod. 2002 Feb;66(2):393-400.

Roles of Stat1, Stat2, and interferon regulatory factor-9 (IRF-9) in interferon
tau regulation of IRF-1.

Stewart MD(1), Choi Y, Johnson GA, Yu-Lee LY, Bazer FW, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843, USA.

Interferon tau (IFNtau) is the pregnancy recognition signal produced by the
conceptus trophectoderm and acts in a paracine manner on the ovine endometrium to
increase expression of IFN-stimulated genes primarily in the stroma and deep
glandular epithelium, including IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1). The roles of
Stat1, Stat2, and IRF-9 in IFNtau regulation of IRF-1 expression were determined 
using human stromal fibroblasts lacking specific IFN signaling components or
complemented with specific Stat1 mutants. In parental (2fTGH) cells treated with 
IFNtau, Stat1alpha/beta was tyrosine phosphorylated by 15 min, and IRF-1 mRNA and
protein increased from 0 to 6 h, was maximal at 6 h, and decreased to 24 h. In
contrast, IFNtau did not affect IRF-1 expression in Stat1- and Stat2-deficient
cells or in Stat1-deficient cells complemented with Stat1 Y701Q or Stat1 R602L
mutants. In Stat1-deficient cells complemented with the Stat1 S727A mutant,
Stat1alpha, or Stat1beta and treated with IFNtau, IRF-1 increased from 0 to 6 h, 
was maximal at 6 h, and decreased thereafter. In IRF-9-deficient cells stimulated
with IFNtau, IRF-1 increased from 0 to 6 h but did not exhibit the sharp decline 
from 6 to 12 h observed in other cells. Collectively, results indicate that
IFNtau effect on IRF-1 expression is primarily regulated by
tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat1alpha or Stat1beta dimers, whereas the decline of
IRF-1 after 6 h of IFNtau treatment is regulated by IRF-9.

PMID: 11804954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Am J Pathol. 2002 Jan;160(1):271-88.

Regulation of signal transducer and activator of transcription and suppressor of 
cytokine-signaling gene expression in the brain of mice with astrocyte-targeted
production of interleukin-12 or experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Maier J(1), Kincaid C, Pagenstecher A, Campbell IL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropharmacology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Interleukin (IL)-12 and interferon (IFN)-gamma are implicated in the pathogenesis
of immune disorders of the central nervous system (CNS). To define the basis for 
the actions of these cytokines in the CNS, we examined the temporal and spatial
regulation of key signal transducers and activators of transcription (STATs) and 
suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) in the brain of transgenic mice with
astrocyte production of IL-12 or in mice with experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE). In healthy mice, with the exception of STAT4 and STAT6, 
the expression of a number of STAT and SOCS genes was detectable. However, in
symptomatic transgenic mice and in EAE significant up-regulation of STAT1, STAT2,
STAT3, STAT4, IRF9, and SOCS1 and SOCS3 RNA transcripts was observed. Although
the increased expression of STAT1 RNA was widely distributed and included
neurons, astrocytes, and microglia, STAT4 and STAT3 and SOCS1 and SOCS3 RNA was
primarily restricted to the infiltrating mononuclear cell population. The level
and location of the STAT1, STAT3, and STAT4 proteins overlapped with their
corresponding RNA and additionally showed nuclear localization indicative of
activation of these molecules. Thus, in both the glial fibrillary acidic
protein-IL-12 mice and in EAE the CNS expression of key STAT and SOCS genes that 
regulate IL-12 (STAT4) and IFN-gamma (STAT1, SOCS1, and SOCS3) receptor signaling
is highly regulated and compartmentalized. We conclude the interaction between
these positive and negative signaling circuits and their distinct cellular
locations likely play a defining role in coordinating the actions of IL-12 and
IFN-gamma during the pathogenesis of type 1 immune responses in the CNS.

PMCID: PMC1867143
PMID: 11786421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. FEMS Immunol Med Microbiol. 2001 Dec;32(1):9-15.

Interferon-beta induction by Chlamydia pneumoniae in human smooth muscle cells.

Rödel J(1), Assefa S, Prochnau D, Woytas M, Hartmann M, Groh A, Straube E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Microbiology, Friedrich Schiller University of Jena,
Germany. juergen.roedel@med.uni-jena.de

Clinical studies have suggested a causal or contributory role of Chlamydia
pneumoniae infection in asthma and atherosclerosis. The activation of synthetic
functions of smooth muscle cells (SMC) including the production of cytokines and 
growth factors plays a major role in the formation of fibrous atherosclerotic
plaques as well as in structural remodelling of the airway wall in chronic
asthma. In this study we demonstrated that C. pneumoniae induced the production
of low levels of interferon (IFN)-beta in bronchial and vascular SMC when
infected cells were treated with tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha).
IFN-beta production was analysed by reverse transcription-PCR and enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. The upregulation of IFN-beta was paralleled by an increase
in mRNA levels of interferon regulatory factor-1 and interferon-stimulated gene
factor 3gamma, two transcription factors activating the expression of the
IFN-beta gene. In addition, C. pneumoniae infection enhanced the mRNA level of
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase, an IFN-inducible factor mediating the restriction of
intracellular chlamydial growth, in TNF-alpha-stimulated SMC. C.
pneumoniae-induced IFN-beta production by SMC may modulate inflammation and
tissue remodelling during respiratory and vascular infection.

PMID: 11750216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jan 11;277(2):1493-9. Epub 2001 Oct 26.

Interferon signaling is dependent on specific tyrosines located within the
intracellular domain of IFNAR2c. Expression of IFNAR2c tyrosine mutants in U5A
cells.

Wagner TC(1), Velichko S, Vogel D, Rani MR, Leung S, Ransohoff RM, Stark GR,
Perez HD, Croze E.

Author information: 
(1)Berlex Biosciences Inc., Richmond, California 94804, USA.

Type I interferons (IFNs) are cytokines that play a central role in mediating
antiviral, antiproliferative, and immunomodulatory activities in virtually all
cells. These activities are entirely dependent on the interaction of IFNs with
their particular cell surface receptor. In this report, we identify two specific 
tyrosine residues located within the cytoplasmic domain of IFNAR2c that are
obligatory for IFN-dependent signaling. Various IFNAR2c tyrosine mutants were
expressed in a human lung fibroscarcoma cell line lacking IFNAR2c (U5A). Stable
clones expressing these mutants were analyzed for their ability to induce STAT1
and STAT2 activation, ISGF3 transcriptional complex formation, gene expression,
and cell growth regulation in response to stimulation with type I IFNs. The
replacement of all seven cytoplasmic tyrosine residues of IFNAR2c with
phenylalanine resulted in a receptor unable to respond to IFN stimulation.
Substitution of single tyrosines at amino acid residue 269, 316, 318, 337, or 512
with phenylalanine had no effect on IFN-dependent signaling, suggesting that no
single tyrosine is essential for IFN receptor-mediated signaling. In addition,
IFNAR2c retaining five proximal tyrosines residues (269, 306, 316, 318, and 337) 
or either two distal tyrosine residues (411 or 512) continued to be responsive to
IFN stimulation. Surprisingly, the presence of only a single tyrosine at either
position 337 or 512 was sufficient to restore a complete IFN response. These
results indicate that IFN-dependent signaling proceeds through the redundant
usage of two tyrosine residues in the cytoplasmic domain of IFNAR2c.

PMID: 11682488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Virology. 2001 Sep 30;288(2):379-90.

Hepatitis C virus core protein modulates the interferon-induced transacting
factors of Jak/Stat signaling pathway but does not affect the activation of
downstream IRF-1 or 561 gene.

Basu A(1), Meyer K, Ray RB, Ray R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri
63110, USA.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) has a propensity to cause chronic infection, with a low
proportion of patients exhibiting a sustained response to interferon-alpha
(IFNalpha) therapy. An earlier report suggested that HCV inhibits
IFNalpha-induced signal transduction through the Jak/Stat pathway by preventing
the formation of the transacting factor ISGF3 complex, although the effect on
downstream pathway and the specific viral protein responsible for inhibition of
IFNalpha-mediated signal transduction were not elucidated. HCV core protein
displays a number of intriguing functional properties and has been implicated in 
virus-mediated pathogenesis. In this study, we have analyzed the effect of core
protein upon IFNalpha- or IFNgamma-induced regulation of the Jak/Stat signaling
pathway. HCV core protein expression exhibited a reduced Stat1 expression in
IFN-treated mammalian cells. A gel retardation assay suggested a reduced level of
formation of the transacting factors, GAF and ISGF3, in IFN-treated cells.
Further studies from protein expression and RNase protection assay revealed that 
the reduced level of GAF or ISGF3 formation could be attributed to modulation of 
Stat1 protein expression, an important player for innate immunity in host defense
mechanism. However, these modulatory effects did not interfere with the
activation of the downstream effector genes, IRF-1 and 561, in IFN-treated cells.
Stable transfectants of cells after introduction of a plasmid DNA encoding both
the structural and the nonstructural proteins of HCV also exhibited a similar
effect. Taken together, these results suggest that although expression of the
core protein alone or with other HCV proteins modulate transacting factors of
Jak/Stat signaling pathway, expression of the downstream effector genes IRF-1 and
561 remains unaffected upon IFN treatment and may contribute to host defense
mechanism.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11601909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):44365-8. Epub 2001 Oct 8.

A role for NF-kappa B in the induction of beta-R1 by interferon-beta.

Rani MR(1), Asthagiri AR, Singh A, Sizemore N, Sathe SS, Li X, DiDonato JD, Stark
GR, Ransohoff RM.

Author information: 
(1)Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio
44195, USA.

Previous experiments have suggested that induction of the beta-R1 gene by
interferon (IFN)-beta required transcription factor ISGF-3 (IFN-stimulated gene
factor-3) and an additional component. We now provide evidence that nuclear
factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) can serve as this component. Site-directed mutagenesis 
of an NF-kappaB binding site in the beta-R1 promoter or over-expression of an
IkappaBalpha super-repressor abrogated IFN-beta-mediated induction of a beta-R1
promoter-reporter. IFN-beta treatment did not augment abundance of NF-kappaB but 
did lead to phosphorylation of the p65 NF-kappaB subunit. It is proposed that
IFN-beta-mediated enhancement of the transactivation competence of NF-kappaB
components is required for inducible transcription of the beta-R1 promoter. These
results provide a novel insight into the role of NF-kappaB in the transcriptional
response to IFN-beta.

PMID: 11591697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Cancer Res. 2001 Sep 1;61(17):6540-7.

Overexpression of IRF9 confers resistance to antimicrotubule agents in breast
cancer cells.

Luker KE(1), Pica CM, Schreiber RD, Piwnica-Worms D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Washington University Medical School, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

IRF9/p48/ISGF3gamma (IRF9) is an IFN regulatory factor that mediates signaling by
type I IFNs (IFNalpha and IFNbeta). After single-step selection of breast
adenocarcinoma cells in paclitaxel, differential display and single gene analysis
demonstrated that transcriptional activation of IRF9 and other IFN-responsive
genes, independent of IFN, corresponded with resistance to antimicrotubule
agents. Transient overexpression of IRF9 reproduced the drug-resistance phenotype
and induced expression of IFN-responsive genes. However, drug resistance was not 
induced by overexpression of Stat1 or Stat2, or treatment with IFNalpha per se.
Using a donor-matched array of cDNA prepared from human tumor and normal tissue
from a variety of organs, we observed overexpression of IRF9 in approximately
one-half of breast and uterine tumors, which indicated that IRF9 may be important
in signaling in these tumor types. These data identify a novel IFN-independent
role for IRF9 in the development of resistance to antimicrotubule agents in
breast tumor cells and may link downstream mediators of IFN signaling to drug
resistance in human cancers.

PMID: 11522652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Science. 2001 Jul 13;293(5528):300-3.

Impairment of mycobacterial but not viral immunity by a germline human STAT1
mutation.

Dupuis S(1), Dargemont C, Fieschi C, Thomassin N, Rosenzweig S, Harris J, Holland
SM, Schreiber RD, Casanova JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Humaine des Maladies Infectieuses, Université de
Paris René Descartes-INSERM UMR550, Faculté de Médecine Necker-Enfants Malades,
75015 Paris, France.

Interferons (IFN) alpha/beta and gamma induce the formation of two
transcriptional activators: gamma-activating factor (GAF) and
interferon-stimulated gamma factor 3 (ISGF3). We report a natural heterozygous
germline STAT1 mutation associated with susceptibility to mycobacterial but not
viral disease. This mutation causes a loss of GAF and ISGF3 activation but is
dominant for one cellular phenotype and recessive for the other. It impairs the
nuclear accumulation of GAF but not of ISGF3 in heterozygous cells stimulated by 
IFNs. Thus, the antimycobacterial, but not the antiviral, effects of human IFNs
are principally mediated by GAF.

PMID: 11452125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Virol. 2001 Aug;75(15):6800-7.

Longer and shorter forms of Sendai virus C proteins play different roles in
modulating the cellular antiviral response.

Garcin D(1), Curran J, Itoh M, Kolakofsky D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva School of
Medicine, CH1211 Geneva, Switzerland.

The Sendai virus (SeV) C gene codes for a nested set of four C proteins that
carry out several functions, including the modulation of viral RNA synthesis and 
countering of the cellular antiviral response. Using mutant C genes (and in
particular a C gene with a deletion of six amino acids present only in the larger
pair of C proteins) and recombinant SeV carrying these mutant C genes, we find
that the nested set of C proteins carry out a nested set of functions. All of the
C proteins interdict interferon (IFN) signaling to IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs)
and prevent pY701-Stat1 formation. However, only the larger C proteins can induce
STAT1 instability, prevent IFN from inducing an antiviral state, or prevent
programmed cell death. Remarkably, interdiction of IFN signaling to ISGs and the 
absence of pY701-Stat1 formation did not prevent IFN-alpha from inducing an
anti-Vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV) state. It is possible that IFN-alpha
signaling to induce an anti-VSV state can occur independently of the
well-established Jak/Stat/ISGF3 pathway and that it is this parallel pathway that
is targeted by the longer C proteins.

PMCID: PMC114406
PMID: 11435558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 May 22;98(11):6138-43. Epub 2001 May 8.

Antiviral activities of the soluble extracellular domains of type I interferon
receptors.

Han CS(1), Chen Y, Ezashi T, Roberts RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.

Alternative splicing leads to the expression of multiple isoforms of the subunits
(IFNAR1 and IFNAR2) of the type I IFN receptor. Here we describe two transcripts 
representing extracellular forms of ovine IFNAR1 and show that soluble
extracellular forms of both IFNAR2 and IFNAR1, prepared in recombinant form in
Escherichia coli, have antiviral (AV) activity in the absence of IFN. Exposure of
Madin-Darby bovine kidney cells to the extracellular domain (R2E) of IFNAR2 at
concentrations as low as 10 nM afforded complete protection against vesicular
stomatitis virus and led to the rapid activation of the transcription factors
ISGF3 and GAF. Although R2E can bind IFN (K(d) approximately 70 nM), activity was
observed irrespective of whether or not ligand was present. R2E was inactive on
mouse L929 cells but active on L929 cells expressing a membraneanchored,
ovine/human chimeric IFNAR2 with an ovine extracellular domain. The data suggest 
that AV activity is conferred by the ability of soluble R2E to associate with the
transfected IFNAR2 subunit rather than resident murine IFNAR1. Soluble
extracellular forms of IFNAR1 have lower AV activity than R2E on Madin-Darby
bovine kidney cells but are less species-specific and protect wild-type L929
cells as efficiently as the transfected cell line, presumably by interacting with
one of the murine receptor subunits.

PMCID: PMC33435
PMID: 11344274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Blood. 2001 May 15;97(10):3017-24.

Functional correction of FA-C cells with FANCC suppresses the expression of
interferon gamma-inducible genes.

Fagerlie SR(1), Diaz J, Christianson TA, McCartan K, Keeble W, Faulkner GR, Bagby
GC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, the Department of Molecular and
Medical Genetics, and the Oregon Cancer Center, Oregon Health Sciences
University, Portland, OR, USA.

Because hematopoietic cells derived from Fanconi anemia (FA) patients of the
C-complementation group (FA-C) are hypersensitive to the inhibitory effects of
interferon gamma (IFNgamma), the products of certain IFNgamma-inducible genes
known to influence hematopoietic cell survival were quantified. High constitutive
expression of the IFNgamma-inducible genes, IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 gamma
subunit (ISGF3gamma), IFN regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1), and the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p21(WAF1) was found in FANCC mutant B lymphoblasts, low-density 
bone marrow cells, and murine embryonic fibroblasts. Paradoxically, these cells
do not activate signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1
properly. In an attempt to clarify mechanisms by which FA-C cells overexpress
IFNgamma-inducible genes in the face of defective STAT1 phosphorylation, it was
reasoned that decreased levels of activated STAT1 might result in reduced
expression of a hematopoietic IFNgamma-responsive protein that normally modulates
expression of other IFNgamma-responsive genes. Levels of the IFNgamma-inducible
factor IFN consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP), a negative trans-acting
regulator of some IFNgamma-inducible genes, were quantified. ICSBP levels were
reduced in FA-C B lymphoblasts and MEFs. However, enforced expression of ICSBP
failed to down-regulate IRF-1, ISGF3gamma, and p21(WAF1). Thus, the FANCC protein
functions to modulate expression of a family of genes that in normal cells are
inducible only by specific environmental cues for apoptosis or mitogenic
inhibition, but it does so independently of the classic IFN-STAT1 pathway and is 
not the direct result of reduced ICSBP expression.

PMID: 11342426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Virology. 2001 May 10;283(2):230-9.

The V protein of human parainfluenza virus 2 antagonizes type I interferon
responses by destabilizing signal transducer and activator of transcription 2.

Parisien JP(1), Lau JF, Rodriguez JJ, Sullivan BM, Moscona A, Parks GD, Lamb RA, 
Horvath CM.

Author information: 
(1)Immunobiology Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029, USA.

Type I interferon (IFN) induces antiviral responses through the activation of the
ISGF3 transcription factor complex that contains the subunit proteins STAT1,
STAT2, and p48/ISGF3 gamma/IRF9. The ability of some human paramyxoviruses to
overcome IFN actions by specific proteolysis of STAT proteins has been examined. 
Infection of cells with type 2, but not type 1 or type 3 human parainfluenza
virus (HPIV) leads to a loss of cellular STAT2 protein. Expression of a single
HPIV2 protein derived from the V open reading frame blocks IFN-dependent
transcriptional responses in the absence of other viral proteins. The loss of IFN
response is due to V-protein-induced proteolytic degradation of STAT2. Expression
of HPIV2 V causes the normally stable STAT2 protein to be rapidly degraded, and
this proteolytic activity can be partially alleviated by proteasome inhibition.
No V-protein-specific effects on STAT2 mRNA levels were observed. The results
indicate that the V protein of HPIV2 is sufficient to recognize and target a
specific cellular transcription factor for destruction by cellular machinery.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11336548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Endocrinology. 2001 May;142(5):1786-94.

Interferon-tau (IFNtau) regulation of IFN-stimulated gene expression in cell
lines lacking specific IFN-signaling components.

Stewart MD(1), Johnson GA, Bazer FW, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-2471, USA.

Interferon-tau (IFNtau) is a unique type I IFN secreted by the ruminant conceptus
that acts in a paracrine manner on the endometrial epithelium to signal pregnancy
recognition. In the ovine endometrium, IFNtau suppresses estrogen receptor alpha 
and oxytocin receptor gene expression, but increases or induces expression of
IFN-simulated genes (ISGs), including signal transducer and activator of
transcription-1 (STAT1), STAT2, ISG factor-3gamma (ISGF3gamma)/p48/IFN regulatory
factor-9, and 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (OAS). Human fibroblast cell lines 
lacking specific IFN signaling components were employed to determine the roles of
STAT1, STAT2, and ISGF3gamma in the effects of IFNtau on ISG protein expression. 
Results indicated that STAT1alpha or STAT1beta is required for IFNtau effects on 
STAT2, ISGF3gamma, and OAS (40/46, 69/71, and 100 kDa). STAT2 is required for
effects on STAT1, ISGF3gamma, and all OAS forms. ISGF3gamma is required for
effects of IFNtau on STAT2 and 40/46- and 69/71-kDa OAS and plays a role in the
effects of IFNtau on 100-kDa OAS and STAT1. Mutation of Tyr(701), but not
Ser(727), of STAT1 abolished the effects of IFNtau on ISG expression. Mutation of
the SH2 domain of STAT1 abolished the effects of IFNtau on all ISGs and reduced
increases in 100-kDa OAS. These data illustrate the importance of transcription
factors composed of STAT1, STAT2, and ISGF3gamma in the signaling pathway
mediating the effects of IFNtau on ISG expression.

PMID: 11316742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 29;276(26):23275-81. Epub 2001 Apr 18.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta mediates interferon-gamma-induced p48
(ISGF3-gamma ) gene transcription in human monocytic cells.

Xiao W(1), Wang L, Yang X, Chen T, Hodge D, Johnson PF, Farrar W.

Author information: 
(1)Intramural Research Support Program, SAIC Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.
xiaow@mail.ncifcrf.gov

Previous studies have identified a novel interferon-stimulated response
element-like element, termed gamma-interferon-activating transcription element,
within the interferon-stimulating gene factor-3gamma (p48) promoter region that
is bound by novel transcription factors in response to stimulation with
interferons (IFNs) (Weihua, X., Kolla, V., and Kalvakolanu, D. V. (1997) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 94, 103-108). In the present study, we have identified 
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBP-beta) as one of the
gamma-interferon-activating transcription element cognate transcription factors
by screening a human monophage-derived cDNA library in a yeast one-hybrid system.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay studies suggest that C/EBP-beta dynamically 
regulates p48 gene expression upon IFN-gamma stimulation by undergoing changes in
its heterodimerization partners. Transient transfection studies demonstrate that 
overexpression of C/EBP-beta strongly enhanced IFN-gamma-induced transcription
from the p48 promoter. However, deletion mutants of C/EBP-beta that lack the
N-terminal transactivation domain were unable to stimulate the p48 promoter.
Western blotting revealed that C/EBP-beta is induced by IFN-gamma stimulation in 
THP-1-derived macrophages. Collectively, these results suggest that C/EBP-beta
plays an important role in the human IFN-gamma signaling pathway by
transcriptional regulation of p48 gene expression, an essential component in the 
IFN signaling pathway.

PMID: 11312260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Cancer Res. 2001 Mar 1;61(5):2261-6.

Impaired alpha-interferon signaling in transitional cell carcinoma: lack of p48
expression in 5637 cells.

Matin SF(1), Rackley RR, Sadhukhan PC, Kim MS, Novick AC, Bandyopadhyay SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA.

The limited success of IFN-alpha therapy for clinical treatment of transitional
cell carcinoma (TCC) has prompted us to investigate the responsiveness of TCC
lines to IFN-alpha. The response to IFN-alpha in terms of 561 gene induction, an 
IFN-stimulated response element-containing IFN-alpha/beta-inducible gene, and
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) formation was normal in primary human
urothelial cells. We tested the antiproliferative effects of IFN-alpha in three
TCC lines as a measure of IFN-alpha responsiveness, and variable patterns of
growth inhibition were observed in three TCC lines. More than 90% growth
inhibition was noted in TCCSUP cells, whereas only 40% and 10% inhibition by
IFN-alpha was observed in 5637 and HT1197 cells, respectively. IFN-alpha
treatment formed extremely low levels of ISGF3 in electrophoretic mobility shift 
assays in these later two relatively insensitive cells. In addition, expression
of the 561 gene was significantly reduced in these two TCC lines by Northern
blots. We have further identified a low expression level of Tyk2 in HT1197 cells 
compared with two other TCCs. This suggests that an extremely low ISGF3 level
after IFN-alpha treatment may be due to low Tyk2 expression or other unidentified
defects. In 5637 cells, p48 protein expression was undetectable. This
undetectable p48 expression is not due to a deletion in the coding region because
the correct size protein is detected following IFN-gamma treatment. Consequently,
the ISGF3 complex formation and 561 gene induction were restored by IFN-gamma
pretreatment plus IFN-alpha treatment. Introduction of p48 expressing plasmid
into 5637 cells was sufficient to form the ISGF3 complex by IFN-alpha treatment, 
suggesting the defect lies in the expression of p48 protein in 5637 cells.
Detailed mechanistic understanding of the action of IFNs in bladder cancer cell
lines may explain the abrogated therapeutic response of IFN-alpha in the clinical
treatment of TCCs.

PMID: 11280796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Annu Rev Immunol. 2001;19:623-55.

IRF family of transcription factors as regulators of host defense.

Taniguchi T(1), Ogasawara K, Takaoka A, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Graduate School of Medicine and Faculty of Medicine,
University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
tada@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Interferon regulatory factors (IRFs) constitute a family of transcription factors
that commonly possess a novel helix-turn-helix DNA-binding motif. Following the
initial identification of two structurally related members, IRF-1 and IRF-2,
seven additional members have now been reported. In addition, virally encoded
IRFs, which may interfere with cellular IRFs, have also been identified. Thus
far, intensive functional analyses have been done on IRF-1, revealing a
remarkable functional diversity of this transcription factor in the regulation of
cellular response in host defense. Indeed, IRF-1 selectively modulates different 
sets of genes, depending on the cell type and/or the nature of cellular stimuli, 
in order to evoke appropriate responses in each. More recently, much attention
has also been focused on other IRF family members. Their functional roles,
through interactions with their own or other members of the family of
transcription factors, are becoming clearer in the regulation of host defense,
such as innate and adaptive immune responses and oncogenesis.

PMID: 11244049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Jan 26;280(3):933-9.

Geranylgeranylacetone induces antiviral gene expression in human hepatoma cells.

Ichikawa T(1), Nakao K, Nakata K, Hamasaki K, Takeda Y, Kajiya Y, Higashi S,
Ohkubo K, Kato Y, Ishii N, Eguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of
Medicine, Nagasaki, Japan.

Geranylgeranylacetone (GGA), an isoprenoid compound, is used clinically as an
anti-ulcer drug. Since some isoprenoids including retinoids have anti-tumor and
anti-viral activities in a variety of cell types, we investigated whether GGA
could induce anti-viral proteins in human hepatoma cells. The HuH-7 and HepG2
cells were treated with GGA, and expression of anti-viral proteins such as
2'5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (2'5'-OAS) and double-stranded RNA-dependent
protein kinase (PKR) in these cells was analyzed. GGA stimulated 2'5'-OAS and PKR
gene expression at the transcriptional level through the formation of
interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), which regulates both gene
transcription. By Western blotting, GGA induced expression of signal transducers 
and activators of transcription 1, 2 (STAT1, STAT2) and p48 proteins, components 
of ISGF3, together with the phosphorylation of STAT1. These results suggest that 
GGA acts as a potent inducer of anti-viral gene expression by stimulating the
ISGF3 formation in human hepatoma cells.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11162614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Acta Haematol. 2000;104(1):1-9.

Sensitivity to interferon-alpha and interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 binding
activity in human chronic myelogenous leukemia cell line KT-1.

Yamauchi H(1), Sakai I, Narumi H, Soga S, Fujita S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Ehime University School of Medicine,
Shigenobu, Ehime, Japan. hayato@m.ehime-u.ac.jp

The mechanism of responsiveness of chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) cells to
interferon (IFN)-alpha was examined by using two subclones of CML cell line KT-1 
which exhibited significantly different sensitivities to the antiproliferative
and apoptosis-inducing effects of IFN-alpha. IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3)
formation by IFN-alpha was reduced in the IFN-alpha-resistant subclone compared
to the IFN-alpha-sensitive subclone. We conclude that the level of ISGF3
formation is responsible for the difference in IFN-alpha responses between these 
subclones.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11111114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Biol Chem. 2001 Feb 2;276(5):3531-5. Epub 2000 Dec 5.

Lack of a role of the interferon-stimulated response element-like region in
interferon alpha -induced suppression of Hepatitis B virus in vitro.

Rang A(1), Heise T, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Martinistrabetae 52, D-20251 Hamburg, Germany.

The antiviral effect of interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) on hepatitis B virus (HBV) is
well documented in vitro and in vivo, but the mechanisms involved are elusive.
Recently, an interferon-stimulated response like element (ISRE) competent for
binding of interferon-stimulated gene factor-3gamma (p48) has been identified in 
the HBV enhancer I region. Mutation of this element was shown to abrogate
IFNalpha-mediated reduction of HBV X-gene promoter-driven reporter gene
expression. This suggested a role of the ISRE and of p48 in IFNalpha-induced
antiviral activity against productive HBV infection. Here, we analyzed the
antiviral effect of both IFNalpha and enhanced p48 expression on complete HBV
genomes containing the wild-type or mutated ISRE. In human hepatoma cells
transfected with both genomes, viral RNA and replicative intermediates were
reduced by IFNalpha treatment to a similar degree. Enhanced p48 expression
increased IFNalpha-induced suppression of HBV RNA significantly from 75 +/- 22.5%
to 46 +/- 9.8%, but this was independent of the integrity of the ISRE-like
region. These data imply that p48 neither mediates the antiviral activity of
IFNalpha against HBV nor down-regulates enhancer I activity by binding directly
to the HBV ISRE-like region, but rather argue for an indirect role of p48.

PMID: 11106638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 2000 Nov;20(11):971-82.

The neutralization of type I IFN biologic actions by anti-IFNAR-2 monoclonal
antibodies is not entirely due to inhibition of Jak-Stat tyrosine
phosphorylation.

Novick D(1), Nabioullin RR, Ragsdale W, McKenna S, Weiser W, Garone L, Burkins C,
Kim SH, Rubinstein M, Tepper MA, Arulanandam AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

A panel of monoclonal antibodies (mAb) derived against human
interferon-alpha/beta receptor-2 (IFNAR-2) was evaluated for their ability to
antagonize the biologic effects of type 1 interferons (IFN-alpha1, IFN-alpha2a,
and IFN-beta). Anti-IFNAR-2 mAb 117.7, 35.9, 53.2, and 51.44 neutralized type I
IFN-mediated antiviral, antiproliferative, and major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) class I upregulation functions. However, only mAb 51.44 neutralized
IFN-alpha2a and IFN-beta-mediated natural killer (NK) cell cytotoxicity. In
BIAcore and cell binding studies, only mAb 51.44 and 234.28 inhibited IFN-alpha2a
and IFN-beta binding to its receptor. The receptor blockade by mAb 51.44 and
234.28 resulted in the inhibition of IFN-alpha2a and IFN-beta-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of Jak1, Tyk2, Stat1/2/3, and IFNAR-1/2 and inhibition of
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) formation. mAb 117.7, 35.9, and 53.2,
although antagonists of IFN's biologic activities, did not block the binding of
IFN-alpha/beta to its receptor. The 117.7 mAb, representative of this class of
receptor nonblocking mAb, induced hyper-tyrosine phosphorylation of IFNAR-2 in
the presence of IFN-alpha/beta but did not inhibit IFN-alpha/beta-induced
Jak-Stat tyrosine phosphorylation and ISGF3 complex formation. These results show
that the neutralization of type I IFN biologic actions by anti-IFNAR-2 mAb cannot
be entirely explained by inhibition of Jak-Stat tyrosine phosphorylation.

PMID: 11096454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2000 Sep;9(9):993-7.

Expression of protein mediators of type I interferon signaling in human squamous 
cell carcinoma of the skin.

Clifford JL(1), Menter DG, Yang X, Walch E, Zou C, Clayman GL, Schaefer TS,
El-Naggar AK, Lotan R, Lippman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA. jclifford@notes.mdacc.tmc.edu

IFN-based therapy has been shown to be active in the treatment of squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC) of the skin and has promise for chemoprevention and treatment of 
several other cancers. In an effort to better understand the molecular mechanism 
of this activity, we have determined the expression pattern of several of the
protein mediators of type I IFN signaling by immunohistochemistry in cutaneous
SCC, SCC metastases, and adjacent nonmalignant epithelium from patient biopsies. 
All of the proteins, signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
1alpha/beta, STAT2, p48, STAT3a, and STAT3beta, are expressed at varying levels
in the adjacent epidermis, as well as in other epidermal and dermal cell types.
For the majority of samples tested, the expression of one or more of these
proteins was reduced in SCC primary tumors compared with the adjacent
nonmalignant epithelial cells, as determined by manual scoring. Quantitative
densitometry of several samples revealed differences that are statistically
significant. Our study provides the first direct evidence for the expression of
the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (STAT1alpha/beta, STAT2, and p48) and STAT3alpha
and STAT3beta mediators of IFN-alpha/beta signaling in human skin and
skin-derived SCCs. These data have led to the hypothesis that the loss of IFN
sensitivity may contribute to the development and progression of skin SCC.

PMID: 11008921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jun 21;1492(1):163-71.

Interleukin-6 modulates interferon-regulated gene expression by inducing the
ISGF3 gamma gene using CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta(C/EBP-beta).

Weihua X(1), Hu J, Roy SK, Mannino SB, Kalvakolanu DV.

Author information: 
(1)Marlene and Stewart Greenebaum Cancer Center, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Maryland School
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Although interleukin-6 (IL-6) alone does not induce the expression of IFN
stimulated genes (ISG), a low dose priming of cells with IL-6 strongly enhances
the cellular responses to interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha). This effect of IL-6 is
not due to superstimulation of the JAK-STAT pathway. Rather, IL-6 induces
expression of ISGF3 gamma (p48), a subunit of the multimeric transcription factor
ISGF3. As a result IFN-alpha robustly activates gene transcription in IL-6 primed
cells. We have shown earlier that the transcription of ISGF3 gamma gene is
regulated through a novel element GATE (gamma-IFN activated transcriptional
element). We show here IL-6 induces the ISGF3 gamma gene through GATE.
Transcription factor C/EBP-beta is required for inducing ISGF3 gamma gene
expression through GATE. A mutant C/EBP-beta inhibits the IL-6 inducible ISGF3
gamma gene expression through GATE. Together, these results establish a molecular
basis for the synergy between IFNs and IL-6.

PMID: 11004486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Microbiol Immunol. 2000;44(6):537-41.

Mumps virus can suppress the effective augmentation of HPC-induced apoptosis by
IFN-gamma through disruption of IFN signaling in U937 cells.

Hariya Y(1), Yokosawa N, Yonekura N, Kohama G, Fuji N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Surgery, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Hokkaido, Japan.

Cells of the human promonocytic cell line U937 were found to be sensitive to
hexadecylphosphocholine (HPC), which is a potential anticancer drug. Induction of
apoptosis was found in U937 cells after treatment with HPC for 24 to 48 hr. The
apoptosis in U937 cells exposed to HPC was increased significantly in the
presence of interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). The augmentation of HPC-induced
apoptosis by IFN-gamma is repressed in cells (U937-MP) persistently infected with
mumps virus. A persistently infected cell line, U937-MP, showed poor induction of
signal transducers and activators of transcription-1alpha (STAT-alpha), STAT-2,
p48 and IFN-regulatory factor-1 (IRF-1), which are closely correlated with
interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) and IFN-gamma signaling pathways. Expression of MHC 
class-I or class-II was augmented by IFN-alpha or IFN-gamma in U937 cells, but
not in persistently infected cells. Therefore, it is suggested that the IFN-gamma
signaling pathway plays an important role in the augmentation of HPC-induced
apoptosis. Mumps virus can suppress the IFN-gamma signaling pathway and
subsequent development of apoptosis.

PMID: 10941939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Immunol. 2000 Aug 15;165(4):2028-39.

Differentiation of monocytes to macrophages switches the Mycobacterium
tuberculosis effect on HIV-1 replication from stimulation to inhibition:
modulation of interferon response and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta
expression.

Weiden M(1), Tanaka N, Qiao Y, Zhao BY, Honda Y, Nakata K, Canova A, Levy DE, Rom
WN, Pine R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine and Bellevue Chest Service,
Department of Pathology, New York University Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, 
USA.

HIV-1 replication is inhibited in uninflamed lung macrophages and is stimulated
during tuberculosis. Attempts to recapitulate activation of HIV-1 replication in 
primary monocytes and macrophages ex vivo and in the untreated and PMA-treated
THP-1 cell line model in vitro have produced opposite results depending on the
state of differentiation of the cells. After infection with Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, monocytes enhanced HIV-1 replication and produced a stimulatory
37-kDa CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) transcription factor,
whereas macrophages suppressed HIV-1 replication and produced an inhibitory
16-kDa C/EBPbeta transcription factor. IFN-beta induced inhibitory 16-kDa
C/EBPbeta in macrophages, but had no effect on C/EBPbeta expression in monocytes.
Macrophages, but not monocytes, were able to activate IFN-stimulated gene
factor-3 (ISGF-3), a transcription factor composed of STAT-1, STAT-2, and IFN
regulatory factor (IRF)-9, after infection with M. tuberculosis or stimulation
with type I IFN. Macrophages expressed IRF-9 DNA-binding activity, but monocytes 
did not, and addition of the IRF-9 component reconstituted ISGF-3 in extracts of 
IFN-treated monocytes. Modulation of IFN responsiveness upon differentiation
occurred at least in part through a post-transcriptionally regulated increase in 
IRF-9 expression. Both monocytes and macrophages maintained IFN responsiveness,
activating STAT-1 homodimer formation and transcription of the STAT-1 gene after 
IFN stimulation. In addition, both monocytes and macrophages were able to
activate NF-kappaB upon infection with M. tuberculosis. These results show that
induction of ISGF-3, expression of the inhibitory 16-kDa C/EBPbeta, and
suppression of HIV-1 replication via a transcriptional mechanism are
macrophage-specific responses to infection with M. tuberculosis.

PMID: 10925286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Biol Chem. 2000 Oct 13;275(41):31805-12.

Regulation of the promoter activity of interferon regulatory factor-7 gene.
Activation by interferon snd silencing by hypermethylation.

Lu R(1), Au WC, Yeow WS, Hageman N, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Center and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, The Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

The molecular mechanism by which virus induces expression of the early
inflammatory genes has not yet been completely elucidated. Previous studies
indicated that the virus-mediated transcription of type I interferon (IFN) genes 
required activation of two members of IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family, IRF-3
and IRF-7, where the expression of IRF-7 was found to be indispensable for the
induction of IFNA genes. To determine the factors that regulate expression of
IRF-7 gene, as well as its inducibility by type I IFNs, we have isolated and
characterized the promoter and first intron of the human IRF-7 gene. This region 
shows a presence of two potential interferon-sensitive response elements
(ISRE/IRF-E). However, only the ISRE present in the first intron was functional
and conferred interferon inducibility in a transient transfection assay. Using a 
pull-down assay with an oligodeoxynucleotide corresponding to this ISRE
immobilized to magnetic beads, we have demonstrated that this ISRE binds ISGF3
complex and IRF-1 from the extract of IFN-treated cells but not from the
untreated cells. We have further shown that the previously observed lack of
expression of IRF-7 in 2fTGH fibrosarcoma cell line, correlated with
hypermethylation of the CpG island in the human IRF-7 promoter. The repression of
the promoter activity was relieved by treatment with DNA methyltransferase
inhibitor 5-aza-deoxycytidine. In vitro methylation of IRF-7 promoter silenced
IRF-7 directed expression of luciferase gene in HeLa cells that express
endogenous IRF-7 gene. Whether silencing of IRF-7 by methylation is instrumental 
for the process of tumorigenesis remains to be determined.

PMID: 10924517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Oncogene. 2000 Jul 13;19(30):3372-83.

IFN-beta induces serine phosphorylation of Stat-1 in Ewing's sarcoma cells and
mediates apoptosis via induction of IRF-1 and activation of caspase-7.

Sancéau J(1), Hiscott J, Delattre O, Wietzerbin J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 365, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

Four human cell lines derived from Ewing's sarcoma, EW-7, EW-1, COH and ORS, were
investigated to establish the effects of human recombinant interferon-alpha2a and
human recombinant interferon-beta on cell proliferation and apoptosis. All four
cell lines were much more sensitive to the antiproliferative effects of IFN-beta 
than of IFN-alpha. Analysis of the early signals triggered by IFN-alpha and
IFN-beta demonstrated that the two IFNs were similarly effective in inducing
tyrosine phosphorylation of the Jak-1 and Tyk-2 kinases and the transcription
factors Stat-1 and Stat-2. Interestingly, an additional rapid phosphorylation of 
Stat-1 on serine was observed after IFN-beta treatment, with concomitant
activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase. In these cells, Stat-1 Ser727
phosphorylation in response to IFN-beta was found to be impaired by p38 MAPkinase
inhibitor (SB203580). IFN-beta induced the formation of the Interferon Stimulated
Gene Factor 3 complex more efficiently than IFN-alpha, as well as sustained
induction of IRF-1, which may account for its greater induction of
2'5'oligo(A)synthetase and greater inhibition of cell proliferation. IFN-beta,
but not IFN-alpha, induced apoptosis in wild-type p53 EW-7 and COH cell lines,
but not in the mutated p53 EW-1 or ORS cell lines. The apoptosis induced by
IFN-beta in EW-7 and COH cell lines appeared to be mediated by IRF-1 and involved
the activation of caspase-7. Ectopic expression of IRF-1 induced apoptosis in all
four cell lines which correlated with the activation of caspase-7 and with the
downregulation of the Bcl-2 oncoprotein, as observed for IFN-beta-induced
apoptosis in parental EW-7 and COH cell lines.

PMID: 10918594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 4;275(31):23981-5.

Role of the intracellular domain of the human type I interferon receptor 2 chain 
(IFNAR2c) in interferon signaling. Expression of IFNAR2c truncation mutants in
U5A cells.

Russell-Harde D(1), Wagner TC, Rani MR, Vogel D, Colamonici O, Ransohoff RM,
Majchrzak B, Fish E, Perez HD, Croze E.

Author information: 
(1)Berlex Biosciences, Richmond, California 94804, the Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, 44195, USA.

A human cell line (U5A) lacking the type I interferon (IFN) receptor chain 2
(IFNAR2c) was used to determine the role of the IFNAR2c cytoplasmic domain in
regulating IFN-dependent STAT activation, interferon-stimulated gene factor 3
(ISGF3) and c-sis-inducible factor (SIF) complex formation, gene expression, and 
antiproliferative effects. A panel of U5A cells expressing truncation mutants of 
IFNAR2c on their cell surface were generated for study. Janus kinase (JAK)
activation was detected in all mutant cell lines; however, STAT1 and STAT2
activation was observed only in U5A cells expressing full-length IFNAR2c and
IFNAR2c truncated at residue 462 (R2.462). IFNAR2c mutants truncated at residues 
417 (R2. 417) and 346 (R2.346) or IFNAR2c mutant lacking tyrosine residues in its
cytoplasmic domain (R2.Y-F) render the receptor inactive. A similar pattern was
observed for IFN-inducible STAT activation, STAT complex formation, and STAT-DNA 
binding. Consistent with these data, IFN-inducible gene expression was ablated in
U5A, R2.Y-F, R2.417, and R2.346 cell lines. The implications are that tyrosine
phosphorylation and the 462-417 region of IFNAR2c are independently obligatory
for receptor activation. In addition, the distal 53 amino acids of the
intracellular domain of IFNAR2c are not required for IFN-receptor mediated STAT
activation, ISFG3 or SIF complex formation, induction of gene expression, and
inhibition of thymidine incorporation. These data demonstrate for the first time 
that both tyrosine phosphorylation and a specific domain of IFNAR2c are required 
in human cells for IFN-dependent coupling of JAK activation to STAT
phosphorylation, gene induction, and antiproliferative effects. In addition,
human and murine cells appear to require different regions of the cytoplasmic
domain of IFNAR2c for regulation of IFN responses.

PMID: 10825167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Immunol. 2000 Apr 1;164(7):3733-40.

Lactobacilli and Streptococci activate NF-kappa B and STAT signaling pathways in 
human macrophages.

Miettinen M(1), Lehtonen A, Julkunen I, Matikainen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.
minjia.miettinen@ktl.fi

Gram-positive bacteria induce the production of several cytokines in human
leukocytes. The molecular mechanisms involved in Gram-positive bacteria-induced
cytokine production have been poorly characterized. In this work we demonstrate
that both nonpathogenic Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG and pathogenic Streptococcus
pyogenes (group A streptococci) induce NF-kappa B and STAT DNA-binding activity
in human primary macrophages as analyzed by EMSA. NF-kappa B activation was rapid
and was not inhibited by a protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide, suggesting 
that these bacteria could directly activate NF-kappa B. STAT1, STAT3, and IFN
regulatory factor-1 DNA binding was induced by both bacteria with delayed
kinetics compared with NF-kappa B. In addition, streptococci induced the
formation of IFN-alpha-specific transcription factor complex and IFN-stimulated
gene factor-3 (ISGF3). STAT1 and STAT3 activation and ISGF3 complex formation
were inhibited by cycloheximide or by neutralization with IFN-alpha/beta-specific
Abs. Streptococci were more potent than lactobacilli in inducing STAT1, ISGF3,
and IFN regulatory factor-1 DNA binding. Accordingly, only streptococci induced
IFN-alpha production. The activation of the IFN-alpha signaling pathway by
streptococci could play a role in the pathogenesis of these bacteria. These
results indicate that extracellular Gram-positive bacteria activate transcription
factors involved in cytokine signaling by two mechanisms: directly, leading to
NF-kappa B activation, and indirectly via cytokines, leading to STAT activation.

PMID: 10725732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Mar 1;28(5):1120-5.

The tetracycline-responsive promoter contains functional interferon-inducible
response elements.

Rang A(1), Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut, Martinistrasse 52, D-20251 Hamburg, Germany.

Tetracycline (tet)-responsive expression vectors allow controlled inducible
expression of proteins in mammalian cells. This system is widely used for
experimental research both in vivo and in vitro. In our attempts to use this
system to study the antiviral effect of IFNalpha on hepatitis B virus, we
discovered an unexpected feature of the tet-responsive promoter (tet promoter) of
the currently available expression vectors. IFNalphawas found to stimulate tet
promoter activity after transient transfection in a dose- and cell type-dependent
manner. By sequence inspection, an IFNalpha-stimulated response element
(ISRE)-like sequence was identified in the linker regions located between the
heptameric tet operator sequences. Gel shift assays revealed binding of
IFN-stimulated gene factors to these sequences, indicating that they mediate the 
IFNalpha-mediated promoter stimulation. These data demonstrate an unexpected
feature of the tet-responsive expression system which needs to be taken into
account when using this system for analysis of cytokine functions in vitro and in
vivo. The data also imply that the tet promoter-based expression system can be
rendered non-responsive to IFNalpha by mutagenesis of the ISREs and this may be
essential when considering gene therapy in vivo.

PMCID: PMC102598
PMID: 10666452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Virol. 1999 Dec;73(12):9928-33.

The V protein of simian virus 5 inhibits interferon signalling by targeting STAT1
for proteasome-mediated degradation.

Didcock L(1), Young DF, Goodbourn S, Randall RE.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, University of St. Andrews, Fife, Scotland KY16 9TS, United 
Kingdom.

To replicate in vivo, viruses must circumvent cellular antiviral defense
mechanisms, including those induced by the interferons (IFNs). Here we
demonstrate that simian virus 5 (SV5) blocks IFN signalling in human cells by
inhibiting the formation of the IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 and gamma-activated 
factor transcription complexes that are involved in activating IFN-alpha/beta-
and IFN-gamma-responsive genes, respectively. SV5 inhibits the formation of these
complexes by specifically targeting STAT1, a component common to both
transcription complexes, for proteasome-mediated degradation. Expression of the
SV5 structural protein V, in the absence of other virus proteins, also inhibited 
IFN signalling and induced the degradation of STAT1. Following infection with
SV5, STAT1 was degraded in the absence of virus protein synthesis and remained
undetectable for up to 4 days postinfection. Furthermore, STAT1 was also degraded
in IFN-pretreated cells, even though the cells were in an antiviral state. Since 
pretreatment of cells with IFN delayed but did not prevent virus replication and 
protein synthesis, these observations suggest that following infection of
IFN-pretreated cells, SV5 remains viable within the cells until they eventually
go out of the antiviral state.

PMCID: PMC113042
PMID: 10559305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Gene. 1999 Sep 3;237(1):177-84.

Transcriptional induction of p69 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase by
interferon-alpha is stimulated by 12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate through
IRF/ISRE binding motifs.

Yu F(1), Wang Q, Floyd-Smith G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, Arizona State University, Tempe
85287-1501, USA.

Protein kinase C (PKC) is required for transcriptional induction of
2'-5'-oligoadenylate (2-5A) synthetases by interferon (IFN)-alpha. Regulatory
elements located in the 5'-flanking region of the p69 2-5A synthetase gene have
been identified which are required for transcriptional stimulation by PKC. The
region from -366 to -117 bp, relative to the translational start site, contains
three sequence motifs that resemble interferon stimulated response
elements/interferon regulatory factor elements (ISRE/IRF-E), which are required
for stimulation of the IFN-alpha-response by the PKC activator,
12-O-tetradecanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA). Constructs which have a deletion of 
the region containing IRF-Es located at -361 bp to -280 and at -246 to -172 bp do
not respond to TPA treatment. Likewise, introduction of point mutations into
either of these IRF-Es decreases stimulation of IFN-alpha induction by TPA and
constructs containing point mutations in both upstream IRF-Es are nonresponsive
to TPA. Binding of the inducible factor to the ISRE is abrogated in cells
depleted of PKC by prolonged treatment with TPA. PKC appears to function as a
signaling component in an IFN-independent pathway that increases the activity of 
IFN-alpha-regulated transcription factors in the nucleus.

PMID: 10524248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Gene. 1999 Sep 3;237(1):1-14.

Interferon regulatory factors: the next generation.

Mamane Y(1), Heylbroeck C, Génin P, Algarté M, Servant MJ, LePage C, DeLuca C,
Kwon H, Lin R, Hiscott J.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Molecular Oncology Group, Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research,
Jewish General Hospital, Montreal, Canada.

Interferons are a large family of multifunctional secreted proteins involved in
antiviral defense, cell growth regulation and immune activation. Viral infection 
induces transcription of multiple IFN genes, a response that is in part mediated 
by the interferon regulatory factors (IRFs). The initially characterized members 
IRF-1 and IRF-2 are now part of a growing family of transcriptional regulators
that has expanded to nine members. The functions of the IRFs have also expanded
to include distinct roles in biological processes such as pathogen response,
cytokine signaling, cell growth regulation and hematopoietic development. The aim
of this review is to provide an update on the novel discoveries in the area of
IRF transcription factors and the important roles of the new generation of
IRFs--particularly IRF-3, IRF-4 and IRF-7.

PMID: 10524230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Oncogene. 1999 Oct 14;18(42):5727-37.

The human papilloma virus (HPV)-18 E6 oncoprotein physically associates with Tyk2
and impairs Jak-STAT activation by interferon-alpha.

Li S(1), Labrecque S, Gauzzi MC, Cuddihy AR, Wong AH, Pellegrini S, Matlashewski 
GJ, Koromilas AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

We have examined the effects of human papilloma virus (HPV) E6 proteins on
interferon (IFN) signaling. Here we show that expression of the 'malignant'
HPV-18 E6 in human HT1080 cells results in inhibition of Jak-STAT activation in
response to IFN-alpha but not IFN-gamma. This inhibitory effect is not shared by 
the 'benign' HPV-11 E6. The DNA-binding and transactivation capacities of the
transcription factor ISGF3 are diminished in cells expressing HPV-18 E6 after
IFN-alpha treatment as a result of decreased tyrosine phosphorylation of Tyk2,
STAT2 and STAT1. However, HPV-18 E6 does not affect the induction of tyrosine
phosphorylation and DNA-binding of STAT1 by IFN-gamma. In addition, HPV E6
proteins physically interact with Tyk2. This interaction takes place preferably
with HPV-18 E6 and to a lesser extent with HPV-11 E6. The E6/Tyk2 interaction
requires the JH6-JH7 domains of Tyk2, which are important for Tyk2 binding to the
cytoplasmic portion of IFN-alpha receptor 1 (IFNAR1). These findings demonstrate 
an inhibitory role of HPV-18 E6 in the IFN-alpha-induced Jak-STAT pathway, which 
may be explained, at least in part, by the ability of E6 to interact with and
impair Tyk2 activation.

PMID: 10523853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 1;274(40):28075-8.

p48 (ISGF-3gamma) is involved in interferon-alpha-induced suppression of
hepatitis B virus enhancer-1 activity.

Nakao K(1), Nakata K, Yamashita M, Tamada Y, Hamasaki K, Ishikawa H, Kato Y,
Eguchi K, Ishii N.

Author information: 
(1)Health Research Center, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, 1-7-1,
Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan. kazuhiko@net.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha) suppresses hepatitis B virus (HBV) gene expression
by reducing its enhancer-1 activity. IFN-alpha induces transcription factors,
interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), and interferon regulatory factor-1
(IRF-1), which activate interferon-inducible gene expression through binding to
the interferon-stimulated regulatory element (ISRE) "AGTTTCNNTTTCNC" in the gene 
promoters. We found the ISRE-like sequence "AGGCTTTCACTTTCTC" in the HBV
enhancer-1 region and elucidated the role of this sequence. Gel mobility shift
assay showed binding of in vitro translated IRF-1 and in vitro translated p48
(ISGF3-gamma), which is a component of ISGF3 to this sequence. However, nuclear
extracts binding to this sequence from human hepatoma cells (HuH-7) treated with 
IFN-alpha contained only the protein consisted of p48. In transfection
experiments, IFN-alpha suppressed the HBV enhancer-1 activity, and overexpression
of p48 enhanced this inhibitory effect. Both mutation and deletion of the
ISRE-like sequence in the HBV enhancer-1 region reduced the suppressive effect of
IFN-alpha. Our results suggest that the ISRE-like sequence in the HBV enhancer-1 
can interact with the protein containing p48 and mediate the IFN-alpha-induced
suppression of the enhancer activity.

PMID: 10497156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 3;274(36):25343-9.

Stat protein transactivation domains recruit p300/CBP through widely divergent
sequences.

Paulson M(1), Pisharody S, Pan L, Guadagno S, Mui AL, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

The signal transduction and activator of transcription (Stat) gene family has
been highly conserved throughout evolution. Gene duplication and divergence has
produced 7 mammalian Stat genes, each of which mediates a distinct process. While
some Stat proteins are activated by multiple cytokines, Stat2 is highly specific 
for responses to type I interferon. We have cloned mouse Stat2 and found that
while its sequence was more divergent from its human homologue than any other
mouse-human Stat pairs, it was fully functional even in human cells. Overall
sequence identity was only 69%, compared with 85-99% similarity for other Stat
genes, and several individual domains that still served similar or identical
functions in both species were even less well conserved. The coiled-coil domain
responsible for interaction with IRF9 was only 65% identical and yet mouse Stat2 
interacted with either human or mouse IRF9; the carboxyl terminus was only 30%
identical and yet both regions functioned as equal transactivation domains. Both 
mouse and human transactivation domains recruited the p300/CBP coactivator and
were equally sensitive to inhibition by adenovirus E1A protein. Interestingly,
the Stat3 carboxyl terminus also functioned as a transactivator capable of
recruiting p300/CBP, as does the Stat1 protein, although with widely differing
potencies. Yet these proteins share no sequence similarity with Stat2. These data
demonstrate that highly diverged primary sequences can serve similar or identical
functions, and that the minimal regions of similarity between human and mouse
Stat2 may define the critical determinants for function.

PMID: 10464260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Oncogene. 1999 Jul 8;18(27):3944-53.

Retinoic acid resistance in NB4 APL cells is associated with lack of interferon
alpha synthesis Stat1 and p48 induction.

Pelicano L(1), Brumpt C, Pitha PM, Chelbi-Alix MK.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UPR 9051, Hôpital St. Louis, Paris, France.

In the t(15;17) acute promyelocytic leukaemia (APL), all trans-retinoic (RA)
treatment induces maturation leading to clinically complete but not durable
remission, as RA resistance develops in the treated patients as well as in vitro.
RA and interferons (IFNs) are known inhibitors of proliferation in various cells 
including those from APL. In this report, we show that they can act cooperatively
to inhibit growth and to induce differentiation of NB4 cells but not of two
RA-resistant NB4 derived cell lines, NB4-R1 and NB4-R2. However, the resistant
cell lines respond to IFN. In NB4 cells, RA increases the expression of Stat1,
p48 and IRF-1, three transcription factors playing a central role in the IFN
response and induces the synthesis and the secretion of IFN alpha. RA-induced IFN
alpha seems to play a role in inhibition of NB4 cell growth but not in their
differentiation. In the resistant cells, NB4-R1 and NB4-R2, both the induction of
IFN and the increase of Statl and p48 expression by RA are completely blocked. In
contrast, IRF-1 mRNA and protein expressions are induced in the three cell lines.
This suggests that increase of IRF-1 expression is not sufficient for IFN
induction. Our results identify some defects linked to RA-resistance in APL and
support the hypothesis that RA-induced Stat1 expression and IFN secretion may be 
one of the mechanisms mediating growth inhibition by RA.

PMID: 10435617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Virology. 1999 Jul 5;259(2):305-13.

The human papillomavirus E7 oncoprotein abrogates signaling mediated by
interferon-alpha.

Barnard P(1), McMillan NA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Immunology and Cancer Research, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, 4102, Australia.

Greater than 95% of all cervical carcinomas have been found to be associated with
"high-risk" human papillomavirus (mainly types 16 and 18) infections, with the
viral E6 and E7 oncoproteins essential for neoplastic development and
maintenance. Interferon-alpha (IFNalpha) is used in the treatment of HPV
infections yet both in vivo and in vitro data suggest that the virus has
developed mechanisms to avoid the effects of interferon. Here we show that the
HPV16 E7 oncoprotein is able to inhibit the induction of IFNalpha-inducible genes
but has no effect of IFNgamma-inducible genes. Expression of E7 correlates with
the loss of formation of the interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3)
transcription complex. Moreover, in the presence of E7, p48, the DNA-binding
component of ISGF3, was unable to translocate to the nucleus upon IFNalpha
stimulation. A direct protein-protein interaction was identified between E7 and
p48 with the site of interaction within E7 defined as the region between amino
acids 17-37, a domain that includes the binding site for the retinoblastoma
protein, pRb. These results suggest that HPV, via E7, targets p48, resulting in
the loss of IFNalpha-mediated signal transduction and may provide a means by
which HPV can avoid the innate immune system.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10388655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Immunol. 1999 May 15;162(10):6107-13.

Human cytomegalovirus inhibits IFN-alpha-stimulated antiviral and
immunoregulatory responses by blocking multiple levels of IFN-alpha signal
transduction.

Miller DM(1), Zhang Y, Rahill BM, Waldman WJ, Sedmak DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

The type I IFNs represent a primordial, tightly regulated defense system against 
acute viral infection. IFN-alpha confers resistance to viral infection by
activating a conserved signal transduction pathway that up-regulates direct
antiviral effectors and induces immunomodulatory activities. Given the critical
role of IFN-alpha in anti-human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) immunity and the profound 
ability of HCMV to escape the host immune response, we hypothesized that HCMV
blocks IFN-alpha-stimulated responses by disrupting multiple levels of the
IFN-alpha signal transduction pathway. We demonstrate that HCMV inhibits
IFN-alpha-stimulated MHC class I, IFN regulatory factor-1, MxA and
2',5-oligoadenylate synthetase gene expression, transcription factor activation, 
and signaling in infected fibroblasts and endothelial cells by decreasing the
expression of Janus kinase 1 and p48, two essential components of the IFN-alpha
signal transduction pathway. This investigation is the first to report inhibition
of type I IFN signaling by a herpesvirus. We propose that this novel immune
escape mechanism is a major means by which HCMV is capable of escaping host
immunity and establishing persistence.

PMID: 10229853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Eur J Biochem. 1999 Feb;260(1):137-44.

Dynamic redistribution of STAT1 protein in IFN signaling visualized by GFP fusion
proteins.

Köster M(1), Hauser H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Regulation and Differentiation, GBF-National Research
Institute for Biotechnology, Braunschweig, Germany.

STAT proteins (signal transducers and activators of transcription) are a family
of transcription factors which are used by many cytokines and cell growth factors
for initiating gene expression. They are activated by tyrosine phosphorylation
through the cytoplasmic domain of stimulated receptors. Upon phosphorylation STAT
proteins dimerize, translocate to the nucleus and activate transcription by
binding to specific recognition sites. Different cytokines activate different
subsets of STATs and other signaling proteins. We have made use of green
fluoresencent protein (GFP) fusion proteins to visualize the subcellular
localization and trafficking of STAT1, STAT2 and p48 during interferon (IFN)
stimulation and have analysed in detail STAT1-GFP trafficking in living cells.
Analysis of GFP fusion proteins allowed the determination of time kinetics of
subcellular trafficking in individual living cells. STAT1-GFP is
indistinguishable from its wild-type protein displaying strong activity as
transcriptional activator as well as the same time kinetics of transport to the
nucleus and retreat to the cytoplasm. After prolonged exposure to IFN, STAT1-GFP 
is no longer retained in the nucleus and relocation to the cytoplasm is observed.
Restimulation with the same type of IFN does not lead to repeated nuclear
translocation of STAT1-GFP. STAT1 is not subject of inhibition, as restimulation 
with another type of IFN allows immediate reuse of previously activated
STAT1-GFP. However, restimulation with the same type of IFN can be achieved when 
the primary stimulus is removed after a short induction period. This method of
visualizing signal transduction reveals a considerable inhomogeneity with respect
to the extent of STAT1-GFP shuttling within a clonal cell population, indicating 
that competence for full-blasted IFN response is restricted to a cellular
subpopulation whereas other cells respond incompletely, retarded or not at all.

PMID: 10091593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 1999 Jan;44(1):8-18.

[Dysfunction of host defence systems caused by virus infection].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujii N(1), Yokosawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Sapporo Medical University, Japan.

PMID: 10025169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 1999 Feb 12;274(7):4045-52.

The proximal tyrosines of the cytoplasmic domain of the beta chain of the type I 
interferon receptor are essential for signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat) 2 activation. Evidence that two Stat2 sites are required to 
reach a threshold of interferon alpha-induced Stat2 tyrosine phosphorylation that
allows normal formation of interferon-stimulated gene factor 3.

Nadeau OW(1), Domanski P, Usacheva A, Uddin S, Platanias LC, Pitha P, Raz R, Levy
D, Majchrzak B, Fish E, Colamonici OR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Tennessee, Memphis, Tennessee 38163,
USA.

The precise role of the different subunits (alpha/IFNAR1 and betaL/IFNAR2) of the
type I interferon receptor (IFN-R) in the activation of signal transducer and
activator of transcription (Stat) 1, Stat2, and Stat3 has not yet been
established. In this report we demonstrate that there are functionally redundant 
phosphotyrosine-dependent and -independent binding sites for Stat2 in the alpha
and beta subunits of the type I IFN-R. Expression of a type I IFN-R containing
only the constitutive Stat2 site or the proximal tyrosines of betaL, but not the 
docking site on the alpha chain (Tyr466 and Tyr481), supported low levels of
Stat2 activation. However, the presence of only one intact Stat2 site did not
lead to induction of interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) or an antiviral 
state. Normal levels of Stat2 tyrosine phosphorylation, induction of ISGF3, and
an antiviral effect always required the proximal tyrosines of betaL and at least 
one of the other Stat2 sites (Tyralpha466, 481 or betaL404-462). These data
suggest that a threshold of Stat2 tyrosine phosphorylation is required for
complete activation of ISGF3. Interestingly, a receptor in which all tyrosines
were mutated to phenylalanine shows normal Stat3 phosphorylation and low levels
of activation of Stat1.

PMID: 9933596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Biol Reprod. 1999 Feb;60(2):312-21.

Defective induction of the transcription factor interferon-stimulated gene
factor-3 and interferon alpha insensitivity in human trophoblast cells.

Cross JC(1), Lam S, Yagel S, Werb Z.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Development and Fetal Health, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, 
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X5. cross@mshri.on.ca

During pregnancy, trophoblast cells of the placenta contact maternal immune cells
and yet are protected from attack. One mechanism that may account for this is
that trophoblasts show altered expression of major histocompatibility complex
(MHC) antigens. The gene for human leukocyte antigen G (HLA-G), a nonclassical
gene, is expressed at high levels in trophoblast. Unlike other MHC class I genes,
the HLA-G gene lacks an interferon (IFN) response element. Moreover, we
demonstrate here that IFN, which regulates classical MHC class I genes in other
cell types, does not affect these genes in trophoblast, owing to inactivation of 
an IFNalpha signaling pathway. Trophoblast cells (JEG-3 and JAR) were found to be
selectively refractory to IFN. Specifically, although IFNalpha induced the
transcription factors STAT1, STAT2, and IFN regulatory factor-1, and a protective
response against encephalomyocarditis virus, it failed to protect the cells from 
vesicular stomatitis virus, activate a transfected MHC class I gene promoter, and
induce the transcription factor IFN-stimulated gene factor (ISGF)-3. The lack of 
ISGF3 DNA-binding activity apparently was due to diminished p48/ISGF3gamma
subunit activity since ISGF3 DNA-binding activity and IFNalpha induction of MHC
class I promoter activity were reconstituted by p48/ISGF3gamma supplementation.
These data indicate that a specific IFN signaling pathway is inactive in JEG-3
trophoblast cells because of altered activity of p48/ISGF3gamma, and they suggest
IFN insensitivity as a mechanism that may help promote feto-placental survival.

PMID: 9915996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Immunol. 1999 Jan 1;162(1):323-30.

A selective defect of IFN-gamma- but not of IFN-alpha-induced JAK/STAT pathway in
a subset of U937 clones prevents the antiretroviral effect of IFN-gamma against
HIV-1.

Bovolenta C(1), Lorini AL, Mantelli B, Camorali L, Novelli F, Biswas P, Poli G.

Author information: 
(1)AIDS Immunophatogenesis Unit, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
bovolenta.chiara@hsr.it

IFN-gamma induces transcription of several IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Recently,
the IFN-gamma-dependent Janus kinase (JAK)/STAT pathway has been shown to mediate
the activation of some ISGs, by the sequential phosphorylation of two JAK kinases
(JAK1 and JAK2) and of STAT1. Given that the JAK/STAT is the major, but not the
only pathway linked to the IFN-gammaR, aim of our work was to investigate the
signal-transduction pathway(s) by which IFN-gamma exerts its effects on acute
replication of HIV in monocytic cells. To this end, we utilized clones previously
derived from the U937 promonocytic cell line, differing for their efficient (plus
clones) or inefficient (minus clones) abilities of supporting HIV replication.
Unlike IFN-alpha, IFN-gamma did not inhibit HIV replication in plus clones,
whereas virus production in minus cells was efficiently inhibited by both types
of IFN. Plus clones generated a JAK/STAT signal-transduction pathway in response 
to IFN-alpha, but not IFN-gamma. In contrast, minus clones responded to either
cytokines. The functional defect of plus clones in response to IFN-gamma was
correlated to a selective defect of IFN-gammaR2, but not IFN-gammaR1, membrane
expression. Surprisingly enough, IFN-gamma stimulation of plus clones induced
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3gamma). These results strongly support the
hypothesis that the JAK/STAT pathway is responsible for the antiretroviral effect
of IFN-gamma, and further provide evidence for a potential second pathway
triggered by IFN-gamma in the absence of IFN-gammaR2 chain cell surface
expression and involving ISGF3gamma.

PMID: 9886402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Exp Cell Res. 1999 Jan 10;246(1):138-47.

Transcriptional induction of the p69 isoform of 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase
by interferon-beta and interferon-gamma involves three regulatory elements and
interferon-stimulated gene factor 3.

Floyd-Smith G(1), Wang Q, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, 85287-1501,
USA. ATGFS@ASUVM.INRE.ASU.EDU

The 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetases are key enzymes that mediate antiviral
actions of interferon (IFN). The mRNAs for the intermediate isoforms (p69) of
human 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase are rapidly induced 10- to 20-fold in
HT1080 glioma cells by IFN-beta and induced 3-fold at 24 h by IFN-gamma.
Induction is mediated by three regulatory elements, an IFN-stimulated response
element and two identical sites resembling interferon response factor binding
sites that are located within 300 bp of the transcriptional start site. Maximal
induction requires all three elements, yet mutation in the most distal IRF-1-like
site diminishes transcription only slightly. Mutation in the ISRE substantially
decreases constitutive expression but does not abrogate the response to IFNs.
Simultaneous mutation in all three elements abolishes responsiveness to both
IFN-beta and IFN-gamma. Both constitutive and IFN-beta-induced expression from
the p69 promoter is blocked in mutant cell lines deficient in components of the
transcription factor, interferon-stimulated gene factor 3, suggesting that it is 
the primary factor controlling IFN-beta induced expression of this gene.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 9882523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Biochimie. 1998 Aug-Sep;80(8-9):703-10.

Cooperative binding of Stat1-2 heterodimers and ISGF3 to tandem DNA elements.

Li X(1), Leung S, Burns C, Stark GR.

Author information: 
(1)The Lerner Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195,
USA.

Interferon (IFN)-alpha-activated Stat1 homodimers and Stat1-2 heterodimers bind
to GAS elements, whereas the transcription factor ISGF3, which contains Stat1,
Stat2 and p48, binds to ISREs. We now find that Stat1-2 dimers can form
heterotetramers on tandem GAS sites and that the heterotetramers have a much
higher binding affinity for a double GAS site than do heterodimers for a single
site, suggesting cooperativity mediated through protein-protein interactions.
Stat1-2 heterotetramers can also be detected with a single GAS site, again
indicating cooperativity mediated through protein-protein interactions. Deleting 
40 amino acid residues from the N-terminus of Stat1 abolished Stat1-Stat2
heterotetramer formation, but did not affect heterodimer formation and an
N-terminal peptide containing the first 120 residues of Stat2 inhibited
heterotetramer formation but did not affect heterodimer formation. Thus, the
N-terminal regions of both Stat1 and Stat2 are important for cooperative DNA
binding, and heterodimers probably interact with each other through these
regions. Cooperative binding of ISGF3 was also observed using the tandem ISREs
from the IFN-alpha responsive promoter of the 6-16 gene. A more abundant and
larger complex was formed with a probe containing two ISREs than with a probe
containing a single ISRE. The N-terminal regions of both Stat1 and Stat2 are
important for the cooperative binding of ISGF3 to tandem ISREs but not to a
single site. The cooperative DNA-binding activities of ISGF3 and Stat1-2 dimers
are likely to contribute to the transcriptional activation of those
IFN-alpha-responsive genes that have tandem DNA elements.

PMID: 9865492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Biochimie. 1998 Aug-Sep;80(8-9):641-50.

The role of interferon regulatory factors in the interferon system and cell
growth control.

Harada H(1), Taniguchi T, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

Complex cellular responses are often coordinated by a genetic regulatory network 
in which a given transcription factor controls the expression of a diverse set of
target genes. Interferon regulatory factor (IRF)-1 and IRF-2 have originally been
identified as a transcriptional activator and repressor, respectively, of the
interferon-beta (IFN-beta) as well as of IFN-inducible genes. However, these
factors have since been shown to modulate not only the cellular response to IFNs,
but also cell growth, susceptibility to transformation by oncogenes, induction of
apoptosis, and development of the T cell immune response. Furthermore, the
evidence suggests that deletion and/or inactivation of the IRF-1 gene may be a
critical step in the development of some human hematopoietic neoplasms.
Subsequently, these factors have been shown to constitute a family of
transcription factors, termed the IRF-family. Recent studies indicate that other 
IRF family members also involve the regulation of the IFN system and cell
transformation. The IRF-family may be examples of transcription factors which can
selectively modulate several sets of genes depending on the cell type and/or
nature of the cellular stimuli, so as to evoke host defense mechanisms against
infection and oncogenesis.

PMID: 9865486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Gene. 1998 Nov 5;222(1):83-90.

Maximal induction of p69 2', 5'-oligoadenylate synthetase in Daudi cells requires
cooperation between an ISRE and two IRF-1-like elements.

Wang Q(1), Floyd-Smith G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program and Department of Biology, Arizona
State University, Tempe, AZ 85287-1501, USA.

The human 2', 5'-oligoadenylate (2-5A) synthetases are members of a family
interferon (IFN)-inducible anti-viral proteins. Three size classes of these
enzymes: small (p40, p46), intermediate (p69, p71) and large (p100), are encoded 
by three genes that exhibit differential constitutive and IFN-inducible
expression. Since the 5'-regulatory region of the 69 kDa isoform contains
multiple putative control elements, deletion analysis and site directed
mutagenesis were done to identify key regulatory motifs. The region located
between bp -972 and -452 from the translational start site contains elements that
slightly repress constitutive and IFN-inducible transcription. The region from bp
-366 to -117 contains two positive regulatory elements that differ slightly from 
consensus IFN-regulated factor 1 (IRF-1) binding sites. In mobility shift assays,
the proximal IRF-1 site weakly binds a novel factor found in both control and
IFN-treated cells. The region from bp -117 to -10 contains a functional
interferon stimulated response element (ISRE) that contributes to constitutive
expression and confers IFN-inducibility on a heterologous promoter. The ISRE
specifically binds an IFN-inducible factor that contains signal transducer
activator of transcription (STAT) 1alpha. The ISRE and the two IRF-1-like sites
cooperatively interact to control transcription. These three elements are
sufficient for constitutive and IFN-inducible expression, since expression from
reporter constructs containing mutations in all three elements is low in both
control and IFN-treated cells.

PMID: 9813254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Immunol. 1998 Nov 1;161(9):4736-44.

p48/STAT-1alpha-containing complexes play a predominant role in induction of
IFN-gamma-inducible protein, 10 kDa (IP-10) by IFN-gamma alone or in synergy with
TNF-alpha.

Majumder S(1), Zhou LZ, Chaturvedi P, Babcock G, Aras S, Ransohoff RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, OH 44195, USA.

Human IFN-gamma-inducible protein, 10 kDa (hIP-10) and murine IP-10 (mIP-10)
genes are induced by IFN-gamma alone, and synergistically induced by TNF-alpha
and IFN-gamma. Upstream regions of the human and murine genes contain conserved
regulatory motifs, including an IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE), which
governs response of the mIP-10 gene to IFN-gamma. Trans-acting factors mediating 
the IFN-gamma response via ISRE remain incompletely defined. We examined
ISRE-binding factors in the regulation of the hIP-10 gene. The requirement of p48
for hIP-10 induction by IFN-gamma, with or without TNF-alpha, was demonstrated
using p48-deficient U2A cells. An hIP-10 promoter-reporter mutant (mISRE3) that
was relatively deficient for binding a related factor, IFN regulatory factor-1
(IRF-1) but competent for binding p48, was induced as well as the wild-type
hIP-10 promoter, supporting the interpretation that p48 played a necessary and
sufficient role in hIP-10 transcription. Genomic in vivo footprinting revealed
IFN-gamma/TNF-alpha-inducible binding at the ISRE consistent with the presence of
p48 and associated factors, but not with IRF-1. Induction of hIP-10 by
TNF-alpha/IFN-gamma also required NFkappaB binding sites, which were protected in
vivo and bound p65 homodimeric NFkappaB in vitro. These results documented the
essential role of p48 (complexed with STAT-1alpha) for induction and sustained
transcription of the IP-10 gene, strongly suggesting that IRF-1 is not required
for IP-10 induction by these inflammatory cytokines.

PMID: 9794404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1998 Sep;18(9):773-81.

The proximal interferon-stimulated response elements are essential for interferon
responsiveness: a promoter analysis of the antiviral MxA gene.

Ronni T(1), Matikainen S, Lehtonen A, Palvimo J, Dellis J, Van Eylen F, Goetschy 
JF, Horisberger M, Content J, Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology, National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.

Interferon (IFN)-inducible human MxA protein mediates resistance against
influenza and several other RNA viruses. The MxA gene is under the control of
type I IFN and, in certain cell types, is also directly activated by viruses.
Here we show that in human macrophages, MxA mRNA levels are upregulated by very
low doses of IFN-alpha in a dose-dependent manner. A similar, albeit much weaker,
dose-dependent induction was seen with IFN-gamma. The induction was rapid and
independent of protein synthesis. Interleukin-6 (IL-6) or tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) did not influence MxA mRNA levels alone or in
combination with IFNs, in spite of the presence of putative response elements of 
these cytokines in the MxA promoter. We show that the promoter of the MxA gene
contains two functional IFN-stimulated response elements (ISRE) near the
transcription start site and one homologous ISRE-like element, which is
apparently nonfunctional, further upstream. The two proximal ISRE sites are
essential for IFN-alpha-induced transcription and appear to be binding sites for 
IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 complex. In addition, EMSA and DNAse I footprinting 
analysis demonstrated that Spl binds with high affinity to a region encompassing 
nucleotides -25 and -50 and, thus, may provide means of interaction with the
basal transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 9781817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Circ Res. 1998 Oct 19;83(8):815-23.

Interferon induction of TAP1: the phosphatase SHP-1 regulates crossover between
the IFN-alpha/beta and the IFN-gamma signal-transduction pathways.

Min W(1), Pober JS, Johnson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and the Molecular Cardiobiology Program, Boyer Center 
for Molecular Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, 
USA.

Interferon (IFN)-gamma and IFN-alpha/beta induction of the transporter associated
with antigen processing-1 (TAP1) promoter was compared in HeLa cells and
endothelial cells (ECs). In HeLa cells, IFN-gamma acts through
Stat1alpha/Stat1alpha homodimers binding to the gamma activating sequence (GAS)
and IFN-alpha/beta acts through Stat1/Stat2/p48 binding to the IFN-stimulated
response element (ISRE). In ECs, however, IFN-gamma and IFN-alpha/beta act
through both the GAS and ISRE. The basis of the IFN signaling crossover in ECs
was investigated. HeLa and ECs contain similar ratios of Stat1alpha to Stat2
proteins, and IFN-alpha/beta also activates the same Janus kinases (JAKs) (Jak1
and tyrosine kinase (Tyk) 2 but not Jak2). However, IFN-alpha/beta activates more
Stat1alpha than does IFN-gamma in ECs, whereas the reverse occurs in HeLa, and
expression of the IFN-alpha/beta receptor-associated phosphatase SHP-1 is much
lower in ECs than HeLa cells. Overexpression of SHP-1 in ECs blocks
IFN-alpha/beta signaling through GAS, and expression of a dominan negative SHP-1 
in HeLa cells permits IFN-alpha/ss signaling through GAS, demonstrating a role
for SHP-1 in regulating crossovers between the IFN-alpha/beta and IFN-gamma
signaling pathways.

PMID: 9776728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Gen Virol. 1998 Aug;79 ( Pt 8):2007-12.

Biological efficacy and signal transduction through STAT proteins of recombinant 
duck interferon in duck hepatitis B virus infection.

Heuss LT(1), Heim MH, Schultz U, Wissmann D, Offensperger WB, Staeheli P, Blum
HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital Freiburg, Germany.

The aim of this study was to characterize the interferon induced intracellular
signals in duck hepatocytes and to investigate the effects of duck interferon on 
virus replication in duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV) infected ducks. Interestingly,
duck interferon was found to activate intracellular signal transduction pathways 
similar to those of its mammalian counterparts. An interferon stimulated gel
shift activity like that of gene factor 3 is induced, as well as serum inducible 
element binding factors homologous to serum inducible factor A (SIF-A), SIF-B and
SIF-C. Duck interferon induced signal transducer and activator of transcription
activation is not inhibited by DHBV infection of hepatocytes. DHBV infected ducks
treated for 10 days with recombinant duck interferon show a decrease in viral DNA
in hepatocytes, and in many cases disappearance of viraemia. These findings
confirm the usefulness of the DHBV infection model for the study of human
hepatitis B virus infection.

PMID: 9714251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cytokine Growth Factor Rev. 1997 Dec;8(4):293-312.

The growing family of interferon regulatory factors.

Nguyen H(1), Hiscott J, Pitha PM.

Author information: 
(1)Lady Davis Institute for Medical Research, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, McGill University, Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Interferons (IFN) exert their multiple biological effects through the induction
of expression of over 30 genes encoding proteins with antiviral,
antiproliferative and immunomodulatory functions. Among the many IFN-inducible
proteins are the Interferon Regulatory Factors (IRFs), a family of transcription 
regulators, originally consisting of the well-characterized IRF-1 and IRF-2
proteins; the family has now expanded to over 10 members and is still growing.
The present review provides a detailed description of recently characterized IRF 
family members. Studies analyzing IRF-expressing cell lines and IRF knockout mice
reveal that each member of the IRF family exerts distinct roles in biological
processes such as pathogen response, cytokine signalling, cell growth regulation 
and hematopoietic development. Understanding the molecular mechanisms by which
the IRFs affect these important cellular events and IFN expression will
contribute to a greater understanding of events leading to various viral, immune 
and malignant disease states and will suggest novel strategies for antiviral and 
immune modulatory therapy.

PMID: 9620643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Exp Med. 1998 Jun 1;187(11):1799-811.

The serine proteinase inhibitor (serpin) plasminogen activation inhibitor type 2 
protects against viral cytopathic effects by constitutive interferon alpha/beta
priming.

Antalis TM(1), La Linn M, Donnan K, Mateo L, Gardner J, Dickinson JL, Buttigieg
K, Suhrbier A.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Cancer Fund Experimental Oncology Unit, The Queensland Institute of
Medical Research, Brisbane 4029, Australia. toniA@qimr.edu.au

The serine proteinase inhibitor (serpin) plasminogen activator inhibitor type 2
(PAI-2) is well characterized as an inhibitor of extracellular urokinase-type
plasminogen activator. Here we show that intracellular, but not extracellular,
PAI-2 protected cells from the rapid cytopathic effects of alphavirus infection. 
This protection did not appear to be related to an effect on apoptosis but was
associated with a PAI-2-mediated induction of constitutive low-level interferon
(IFN)-alpha/beta production and IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) activation, 
which primed the cells for rapid induction of antiviral genes. This primed
phenotype was associated with a rapid development of resistance to infection by
the PAI-2 transfected cells and the establishment of a persistent productive
infection. PAI-2 was also induced in macrophages in response to viral RNA
suggesting that PAI-2 is a virus response gene. These observations, together with
the recently demonstrated PAI-2-mediated inhibition of tumor necrosis
factor-alpha induced apoptosis, (a) illustrate that PAI-2 has an additional and
distinct function as an intracellular regulator of signal transduction pathway(s)
and (b) demonstrate a novel activity for a eukaryotic serpin.

PMCID: PMC2212304
PMID: 9607921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Immunol. 1998 Jun 1;160(11):5475-84.

IFN-gamma priming up-regulates IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) components,
augmenting responsiveness of IFN-resistant melanoma cells to type I IFNs.

Wong LH(1), Hatzinisiriou I, Devenish RJ, Ralph SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University, Clayton, 
Victoria, Australia.

IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) mediates transcriptional activation of
IFN-sensitive genes (ISGs). The component subunits of ISGF3, STAT1alphabeta,
STAT2, and p48-ISGF3gamma, are tyrosine phosphorylated before their assembly into
a complex. Subsequently, the ISGF3 complex is translocated to the nucleus. We
have recently established that the responsiveness of human melanoma cell lines to
type I IFNs correlates directly with their intracellular levels of ISGF3
components, particularly STAT1. In the present study, we show that pretreating
IFN-resistant melanoma cell lines with IFN-gamma (IFN-gamma priming) before
stimulation with type I IFN also results in increased levels of ISGF3 components 
and enhanced DNA-binding activation of ISGF3. In addition, IFN-gamma priming of
IFN-resistant melanoma cell lines increased expression of type I IFN-induced ISG 
products, including ISG54, 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthase, HLA class I, B7-1, and 
ICAM-1 Ags. Furthermore, IFN-gamma priming enhanced the antiviral effect of
IFN-beta on the IFN-resistant melanoma cell line, MM96. These results support a
role for IFN-gamma priming in up-regulating ISGF3, thereby augmenting the
responsiveness of IFN-resistant melanoma cell lines to type I IFN and providing a
molecular basis and justification for using sequential IFN therapy, as proposed
by others, to enhance the use of IFNs in the treatment of melanoma.

PMID: 9605150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 7;272(45):28779-85.

Interferon-resistant human melanoma cells are deficient in ISGF3 components,
STAT1, STAT2, and p48-ISGF3gamma.

Wong LH(1), Krauer KG, Hatzinisiriou I, Estcourt MJ, Hersey P, Tam ND, Edmondson 
S, Devenish RJ, Ralph SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Monash University,
Wellington Road, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia.

The mechanism of IFN resistance was examined in three long-term cell lines,
SK-MEL-28, SK-MEL-3, and MM96, exhibiting significant variation in responsiveness
to the antiproliferative and antiviral effects of type I IFNs. The JAK-STAT
components involved in IFN signal transduction were analyzed in detail. After
exposure to IFN, activation of the IFN type I receptor-linked tyrosine kinases,
JAK-1 and TYK-2, was detected at similar levels in both IFN-sensitive and
IFN-resistant cell types, indicating that IFN resistance did not result from a
deficiency in signaling at the level of receptor-associated kinase activation.
However, analysis of ISGF3 transcription factor components, STAT1, STAT2, and
p48-ISGF3gamma, revealed that their expression and activation correlated with
cellular IFN responsiveness. The analysis was extended to also include
IFN-sensitive primary melanocytes, three additional IFN-resistant melanoma cell
lines, and seven cell cultures recently established from melanoma patient
biopsies. It was consistently observed that the most marked difference in ISGF3
was a lack of STAT1 in the resistant versus the sensitive cells. Transfection of 
the IFN-resistant MM96 cell line to express increased levels of STAT1 protein
partially restored IFN responsiveness in an antiviral assay. We conclude that a
defect in the level of STAT1 and possibly all three ISGF3 components in
IFN-resistant human melanoma cells may be a general phenomenon responsible for
reduced cellular responsiveness of melanomas to IFNs.

PMID: 9353349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Cytokine. 1997 Sep;9(9):660-5.

Phospholipase C gamma 1 overexpression and activation induced by interferon beta 
in human T lymphocytes: an ISGF3-independent response.

Miscia S(1), Di Baldassarre A, Rana RA, Cataldi A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Morfologia Umana, Università G. D'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy.
s.miscia@morpho.unich.it

Interferons exert their antiviral, antiproliferative and immunoregulatory
activities by stimulating the expression of several genes. Such genes disclose a 
common element within their promoters, defined Interferon Stimulated Response
Element (ISRE), which binds a nuclear factor(s) translocated from the cytoplasm
to the nucleus (ISGF3) after the binding of interferon (IFN) to the specific
receptor. Here we report the induction of the synthesis and of the hydrolytic
activity of phospholipase C gamma 1 (PLC gamma 1) in human T lymphocytes by
IFN-beta. The increased level of PLC gamma 1 becomes evident after 90 min of
IFN-beta treatment and is still detectable after 24 h. Neither the PLC gamma 1
overexpression induced by IFN nor the increased hydrolytic activity of the enzyme
appear to be affected by pretreatment of the cells with the protein tyrosine
kinase inhibitor genistein, which is known to prevent the association of ISGF3
components. These results suggest that in human T lymphocytes IFN-beta can
activate other transcription factor(s) distinct from ISGF3 to regulate PLC gamma 
1 expression. In addition, the ability of this enzyme to hydrolyse PIP2, also in 
the presence of genistein, implies the possibility that this enzyme can exert its
hydrolytic activity independently of protein tyrosine kinase activation.

PMID: 9325014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Virol. 1997 Sep;71(9):6887-97.

Interferon-independent and -induced regulation of Epstein-Barr virus EBNA-1 gene 
transcription in Burkitt lymphoma.

Nonkwelo C(1), Ruf IK, Sample J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Virology and Molecular Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

Replication of the Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) genome within latently infected cells
is dependent on the EBV EBNA-1 protein. The objective of this study was to
identify transcriptional regulatory proteins that mediate EBNA-1 expression via
the viral promoter Qp, which is active in EBV-associated tumors such as Burkitt
lymphoma and nasopharyngeal carcinoma. Results of a yeast one-hybrid screen
suggested that a subset of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family may
regulate EBNA-1 transcription by targeting an essential cis-regulatory element of
Qp, QRE-2. Further investigation indicated that the transcriptional activator
IRF-1 and the closely related IRF-2, a repressor of interferon-induced gene
expression, are both capable of activating Qp. However, the major QRE-2-specific 
binding activity detected within extracts of Burkitt lymphoma cells was
attributed to IRF-2, suggesting that interferon-independent activation of Qp is
largely mediated by IRF-2 in these cells. We observed no effect of gamma
interferon on Qp activity in transfection assays, whereas we observed a moderate 
but significant repression of Qp activity in response to alpha interferon,
possibly mediated by either the interferon consensus sequence binding protein or 
IRF-7, a novel alpha interferon-inducible factor identified in this study. Since 
expression of IRF-1 and IRF-2 is increased in response to interferons, the Qp
activity observed in the presence of interferon likely represented an equilibrium
between IRF factors that activate and those that repress gene expression in
response to interferon. Thus, by usurping both IRF-1 and its transcriptional
antagonist IRF-2 to activate Qp, EBV has evolved not only a mechanism to
constitutively express EBNA-1 but also one which may sustain EBNA-1 expression in
the face of the antiviral effects of interferon.

PMCID: PMC191971
PMID: 9261415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 29;272(35):21872-7.

Regulation of interferon-alpha responsiveness by the duration of Janus kinase
activity.

Lee CK(1), Bluyssen HA, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Kaplan Cancer Center, New York University School
of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Daudi B lymphoblastoid cells are highly sensitive to the anti-growth and
anti-viral effects of interferon (IFN). Unlike many cell lines, these cells show 
prolonged transcription of IFN-stimulated genes following treatment with
IFN-alpha. This prolonged response correlated with the continued presence of the 
activated transcription factor, IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). Pulse-chase
labeling experiments indicated that the half-life of the phosphorylation of
signal transducers and activators of transcription (Stat)1 and Stat2 was short
(<2 h) although the turnover of the proteins themselves was slow (>24 h),
indicative of a constitutive phosphatase activity. The administration of
protein-tyrosine kinase inhibitors at any time point during IFN stimulation led
to rapid inhibition of the response, indicating that tyrosine kinase activity was
continuously required. Catalytic activity of Jak1 and Tyk2 kinases remained
elevated for prolonged periods following stimulation. Continuous presence of
IFN-alpha was necessary for maintaining prolonged activation of ISGF3 and of
Janus kinases, an activity that was blocked by antibodies to IFN-alpha or by
cycloheximide. Conditioned medium of IFN-alpha-stimulated cells was capable of
stimulating STAT activation in naive cells. Taken together, these results suggest
that the response to IFN-alpha is controlled by the duration of stimulated Janus 
kinase activity over the background of constitutive dephosphorylation and that
this response can be sustained by autocrine secretion of IFN-alpha.

PMID: 9268319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Aug 8;1333(1):M9-17.

IRF-1: the transcription factor linking the interferon response and oncogenesis.

Taniguchi T(1), Lamphier MS, Tanaka N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo Hongo,
Japan. tada@m.u-tokyo.ac.jp

PMID: 9294015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):20070-6.

Distinct STAT structure promotes interaction of STAT2 with the p48 subunit of the
interferon-alpha-stimulated transcription factor ISGF3.

Martinez-Moczygemba M(1), Gutch MJ, French DL, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York
11794, USA.

Cells express a variety of STAT (signal transducer and activator of
transcription) transcription factors that are structurally homologous and yet
function specifically in response to particular cytokines. The functions of the
individual STATs are dependent on distinct protein-protein interactions. STAT1
and STAT2 are activated by tyrosine phosphorylation in response to type I
interferons-alpha/beta (IFN-alpha/beta) and subsequently form a multimeric
transcription factor designated the IFN-alpha-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3).
ISGF3 is a unique STAT complex because it also contains a non-STAT molecule, p48,
which is a critical DNA-binding component. We provide evidence that STAT2
specifically interacts with p48 in vivo before and after IFN-alpha stimulation.
The specificity of ISGF3 formation is therefore a result of the distinct nature
of the STAT2 molecule. Coimmunoprecipitation assays demonstrate p48 association
with STAT2 but not STAT1. Hybrid STAT2. STAT1 molecules were used to identify a
region of STAT2 which specifically associates with p48. The region of STAT2
interaction spans an amino-terminal region of two predicted coiled coils. The
studies demonstrate the in vivo existence of a STAT2.p48 complex and a distinct
STAT2.STAT1 complex after IFN-alpha stimulation. Data suggest that distinct
bipartite complexes STAT2.p48 and STAT2.STAT1 translocate to the nucleus and
associate on the DNA target site as ISGF3.

PMID: 9242679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Virol. 1997 Jul;71(7):5095-101.

Restoration of interferon responses of adenovirus E1A-expressing HT1080 cell
lines by overexpression of p48 protein.

Leonard GT(1), Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Research
Institute, Ohio 44195, USA.

We have previously shown that both alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) and IFN-gamma
signaling pathways are blocked in HeLa cells expressing the adenovirus E1A
proteins (G. T. Leonard and G. C. Sen, Virology 224:25-33, 1996). Here, we report
that in two other E1A-expressing cell lines derived from the HT1080 cells,
neither IFN-alpha nor IFN-gamma could induce the transcription of genes
containing the IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE). In contrast,
IFN-gamma-mediated signaling to the gamma-activated sequence was unimpaired in
these cells. This dichotomy was due to a lowered level of functional p48 protein 
but not of STAT1 protein in the E1A-expressing HT1080 cells. When p48 was
overexpressed in those cells by stably transfecting a p48 expression vector, both
types of IFN could effectively induce the transcription of ISRE-driven genes.
Consequently, IFN-alpha was highly effective in inhibiting the replication of
encephelomyocarditis virus in the E1A-expressing cells, which also overexpressed 
p48. These results reinforce the general conclusion that adenovirus E1A proteins 
block IFN signaling pathways by lowering the functional levels of one or more
components of the trans-acting complexes that activate the transcription of
IFN-stimulated genes.

PMCID: PMC191743
PMID: 9188575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Cytokine. 1997 Jun;9(6):383-93.

Susceptibility to virus infection is determined by a Stat-mediated response to
the autocrine effect of virus-induced type I interferon.

Improta T(1), Pine R.

Author information: 
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham NC 27710, USA.

Interferon (IFN) signalling appears to be the predominant pathway that leads to
the development of the host defence against virus. However, other mechanisms that
are IFN independent may also be involved. The Stat1 transcription factor is
specific for the IFN pathway and plays a central role in mediating many, if not
all, IFN-dependent biological responses. Viral infection of cells in the presence
or absence of Stat1 was studied to examine the role of IFN-dependent and
independent antiviral mechanisms. A lower virus yield measured by plaque assays
was observed following challenge with VSV, EMCV and NDV of cells in which either 
Stat1a or Stat1b was present compared to those lacking both forms of the Stat
protein. The more efficient antiviral response was abolished when cells were
infected with virus in the presence of IFN-neutralizing antibodies, suggesting
that a Stat-dependent pathway is activated following virus infection by
endogenously produced IFN. Virus-induced Stat protein translocation from the
cytoplasmic compartment, detected within 3 h of infection, and Stat-dependent
transcriptional activation of ISGF2 in response to virus challenge, were also
abolished by neutralizing type I IFN. Thus, susceptibility to virus infection can
be determined by the cell's ability to respond to autocrine IFN through the
Stat-mediated pathway of gene induction.

PMID: 9199872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Jun;8(6):687-98.

Retinoic acid induces signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1, 
STAT2, and p48 expression in myeloid leukemia cells and enhances their
responsiveness to interferons.

Matikainen S(1), Ronni T, Lehtonen A, Sareneva T, Melén K, Nordling S, Levy DE,
Julkunen I.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Helsinki, Finland.

IFNs are antiproliferative cytokines that have growth-inhibitory effects on
various normal and malignant cells. Therefore, they have been used in the
treatment of certain forms of cancer, such as chronic myelogenous leukemia and
hairy cell leukemia. However, there is little evidence that IFNs would be
effective in the treatment of acute myelogenous leukemia, and molecular
mechanisms underlying IFN unresponsiveness have not been clarified. Here we have 
studied the activation and induction of IFN-specific transcription factors signal
transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) 1, STAT2, and p48 in
all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)-differentiated myeloid leukemia cells using
promyelocytic NB4, myeloblastic HL-60, and monoblastic U937 cells as model
systems. These cells respond to ATRA by growth inhibition and differentiation. We
show that in undifferentiated NB4 cells, 2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase and MxB 
gene expression is not activated by IFN-alpha, possibly due to a relative lack of
signaling molecules, especially p48 protein. However, during ATRA-induced
differentiation, steady-state STAT1, STAT2, and especially p48 mRNA and
corresponding protein levels were elevated both in NB4 and U937 cells, apparently
correlating to an enhanced responsiveness of these cells to IFNs. ATRA treatment 
of NB4 cells sensitized them to IFN action as seen by increased IFN-gamma
activation site DNA-binding activity or by efficient formation of
IFN-alpha-specific ISGF3 complex and subsequent oligoadenylate synthetase and MxB
gene expression. Lack of p48 expression could be one of the mechanisms of
promyelocytic leukemia cell escape from growth-inhibitory effects of IFN-alpha.

PMID: 9186002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Biol Chem. 1997 Apr 25;272(17):11002-5.

The short form of the interferon alpha/beta receptor chain 2 acts as a dominant
negative for type I interferon action.

Pfeffer LM(1), Basu L, Pfeffer SR, Yang CH, Murti A, Russell-Harde D, Croze E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA. lpfeffer@utmem1.utmem.edu

We have characterized the functional properties of the short form of the human
interferon alpha/beta receptor chain 2 (IFNAR2), denoted IFNAR2.1. IFNAR2.1
contains a shortened cytoplasmic domain when compared with the recently cloned
full-length IFNAR2 chain (IFNAR2. 2). We show that IFNalpha8 and IFNbeta1b induce
antiviral and antiproliferative activity in mouse cell transfectants expressing
the human IFNAR1 chain of the receptor and induce the formation of STAT1/STAT2
dimers in IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE)-dependent gel shift assays. In
contrast, coexpression of IFNAR2.1 with IFNAR1 reduces the IFN-induced antiviral,
antiproliferative and ISRE-dependent gel shift binding activity conferred by
IFNAR1 alone. No antiviral or antiproliferative response to IFN, nor IFN-induced 
ISRE-dependent gel shift binding activity, was observed when IFNAR2.1 was
expressed alone in murine cells. Therefore, IFNAR2.1 acts as a dominant negative 
for these IFN-induced activities. Our results suggest that IFNAR2.1 represents a 
nonfunctional version of the full-length chain (IFNAR2.2).

PMID: 9110990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Cell Biochem. 1997 Feb;167(1-2):169-77.

Tamoxifen enhances interferon-regulated gene expression in breast cancer cells.

Lindner DJ(1), Kolla V, Kalvakolanu DV, Borden EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Maryland Cancer
Center, Baltimore 21201, USA.

The molecular basis for the enhanced growth inhibition of MCF-7 human breast
cancer xenografts by a combination of human interferon-beta (IFN-beta) and
tamoxifen was investigated. Treatment of MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and BT-20 cells with 
the combination of IFN-beta and tamoxifen resulted in enhanced antiproliferative 
effects in vitro. Treatment with the combination of IFN-beta and tamoxifen
enhanced the expression of several IFN-beta-inducible genes in human breast
carcinoma cell lines relative to levels induced by IFN-beta alone. Tamoxifen
alone did not induce transcription of IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs). Augmentation
of ISG expression by the combination of IFN-beta and tamoxifen was noted in
breast tumor cell lines irrespective of their functional estrogen receptor (ER)
status or their dependence on estradiol for growth, suggesting that upregulation 
of ISGs was independent of ER status. Enhancement of IFN-stimulated gene
expression by tamoxifen occurred at the transcriptional level. Expression of
transfected reporter genes under the control of IFN-alpha/beta regulated
promoters was also enhanced in IFN-beta and tamoxifen-treated cells. Similarly,
transcriptional induction of chimeric reporter plasmids driven by an IFN-gamma
inducible promoter (GAS; IFN-gamma activated site) was also enhanced by the
combination of IFN-gamma and tamoxifen. In tamoxifen treated cells, IFN-beta and 
IFN-gamma readily activated transcription factors ISGF-3 and GAF, respectively.
Therefore, augmentation of ISG expression by tamoxifen is an early event in the
antitumoral activity of this drug combination.

PMID: 9059994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Immunol. 1996 Dec 1;157(11):5145-54.

A dominant negative mutant of an IFN regulatory factor family protein inhibits
both type I and type II IFN-stimulated gene expression and antiproliferative
activity of IFNs.

Thornton AM(1), Ogryzko VV, Dent A, Sharf R, Levi BZ, Kanno Y, Staudt LM, Howard 
BH, Ozato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    J Immunol 1999 Mar 1;162(5):3103.

Type I (alpha,beta) and type II (gamma) IFNs elicit antiproliferative and
antiviral activities through two distinct transcription pathways involving 1) IRF
family proteins and ISGF3, and 2) STAT1. We have employed a dominant negative
strategy to study the role of IRF family proteins in eliciting the biologic
activities of IFN. A truncated IRF protein retaining the DNA-binding domain (DBD)
of ICSBP (a member of the IRF family) was stably transfected into U937 monocytic 
cells. Clones expressing DBD had markedly reduced ISRE-binding activity and were 
defective in expressing several type I IFN-inducible genes. STAT1 was one such
type I IFN-inducible gene whose expression was also inhibited in DBD clones. As a
result, the expression of several IFN-gamma-inducible genes was also inhibited in
these clones, indicating functional coupling of the type I and type II IFN
transcription pathways. Furthermore, DBD clones grew more slowly than control
clones and were refractory to antiproliferative effects of both types of IFNs. We
found that IFN treatment of U937 cells leads to a G1 arrest and an increase in
underphosphorylated retinoblastoma gene product. However, IFN treatment did not
change the cell cycle profile, nor retinoblastoma gene product phosphorylation
state in DBD clones. These data indicate that expression of DBD disrupts cell
cycle regulatory mechanisms. Combined with the previously noted failure of DBD
clones to elicit antiviral activity, the present work shows that IRF family
proteins play an integral part in growth control activities of IFNs.

PMID: 8943426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Nature. 1996 Sep 26;383(6598):344-7.

Cooperation of Stat2 and p300/CBP in signalling induced by interferon-alpha.

Bhattacharya S(1), Eckner R, Grossman S, Oldread E, Arany Z, D'Andrea A,
Livingston DM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

The transcription factor ISGF3 transduces interferon (IFN)-alpha signals and
activates the transcription of cellular antiviral defence genes. Adenovirus E1A
blocks the IFN-alpha response, allowing unhindered viral replication. ISGF3
consists of Stat1, Stat2 and p48. Here we show that p300 and/or CBP (CREB-binding
protein), which are transcription adaptors targeted by E1A, interact specifically
with Stat2. Binding occurs between the first cysteine-histidine-rich region of
p300/CBP and the carboxy-terminal segment of Stat2, a domain essential for ISGF3 
function. We find that this domain of Stat2 has transactivation potential, which 
correlates with its binding to p300/CBP. Moreover, E1A represses Stat2
transactivation and IFN-alpha-activated transcription by inhibiting p300/CBP
function. This provides a new mechanism for inhibition of the IFN-alpha-activated
antiviral response by E1A, and supports the view that E1A binding to p300/CBP has
functional significance for adenovirus replication in its natural host.

PMID: 8848048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Interferon Cytokine Res. 1996 Jul;16(7):507-10.

Expression of intracellular interferon constitutively activates ISGF3 and confers
resistance to EMC viral infection.

Rutherford MN(1), Kumar A, Coulombe B, Skup D, Carver DH, Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

The mechanism(s) by which interferon (IFN)-alpha confers resistance to viruses is
currently being characterized. Previous studies have shown that binding of
IFN-alpha to its high-affinity receptor activates transcription factor
interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), which positively regulates a number 
of antiviral genes including 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (2-5A synthetase).
We show that mouse L cells expressing nonsecreted (intracellular) type I human
IFN are less susceptible to encephalomyocarditis (EMC) virus infection and have
increased levels of 2-5A synthetase. The 2-5A synthetase promoter is
constitutively induced, and the antiviral effects are most likely mediated
through activation of ISGF3, which occurs constitutively in cell lines expressing
intracellular interferon. These data suggest that the internalization of
IFN-alpha may play a role in the antiviral properties associated with IFN.

PMID: 8836915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Leukoc Biol. 1996 Jul;60(1):137-46.

Constitutive expression of specific interferon isotypes in peripheral blood
leukocytes from normal individuals and in promonocytic U937 cells.

Lallemand C(1), Lebon P, Rizza P, Blanchard B, Tovey MG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral Oncology, CNRS, Villejuif, France.

Constitutive expression of IFN-alpha5 and IFN-beta was detected in different
lymphoid cells including peripheral blood mononuclear cells from normal
individuals following amplification of IFN mRNA by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing of the amplified
product. The activated form of the interferon-induced transcription factor
complex ISGF3 was also detected in nuclear extracts from uninduced cells. Culture
supernatants from uninduced U937 cells were also found to activate an ISRE cloned
upstream of the luciferase reporter gene, indicating the presence of endogenous
IFN activity equivalent to approximately 0.3 to 0.5 IU/mL. This endogenous IFN
was also shown to play a role in maintaining the basal level of expression of the
major histocompatibility class I genes in lymphoid cells. These results suggest
that IFN-alpha5 and IFN-beta are produced at low levels in normal tissues and
play an important role in the regulation of cell function and in the maintenance 
of homeostasis.

PMID: 8699118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 1996 May 24;271(21):12408-13.

Application of genomic DNA affinity chromatography identifies multiple
interferon-alpha-regulated Stat2 complexes.

Ghislain JJ(1), Fish EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha)-induced signal transduction is mediated by the
phosphorylation-activation of the signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) proteins Stat1, Stat2, and Stat3. Previous studies have
shown that these activated STATs dimerize to form four distinct STAT complexes
which translocate to the nucleus and activates transcription by binding to
specific promoter elements. The interferon-stimulated gene factor-3 (ISGF3)
consists of Stat2 and Stat1 heterodimers in association with a DNA-binding
protein, p48, that binds to the interferon stimulated response element. Homo-and 
heterodimers of Stat1 and Stat3 bind to the palindromic interferon response
element (pIRE). In this report we demonstrate the utility of a biochemical
procedure that we have developed, based on genomic DNA affinity chromatography,
for the identification of IFN-alpha-induced STAT complexes. Using this approach, 
we identified ISGF3-independent Stat2-containing STAT complexes. Results from the
analysis of Stat2 complexes in the electrophoretic mobility shift assay were
consistent with genomic DNA affinity chromatography results and identified a
Stat2:1 complex that binds with low affinity to the pIRE of the interferon
regulatory factor-1 gene. Immunoprecipitation studies of Stat2 revealed an
IFN-alpha dependent co-precipitation of both Stat1 and Stat3. Taken together, our
results suggest that IFN-alpha activates, in addition to ISGF3, other
Stat2-containing STAT complexes, one of which binds to an element related to the 
interferon regulatory factor-1 pIRE.

PMID: 8647845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1419-24.

Inhibition of alpha interferon but not gamma interferon signal transduction by
phorbol esters is mediated by a tyrosine phosphatase.

Petricoin E 3rd(1), David M, Igarashi K, Benjamin C, Ling L, Goelz S, Finbloom
DS, Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Previous studies have indicated that the expression of viral oncoproteins, cell
transformation, or phorbol ester treatment of cells can inhibit alpha/beta
interferon (IFN-alpha/beta)-induced gene expression. The mechanisms by which
these promoters of cell growth exert their inhibitory effects vary, but in most
instances they involve a disruption of the IFN-alpha/beta-induced transcription
complex ISGF3 such that the DNA-binding component of this complex (the 48-kDa
ISGF3gamma protein) does not bind to the interferon-stimulated response element
(ISRE). In this report, we demonstrated that phorbol ester treatment of human
peripheral blood monocytes dramatically inhibits activation of
IFN-alpha/B-stimulated early response genes but by a mechanism which does not
involve abrogation of the ISRE binding of ISGF3gamma. Phorbol ester treatment of 
monocytes inhibited IFN alpha-stimulated tyrosine phosphorylation of the
transcription factors Stat1alpha, Stat2, and Stat3 and of the tyrosine kinase
Tyk2 but had no effect on IFN-gamma activation of Stat1alpha. IFNalpha-stimulated
tyrosine phosphorylation of Jak1 and the alpha subunit of the IFN-alpha receptor 
were unaffected by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA). Moreover, PMA caused
the dephosphorylation of Tyk2 but not of Jak1, which was activated by IFN.
Pretreatment of cells with vanadate prevented the effects of PMA with regard to
PMA-induced Tyk2 dephosphorylation. These observations suggest that PMA exerts
its inhibitory effects by activation of a tyrosine phosphatase which selectively 
regulates Tyk2 but not Jak1 activity.

PMCID: PMC231126
PMID: 8657115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. EMBO J. 1996 Apr 1;15(7):1566-71.

Interferon-alpha-induced phosphorylation and activation of cytosolic
phospholipase A2 is required for the formation of interferon-stimulated gene
factor three.

Flati V(1), Haque SJ, Williams BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, OH 44195, USA.

Treatment of cells with interferon (IFN)-alpha caused phosphorylation and
activation of cytosolic phospholipase A2 (cPLA2). The protein tyrosine kinase
Jak1 was found to be necessary for the activation of cPLA2. Jak1 could be
co-immunoprecipitated with cPLA2 from cell extracts, indicating that a close
physical interaction occurs between these two proteins. The induction of
IFN-stimulated gene factor three (ISGF3) by IFN-alpha, is blocked by cPLA2
inhibitors in cell cultures and in cell-free reconstituted systems. However,
these inhibitors do not block IFN-alpha or gamma-induced binding of STAT1 to the 
inverted repeat (IR) element of the IFN regulatory factor 1 (IRF-1) gene. Thus,
cPLA2 activations occurs as an early event in the IFN-alpha response and is
selectively involved in ISGF3-dependent gene activation.

PMCID: PMC450066
PMID: 8612580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 1996 Mar 8;271(10):5790-4.

Formation of STAT1-STAT2 heterodimers and their role in the activation of IRF-1
gene transcription by interferon-alpha.

Li X(1), Leung S, Qureshi S, Darnell JE Jr, Stark GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Research Institute, The Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

An upstream inverted repeat (IR) element mediates transcriptional activation of
the interferon response factor-1 gene (IRF-1) by interferon (IFN)-alpha and
IFN-gamma. IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma fail to induce IRF-1 in cells that lack signal
transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), and STAT1 homodimers bind to
IR elements in extracts of IFN-alpha-treated cells. We now report that STAT2 also
plays an important role in the IFN-alpha-mediated transcriptional activation of
the IRF-1 gene. A new factor, most likely a STAT1-STAT2 heterodimer, was detected
with an IR probe in extracts of IFN-alpha-treated cells. STAT1 and STAT2 are
already known to combine with p48, a DNA-binding protein, to form IFN-stimulated 
gene factor 3 (ISGF3), which binds to IFN-stimulated response elements (ISREs)
distinct from the IR of the IRF-1 gene. In extracts of U2A cells, which lack p48,
STAT1-STAT2 heterodimers were still formed, indicating that they do not contain
p48. We manipulated the intracellular levels of STAT1-STAT2 heterodimers and
STAT1 homodimers to examine their roles in the induction of IRF-1 by IFN-alpha.
Although both dimers can induce IRF-1 transcription, the heterodimers are more
potent and thus may be the major activators in vivo. Deletion analysis reveals
that the C-terminal domain of STAT2 is important for transcriptional activation
mediated by both STAT1-STAT2 heterodimers and ISGF3.

PMID: 8621447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biochem. 1996 Feb;119(2):231-4.

Structure of mouse interferon stimulated gene factor 3 gamma (ISGF3 gamma/p48)
cDNA and chromosomal localization of the gene.

Suhara W(1), Yoneyama M, Yonekawa H, Fujita T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Cell Biology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical
Science.

Interferon stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) is a trimeric transcription factor
activated on treatment of cells with interferon-alpha and beta (type I IFNs).
Upon stimulation, the regulatory subunits, p84/91 and p113, present in the
cytoplasm are phosphorylated at specific tyrosine residues and assemble with the 
DNA binding subunit, ISGF3 gamma, into the active ISGF3 in the nucleus. Thus,
ISGF3 plays a primary role in the transmission of a signal from the cell surface 
to the nucleus. In this report, we describe the cloning of a mouse cDNA encoding 
a polypeptide homologous to human ISGF3 gamma. Comparison of the deduced amino
acid sequences revealed the middle region was significantly different between
mouse and man. The mouse cDNA was shown to encode a functional ISGF3 subunit by
means of an in vitro reconstitution assay. Furthermore, the locus of the ISGF3
gamma gene, designated as Isgf3g, was mapped to distal mouse chromosome 14 by
linkage analysis using an intersubspecific backcross typing panel.

PMID: 8882710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Genes Cells. 1996 Jan;1(1):115-24.

Essential and non-redundant roles of p48 (ISGF3 gamma) and IRF-1 in both type I
and type II interferon responses, as revealed by gene targeting studies.

Kimura T(1), Kadokawa Y, Harada H, Matsumoto M, Sato M, Kashiwazaki Y, Tarutani
M, Tan RS, Takasugi T, Matsuyama T, Mak TW, Noguchi S, Taniguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Interferons (IFNs) are a class of cytokines which confer cellular
resistance against viral infections. Type I (IFN-alpha and -beta) and type II
(IFN-gamma) IFNs utilize distinct receptors, the stimulation of which results in 
the induction of downstream target genes. These target genes usually contain
within their promoter region an IFN responsive element, termed ISRE (IFN
stimulated response element) which binds a heterotrimeric transcription factor,
ISGF3 (IFN-stimulated gene factor 3) consisting of p48 (ISGF3 gamma), Stat1
(Signal transducers and activators of transcription-1; alpha or beta), and Stat2.
The ISRE sequence overlaps with that of IRF-E which binds another IFN-inducible
factor, IRF-1 (IFN regulatory factor-1).
RESULTS: We generated mice lacking p48 by gene targeting. We show that p48 plays 
an essential role in both type I and type II IFN responses; activation of
IFN-inducible genes and establishment of the antiviral state by IFN-alpha or
-gamma are both severely impaired, and ISRE-binding activities induced by both
IFNs are absent in the p48-negative embryonic fibroblasts (EFs). Furthermore, we 
generated mice deficient for both p48 and IRF-1 and found that at least one
IFN-inducible gene is dependent on both factors.
CONCLUSIONS: p48 and IRF-1 do not perform redundant functions in the cell, but
rather complement one another in both type I and II IFN responses.

PMID: 9078371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Exp Med. 1995 Nov 1;182(5):1517-25.

Interferon (IFN) beta acts downstream of IFN-gamma-induced class II
transactivator messenger RNA accumulation to block major histocompatibility
complex class II gene expression and requires the 48-kD DNA-binding protein,
ISGF3-gamma.

Lu HT(1), Riley JL, Babcock GT, Huston M, Stark GR, Boss JM, Ransohoff RM.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA.

Interferon (IFN) gamma, a cardinal proinflammatory cytokine, induces expression
of the gene products of the class II locus of the major histocompatibility
complex (MHC), whereas IFN-alpha or -beta suppresses MHC class II expression. The
mechanism of IFN-beta-mediated MHC class II inhibition has been unclear.
Recently, a novel factor termed class II transactivator (CIITA) has been
identified as essential for IFN-gamma-induced MHC class II transcription. We
studied the status of IFN-gamma-induced CIITA messenger RNA (mRNA) accumulation
and CIITA-driven transactivation in IFN-beta-treated cells and used cell lines
that had defined defects in the type I IFN response pathway to address the roles 
of IFN signaling components in the inhibition of MHC class II induction. IFN-beta
treatment did not suppress IFN-gamma-induced accumulation of CIITA mRNA. After
cells were stably transfected with CIITA, endogenous MHC class II genes were
constitutively expressed, and MHC class II promoters, delivered by transfection, 
were actively transcribed in CIITA-expressing cells. Expression of these
promoters was significantly impaired by pretreatment with IFN-beta. These results
suggest that IFN-beta acts downstream of CIITA mRNA accumulation, and acts in
part by reducing the functional competence of CIITA for transactivating MHC class
II promoters. IFN stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) gamma was essential for
IFN-beta to mediate inhibition of MHC class II induction, regardless of whether
MHC class II transcription was stimulated by IFN-gamma or directly by CIITA
expression. Results of these experiments suggest that inhibition of MHC class II 
in IFN-beta-treated cells requires expression of gene(s) directed by the
ISGF3-IFN-stimulated response element pathway, and that these gene product(s) may
act by blocking CIITA-driven transcription of MHC class II promoters.

PMCID: PMC2192209
PMID: 7595221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 1995 Aug 18;270(33):19624-9.

Transcriptional induction by double-stranded RNA is mediated by
interferon-stimulated response elements without activation of
interferon-stimulated gene factor 3.

Bandyopadhyay SK(1), Leonard GT Jr, Bandyopadhyay T, Stark GR, Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195, USA.

Many genes induced by type I interferons (IFNs) are also induced by
double-stranded (ds)RAN. In this study, we investigated the mechanism of this
induction process. Using cell lines from which the type I IFN genes have been
deleted, we established that induction by dsRNA of the IFN-inducible 561 gene is 
direct and not mediated by the intermediate synthesis of IFN. Unlike 561 mRNA,
the IFN-inducible 6-16 mRNA was induced poorly by dsRNA. Transfection studies
demonstrated that the sequence difference between the core IFN-stimulated
response elements (ISREs) of these two genes is not responsible for their
differential inducibility by dsRNA. A point mutation in the 561 ISRE that
abolished its response to IFN-alpha also made it unresponsive to dsRNA, thus
demonstrating that the ISRE is the relevant cis-acting element for dsRNA
signaling. The roles of different known ISRE-binding protein and tyrosine kinases
in transducing the signal elicited by dsRNA were evaluated in genetically altered
cell lines. dsRNA failed to induce 561 mRNA in cells expressing an anti-sense RNA
for interferon regulatory factor 1, whereas it was induced strongly in cells
expressing the corresponding sense mRNA. 561 mRNA was also induced strongly by
dsRNA, but not by IFN-alpha, in mutant cell lines that do not express functional 
tyrosine kinases Tyk2 or JAK1 or ISRE binding protein, p48, or STAT2, all of
which are required for IFN-alpha signaling. However, in cells devoid of
functional STAT1, which is also required for IFN-alpha signaling, the induction
of 561 mRNA by dsRNA was very low. Expression of transfected STAT1 alpha protein,
but not of STAT 1beta protein, in these cells greatly enhanced the dsRNA
inducibility of the 561 gene. These studies indicated that the major
ISRE-mediated signaling pathway used by dsRNA requires interferon regulatory
factor 1 and STAT alpha. This pathway, however, does not require the other known 
cytoplasmic components used for IFN-alpha signaling.

PMID: 7642650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1995 Jul 21;762:15-27; discussion 27-8.

Transcription factors NF-IL6 and APRF involved in gp130-mediated signaling
pathway.

Akira S(1), Nishio Y, Tanaka T, Inoue M, Matsusaka T, Wang XJ, Wei S, Yoshida N, 
Kishimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

PMID: 7545362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jun 6;92(12):5645-9.

Combinatorial association and abundance of components of interferon-stimulated
gene factor 3 dictate the selectivity of interferon responses.

Bluyssen HA(1), Muzaffar R, Vlieststra RJ, van der Made AC, Leung S, Stark GR,
Kerr IM, Trapman J, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York
10016, USA.

Genes containing the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) enhancer have 
been characterized as transcriptionally responsive primarily to type I
interferons (IFN alpha/beta). Induction is due to activation of a multimeric
transcription factor, interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), which is
activated by IFN alpha/beta but not by IFN gamma. We found that ISRE-containing
genes were induced by IFN gamma as well as by IFN alpha in Vero cells. The IFN
gamma response was dependent on the ISRE and was accentuated by preexposure of
cells to IFN alpha, a treatment that increases the abundance of ISGF3 components.
Overexpression of ISGF3 polypeptides showed that the IFN gamma response depended 
on the DNA-binding protein ISGF3 gamma (p48) as well as on the 91-kDa protein
STAT91 (Stat1 alpha). The transcriptional response to IFN alpha required the
113-kDa protein STAT113 (Stat2) in addition to STAT91 and p48. Mutant
fibrosarcoma cells deficient in each component of ISGF3 were used to confirm that
IFN gamma induction of an ISRE reporter required p48 and STAT91, but not STAT113.
A complex containing p48 and phosphorylated STAT91 but lacking STAT113 bound the 
ISRE in vitro. IFN gamma-induced activation of this complex, preferentially
formed at high concentrations of p48 and STAT91, may explain some of the
overlapping responses to IFN alpha and IFN gamma.

PMCID: PMC41753
PMID: 7539922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jun 2;270(22):13063-9.

Functional domain analysis of interferon consensus sequence binding protein
(ICSBP) and its association with interferon regulatory factors.

Sharf R(1), Azriel A, Lejbkowicz F, Winograd SS, Ehrlich R, Levi BZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Food Engineering & Biotechnology, Technion, Haifa, Israel.

Interferon consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP) is a member of the
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of proteins that include IRF-1, IRF-2, 
and ISGF3gamma which share sequence similarity at the putative DNA binding domain
(DBD). ICSBP is expressed exclusively in cells of the immune system and acts as a
repressor of interferon consensus sequence (ICS) containing promoters that can be
alleviated by interferons. In this communication, we have searched for functional
domains of ICSBP by dissecting the DBD from the repression activity. The putative
DBD of ICSBP (amino acids 1-121) when fused in frame to the transcriptional
activation domain of the herpes simplex VP16 (ICSBP-VP16) is a very strong
activator of ICS-containing promoters. In addition, ICSBP-VP16 fusion construct
transfected into adenovirus (Ad) 12 transformed cells enabled cell surface
expression of major histocompatibility complex class I antigens as did treatment 
with interferon. On the other hand, the DBD of the yeast transcriptional
activator GAL4 was fused in frame to a truncated ICSBP in which the DBD was
impaired resulting in a chimeric construct GAL4-ICSBP. This construct is capable 
of repressing promoters containing GAL4 binding sites. Thus, ICSBP contains at
least two independent domains: a DBD and a transcriptional repressor domain.
Furthermore, we have tested possible interactions between ICSBP and IRFs. The
chimeric construct GAL4-ICSBP inhibited the stimulated effect of IRF-1 on a
reporter gene, implying for a possible interaction between IRF-1 and ICSBP.
Electromobility shift assays, demonstrated that ICSBP can associate with IRF-2 or
IRF-1 in vitro as well as in vivo. Thus, ICSBP contains a third functional domain
that enables the association with IRFs. These associations are probably important
for the fine balance between positive and negative regulators involved in the
interferon-mediated signal transduction pathways in cells of the immune system.

PMID: 7768900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. FEBS Lett. 1995 May 22;365(1):87-91.

Interferon receptor recognition peptides enhance the biological potency of
interferon alphas.

Fish EN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Toronto, Ont., Canada.

Based on our earlier studies that defined three strategic regions in the Type 1
interferon (IFN) molecule associated with receptor interactions and biological
activity, three IFN receptor recognition peptides (IRRP) were synthesized, with
amino acid sequences CLKDRHD (IRRP1), ESLLEKFYTELYQQLND (IRRP2) and
YFQRITLYLTEKKYSPCA (IRRP3) and examined for biological effectiveness. In cell
surface receptor binding studies, the binding capacity of cells for IFN-alpha s
was increased in the presence of the IRRPs. Increased receptor occupancy resulted
in increased phosphorylation-activation of the transcription factor ISGF3 and
enhanced antiviral activity. The potentiating effect on IFN-induced growth
inhibition was less marked. These data suggest that the IRRPs may influence the
biological potency of IFN-alpha by facilitating accessibility to cell surface
receptor components. The IRRPs may function to increase the number of low
affinity receptor-ligand interactions necessary to initiate receptor
oligomerization, thereby catalysing the formation of high affinity IFN-receptor
complexes.

PMID: 7774722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Apr 25;92(9):3829-33.

Tyrosine-phosphorylated Stat1 and Stat2 plus a 48-kDa protein all contact DNA in 
forming interferon-stimulated-gene factor 3.

Qureshi SA(1), Salditt-Georgieff M, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021, USA.

Interferon alpha induction of transcription operates through
interferon-stimulated-gene factor 3 (ISGF), a transcription factor two components
of which are members of the newly characterized Stat family of transcription
factors. Interferon alpha induces tyrosine phosphorylation of Stat1 and Stat2
proteins that associate and, together with a 48-kDa protein, form ISGF3. Evidence
is presented that a heterodimer of Stat1 and Stat2 is present in ISGF3 and that
Stat1 and the 48-kDa protein make precise contact, while Stat2 makes general
contact, with the interferon-stimulated response element, the binding site of the
ISGF3.

PMCID: PMC42055
PMID: 7537377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Biol Chem. 1995 Apr 7;270(14):8188-93.

Transmembrane signaling by the alpha subunit of the type I interferon receptor is
essential for activation of the JAK kinases and the transcriptional factor ISGF3.

Colamonici OR(1), Platanias LC, Domanski P, Handa R, Gilmour KC, Diaz MO, Reich
N, Pitha-Rowe P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Tennessee, Memphis 38163, USA.

The Type I interferon (IFN) receptor has a multisubunit structure. The component 
of the receptor that has been most thoroughly studied is the alpha subunit.
Expression of the alpha subunit in mouse L-929 cells confers antiviral response
to human IFN alpha 8, but not to human IFN alpha 2 or IFN beta. This antiviral
effect is observed without a significant increase in IFN binding. It has not been
determined why mouse cells expressing the human alpha subunit show different
response to the antiviral activity of distinct human Type I IFNs. In this report,
we demonstrate that the response to human Type I IFNs in mouse cells expressing
the alpha subunit is dependent on cross-binding to the mouse receptor. This is
supported by the finding that human IFN alpha 8, but not human IFN alpha 2,
cross-binds to the mouse receptor even in the absence of expression of the human 
alpha subunit. We also demonstrate that only mouse cells expressing the human
alpha subunit are able to tyrosine-phosphorylate p135tyk2 and JAK-1 and to form
the ISGF3 complex in response to human IFN alpha 8. These results demonstrate
that the alpha subunit is essential for IFN alpha signaling through the JAK
kinases and ISGF3.

PMID: 7713924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1312-7.

Role of STAT2 in the alpha interferon signaling pathway.

Leung S(1), Qureshi SA, Kerr IM, Darnell JE Jr, Stark GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195.

We have isolated U6A, a mutant cell line which lacks the STAT2 subunit of the
transcription factor interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). The
response of U6A cells to IFN-alpha is almost completely defective, but the
response to IFN-gamma is normal. Complementation of U6A cells with a cDNA
encoding STAT2 restores the IFN-alpha response, proving that STAT2 is required in
this pathway. Binding of IFNs to their receptors triggers tyrosine
phosphorylation and activation of the receptors, JAK family kinases, STAT1, and
STAT2. In IFN-alpha-treated U6A cells, phosphorylation of the essential tyrosine 
kinases TYK2 and JAK1 is normal, but the phosphorylation of STAT1 is weak. A
mutant STAT2 protein in which the phosphorylated tyrosine at position 690 is
changed to phenylalanine does not restore normal phosphorylation of STAT1 in
response to IFN-alpha. The dependence of STAT1 phosphorylation on the presence of
STAT2 but not vice versa (T. Improta, C. Schindler, C. M. Horvath, I. M. Kerr, G.
R. Stark, and J. E. Darnell, Jr., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91:4776-4780, 1994) 
indicates that in the formation of ISGF3, these two proteins may be
phosphorylated sequentially in response to IFN-alpha and that phosphorylated
STAT2 may be required to allow unphosphorylated STAT1 to bind to the activated
IFN-alpha receptor.

PMCID: PMC230354
PMID: 7532278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Feb 11;23(3):459-63.

The genomic structure of the STAT genes: multiple exons in coincident sites in
Stat1 and Stat2.

Yan R(1), Qureshi S, Zhong Z, Wen Z, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021.

The genomic structure of Stat2 has been determined and compared with a large
portion of the Stat1 gene. There are 24 exons in the Stat2 gene and a matching
number in very similar positions in the Stat1 gene. Thus a very complicated
genomic structure was presumably duplicated and has been closely maintained
throughout evolution.

PMCID: PMC306697
PMID: 7885841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. FEBS Lett. 1995 Jan 30;358(3):225-9.

Possible involvement of the transcription factor ISGF3 gamma in virus-induced
expression of the IFN-beta gene.

Kawakami T(1), Matsumoto M, Sato M, Harada H, Taniguchi T, Kitagawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

Two virus-inducible transcription factors, IRF-1 and IRF-2 have been identified
as an activator and a repressor, respectively, of the type I interferon (IFN)
genes. Recent studies with mice carrying null mutations for the IRF-1 or IRF-2
alleles have revealed the existence of IRF-1-dependent and -independent pathways 
mediating IFN-beta gene induction. Here we report that the expression of an IRF
family member ISGF3 gamma is induced upon viral infection in IRF-1-/-, IRF-2-/-
embryonic fibroblasts. Furthermore, ISGF3 gamma can bind to a virus-inducible
promoter element in the IFN-beta gene. These results suggest that ISGF3 gamma or 
complex containing ISGF3 gamma is involved in the IRF-1-independent pathway
mediating IFN-beta gene regulation.

PMID: 7843405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Exp Cell Res. 1995 Jan;216(1):143-8.

Induction of expression of interferon-stimulated gene factor-3 (ISGF-3) proteins 
by interferons.

Kumar R(1), Korutla L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine,
Hershey 17033.

Interferon-stimulated gene factor-3 (ISGF-3) is a multiprotein (113, 91, 84, and 
48 kDa) transcriptional factor which regulates the expression of a specific set
of genes, the interferon (IFN)-stimulated genes. In the studies presented here,
we investigated the induction of synthesis of proteins of the ISGF-3 complex by
IFNs. We report that both IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma induce a 3- to 5-fold increased
expression of p91, p84, and p113 and their phosphotyrosine contents in a dose-
and time-dependent manner. The IFN-mediated induction in the levels of p91
correlated well with the increased expression of steady-state levels of p91 mRNA 
by IFNs. Increased levels of p91 and p84 became detectable after 6 and 4 h
treatment with IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma, respectively, and reached a maximum
5.2-fold at 18 h by IFN-alpha and 4-fold at 15 h by IFN-gamma. The levels of p113
were induced up to 3-fold at 15 h by IFN-alpha or IFN-gamma. The induction of
ISGF-3 proteins by IFNs was accompanied by an increase in the accumulation of
p91, p84, and p113 in the nucleus. The observed induction of increased expression
of ISGF-3 proteins does not require continuous presence of IFNs, as removal of
IFNs after 6 h of minimal treatment still resulted in a significant increase (2- 
to 4-fold) in the levels of expression of p91, p84, and p113 over an additional
period of 12 h in culture, and induced proteins remained phosphorylated on
tyrosine. The IFN-mediated increase in the synthesis of ISGF-3 proteins was
blocked by Actinomycin D. Extension of these investigations to other human and
mouse responsive cells, Daudi, Hela, and NIH3T3, also demonstrated significant
increase in the levels of p91, p84, and p113 by interferons.

PMID: 7529187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. EMBO J. 1994 Dec 15;13(24):5871-7.

Differential tyrosine phosphorylation of the IFNAR chain of the type I interferon
receptor and of an associated surface protein in response to IFN-alpha and
IFN-beta.

Abramovich C(1), Shulman LM, Ratovitski E, Harroch S, Tovey M, Eid P, Revel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Virology, Weizmann Institute of Science, 
Rehovot, Israel.

The human interferon alpha-receptor (IFNAR gene product) is a transmembranal
protein of 557 amino acids with an intracytoplasmic domain of 100 amino acids
containing four tyrosines. Antibodies to a C-terminal peptide (residues 521-536) 
were developed which efficiently immunoprecipitate the 105 kDa IFNAR protein from
detergent extracts of human cells. We show that the IFNAR protein becomes
tyrosine phosphorylated within 5 min after treatment of human myeloma U266 cells 
with IFN-alpha 2, IFN-alpha 8 or IFN-beta. The IFNAR chain interacts with both
IFN-alpha 2 and IFN-beta, as demonstrated by cross-linking. Among elements
involved in signal transduction by type I IFNs, the tyrosine kinase Tyk2 but not 
Jak1, and the ISGF3 transcription factor subunit Stat2 (p113) but not Stat1
(p91), are found associated with the IFNAR protein. After IFN-beta treatment for 
5 min, a tyrosine-phosphorylated protein of approximately 95 kDa (beta-PTyr) is
found bound to IFNAR, but can be dissociated by denaturation. The beta-PTyr
protein is present on the cell surface, like IFNAR, as shown by extracellular
biotin tagging. The ratio of beta-PTyr to IFNAR tyrosine phosphorylation is much 
higher with IFN-beta than with IFN-alpha 2 or 8. Both are IFN dependent and
abrogated by a monoclonal antibody which blocks IFNAR action. The beta-PTyr
component may represent an important difference in the action of IFN-beta as
compared with IFN-alpha in their shared receptor system.

PMCID: PMC395562
PMID: 7813427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Immunol. 1994 Oct 15;153(8):3655-63.

Evidence for glycosphingolipid modification of the type 1 IFN receptor.

Ghislain J(1), Lingwood CA, Fish EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

P1-determinant glycolipids that include two membrane glycosphingolipids,
globotriaosylceramide (Gal alpha 1-4Gal beta 1-4Glc-ceramide, Gb3) and
galabiosylceramide (Gal alpha 1-4Gal-ceramide, Gb2) are receptors for an
Escherichia coli-derived subunit toxin, verotoxin (VT-1). Studies with Daudi
cells and glycosphingolipid-deficient Daudi mutants and U937 cells identified
that the presence of Gb2/Gb3 correlates with IFN-alpha sensitivity. Comparison of
amino acid sequences between VT-1 and the extracellular region of the 63-kDa
IFN-alpha beta receptor (IFNAR) peptide reveals regions of identity, specifically
in those domains in the VT-1 B subunit, that have been implicated as Gb2/Gb3
binding sites. In direct ligand binding studies, we show that membrane Gb2/Gb3
content affects the binding capacity of cells for IFN-alpha, although IFNAR cell 
surface expression is unaffected. Binding of IFN-alpha to the receptor leads to
kinase-associated phosphorylation of the latent transcription factor, ISGF3,
which activates transcription by binding to IFN-stimulated regulatory elements in
IFN-sensitive genes. Electrophoretic mobility band shift assays indicated that
U-937 and Daudi mutant cells, deficient in Gb2 and Gb3, exhibited reduced nuclear
factor binding to the human 2-5A synthetase IFN-stimulated regulatory element
when compared with wild-type Daudi cells, after exposure to IFN-alpha. Moreover, 
when Daudi cells were treated with a ceramide analogue,
1-phenyl-2-(decanoylamino)-3-morpholino-1-propanol, Gb2 and Gb3 synthesis was
inhibited and a concomitant reduction in IFN-induced ISGF3 activation was noted. 
IFNAR cell surface expression was unaffected by
1-phenyl-2-(decanoylamino)-3-morpholino-1-propanol treatment. By using a fusion
protein of the extracellular domain of IFNAR linked at the carboxyl terminus to
the Fc portion of IgG1, we demonstrate that IFNAR is able to bind preferentially 
to Gb2. These results suggest that an association of IFNAR with membrane Gal
alpha 1-4Gal containing glycolipids facilitates receptor-mediated signaling.

PMID: 7930586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Antiviral Res. 1994 Oct;25(2):91-103.

Transcriptional induction of genes by IFN-beta in mouse cells is regulated by a
transcription factor similar to human ISGF-3.

Kalvakolanu DV(1), Mannino SB, Thornton A, Ozato K, Borden EC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226.

Previous studies of IFN-stimulated transcription factors in murine cells have
identified a variety of trans-acting factors that bind to the IFN-stimulated
response element (ISRE) whose role in gene expression remain unclear. The present
investigation was undertaken to delineate the signal transduction pathway as well
as to identify the transcription factors regulated by murine IFN-beta in L929
cells. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Genistein, abrogated gene induction and
activation of transcription factors by IFN-beta. As early as 5 min after IFN-beta
treatment, a transcription factor was activated in the cytoplasm which
subsequently migrated into the nucleus. Anti-phosphotyrosine antibodies detected 
a specific transcription factor induced by mIFN-beta. Antibodies raised against
human ISGF-3 subunit proteins p48, p84, p91 and p113 recognized this factor in
the cytoplasm as well as in the nucleus of IFN-beta-treated L929 cells. An
antibody raised against an oligopeptide of human p113 (residues 435-450)
recognized the ISGF-3 complexes both in human and murine cells. However, a
different antibody against the C-terminus of human p113 (residues 671-806) did
not recognize the ISGF-3 like complex in mouse cells, indicating differences in
the primary sequence of these proteins.

PMID: 7847880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 30;269(39):24391-5.

Acute phase response factor and additional members of the interferon-stimulated
gene factor 3 family integrate diverse signals from cytokines, interferons, and
growth factors.

Raz R(1), Durbin JE, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York
10016.

Cytokines and growth factors elicit responses in target cells through induction
of gene expression. Signaling mechanisms leading to gene transcription from cell 
surface receptors often require tyrosine phosphorylation. A family of
transcription factors comprising the interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene factor 3
(ISGF3) multimeric complex are phosphorylated and activated in response to
interferon. We describe a protein 50% identical to the 91-kDa subunit of ISGF3
that constitutes the acute phase response factor (APRF). This protein was rapidly
activated by interleukin-6 to bind an enhancer element common to genes activated 
in liver cells during the acute phase response to inflammation. Remarkably, APRF 
was also activated by IFN alpha, IFN gamma, epidermal growth factor,
platelet-derived growth factor, colony stimulating factor-1, and the cytokines
leukemia inhibitory factor and oncostatin M. The growth factors also activated a 
third, distinct but related, DNA-binding protein in addition to APRF and p91.
This novel factor or a closely related one, but neither APRF nor p91, was also
activated in lymphoid cells by interleukin-2, erythropoietin, and interleukin-3. 
Activation of APRF, p91, and additional members of the ISGF3 family is thus a
general feature of a wide variety of signaling pathways, integrating diverse
signals through common transcriptional regulators.

PMID: 7523373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Blood. 1994 Sep 15;84(6):1942-9.

Primary leukemia cells resistant to alpha-interferon in vitro are defective in
the activation of the DNA-binding factor interferon-stimulated gene factor 3.

Xu B(1), Grandér D, Sangfelt O, Einhorn S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Oncology, Radiumhemmet, Karolinska Hospital,
Stockholm, Sweden.

Cells from one-third of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) patients are resistant
to alpha-interferon (alpha-IFN) as measured by induction of blast transformation.
We have previously shown that all CLL clones express alpha/beta-IFN receptors,
but that the resistant cells are defective in the induction of the enzyme
2',5'-oligoadenylate synthetase (2',5-A synthetase). Thus, the deficiency in IFN 
sensitivity is localized somewhere between the interaction of the IFN molecule
with its receptor and induction of 2',5'-A synthetase. We have now further
characterized the resistance of CLL clones to IFN by investigating whether it is 
associated with a defect in the activation of IFN-stimulated gene factor 3
(ISGF3), which is involved in the activation of alpha-IFN-stimulated genes
(ISGs). A defect induction of ISGF3 after alpha-IFN treatment was found in 4 of
12 CLL patients. There was a close correlation between defective induction of
ISGF3 and a lack of enhancement of 2',5'-A synthetase as well as induction of
blast transformation. Pretreatment with gamma-IFN and mixing experiments with
extracts from IFN-sensitive cells indicate that a lack of the gamma-component of 
ISGF3 was the reason for defect in activation in 2 of the patients. We conclude
that a defect in activation of ISGF3 is a possible cause for resistance in CLL
cells to IFN-induced blast transformation in vitro.

PMID: 8080997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Science. 1994 Jun 3;264(5164):1415-21.

Jak-STAT pathways and transcriptional activation in response to IFNs and other
extracellular signaling proteins.

Darnell JE Jr(1), Kerr IM, Stark GR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021.

Through the study of transcriptional activation in response to interferon alpha
(IFN-alpha) and interferon gamma (IFN-gamma), a previously unrecognized direct
signal transduction pathway to the nucleus has been uncovered: IFN-receptor
interaction at the cell surface leads to the activation of kinases of the Jak
family that then phosphorylate substrate proteins called STATs (signal
transducers and activators of transcription). The phosphorylated STAT proteins
move to the nucleus, bind specific DNA elements, and direct transcription.
Recognition of the molecules involved in the IFN-alpha and IFN-gamma pathway has 
led to discoveries that a number of STAT family members exist and that other
polypeptide ligands also use the Jak-STAT molecules in signal transduction.

PMID: 8197455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 May 24;91(11):5046-50.

Molecular interactions between interferon consensus sequence binding protein and 
members of the interferon regulatory factor family.

Bovolenta C(1), Driggers PH, Marks MS, Medin JA, Politis AD, Vogel SN, Levy DE,
Sakaguchi K, Appella E, Coligan JE, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Interferon (IFN) consensus sequence binding protein (ICSBP) is a transcription
factor expressed mostly in the cells of the immune system. ICSBP belongs to the
IFN regulatory factor (IRF) family, which also includes IRF-1, IRF-2, and the
IFN-alpha-stimulated gene factor 3 gamma (ISGF3 gamma). We show here that ICSBP
forms a complex with IRF-1 or IRF-2 both in vivo and in vitro and, in the
presence or absence of the target DNA, with the IFN-stimulated response element
(ISRE). Further, electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that this interaction
greatly enhances the otherwise very low binding affinity of ICSBP to the ISRE. We
show, on the other hand, that ICSBP inhibits binding of the IFN-alpha-stimulated 
gene factor 3 gamma to the ISRE. Through these interactions ICSBP is likely to
exert complex modulatory functions in the regulation of IFN-stimulated genes.

PMCID: PMC43928
PMID: 8197182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 May 24;91(11):4776-80.

Transcription factor ISGF-3 formation requires phosphorylated Stat91 protein, but
Stat113 protein is phosphorylated independently of Stat91 protein.

Improta T(1), Schindler C, Horvath CM, Kerr IM, Stark GR, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021.

Transcription factor ISGF-3 is a multiprotein, interferon alpha-activated
transcription complex consisting of a 48-kDa DNA-binding protein and two proteins
termed Stats (for signal transducers and activators of transcription) that become
phosphorylated on tyrosine in the cell cytoplasm, a 113-kDa and either a 91- or
84-kDa polypeptide, the latter two of which arise from differentially spliced
mRNAs. Using cell lines lacking the Stat91 or Stat84 proteins, we show that
mutations in several different sites in the 91-kDa protein block the interferon
alpha-induced phosphorylation of the 91-kDa protein and subsequent ISGF-3
formation. Although correct tyrosine phosphorylation on residue 690 of the
Stat113 protein occurs independent of the Stat91/84 protein, the Stat113
phosphoprotein by itself moves to the cell nucleus much less efficiently in the
absence of phosphorylated Stat91/84 protein.

PMCID: PMC43871
PMID: 8197134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Apr 15;221(2):731-9.

Characterization of nuclear factors involved in 202 gene induction by
interferon-alpha in murine leukemia cells.

Gariglio M(1), Gaboli M, Mana C, Ying GG, Gribaudo G, Cavallo R, Landolfo S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Microbiology, Medical School, University of Torino, Italy.

The 5' terminal flanking region of the interferon-inducible gene, 202, contains
an interferon-stimulable response element (ISRE), called a GA box, that confers
inducibility by interferon(IFN)-alpha, but not by IFN-gamma, on a reporter gene, 
such as the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT). Nuclear extracts from L1210 
murine leukemia cells, stimulated for various periods of time with IFN-alpha,
were mixed with 32P-labeled GA box and analyzed for the presence of retarded
complexes in electrophoretic-mobility-shift assays. In addition to a few
constitutive retarded complexes, an inducible GA box-binding activity (GAbf-1)
appeared after 5 min, peaked at about 2 h, and was still abundant 12 h after
IFN-alpha treatment. In the cytoplasmic fraction GAbf-1 was not detectable before
30 min, continued to increase up to 2 h, but had disappeared within 12 h. GAbf-1 
activity was not observed in nuclear extracts treated with IFN-gamma, and was not
inhibited by prior treatment with the protein-synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide. 
When the binding properties of GAbf-1 were compared with those of ISGF-3, the
primary transcriptional activator for IFN-alpha-induced genes, a different
pattern of retarded complexes was observed. Moreover, as observed by
immunoblotting analysis, nuclear extracts from IFN-alpha-treated L1210 cells did 
not contain the p91/84 subunit of the ISGF3, the best characterized nuclear
complex activated by IFN-alpha. Altogether these results indicate that GAbf-1 may
be a novel transcription factor exploited by IFN-alpha to activate the 202
inducible gene in murine pre-B leukemia cells.

PMID: 8174552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Cell. 1994 Apr 8;77(1):63-71.

Molecular cloning of APRF, a novel IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 p91-related
transcription factor involved in the gp130-mediated signaling pathway.

Akira S(1), Nishio Y, Inoue M, Wang XJ, Wei S, Matsusaka T, Yoshida K, Sudo T,
Naruto M, Kishimoto T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

Acute-phase response factor (APRF) is a transcription factor that binds to the
interleukin-6 (IL-6)-responsive elements identified in the promoters of various
acute-phase protein genes. We report here the purification and cloning of APRF.
APRF exhibits a 52.5% overall homology at the amino acid level with p91, a
component of the interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene factor 3 complexes. The cloned 
APRF protein is tyrosine phosphorylated and translocated into the nucleus in
response to IL-6, but not in response to IFN-gamma. Tyrosine phosphorylation was 
also observed in response to other cytokines, such as leukemia inhibitory factor,
oncostatin M, and ciliary neurotrophic factor, whose receptors share the IL-6
receptor signal transducer gp130. In contrast, we observed that p91 is not
tyrosine phosphorylated in response to IL-6. These results suggest that this
novel p91-related protein may play a major role in the gp130-mediated signaling
pathway and that selective activation of p91-related factors may explain the
diversity of cellular responses to different cytokines.

PMID: 7512451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Mar;14(3):2170-9.

Mutant cell lines unresponsive to alpha/beta and gamma interferon are defective
in tyrosine phosphorylation of ISGF-3 alpha components.

Loh JE(1), Schindler C, Ziemiecki A, Harpur AG, Wilks AF, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Immunobiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510.

The 84-, 91-, and 113-kDa proteins of the ISGF-3 alpha complex are phosphorylated
on tyrosine residues upon alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) treatment and subsequently
translocate to the nucleus together with a 48-kDa subunit. In this study, we
investigated the presence and the functional status of ISGF-3 alpha subunits and 
Tyk-2 and JAK1 tyrosine kinases in mutant HeLa cells defective in the
IFN-alpha/beta and -gamma response. Stable cell fusion analysis revealed a single
complementation group among one class (class B) of mutants. The class B mutants
contain detectable level of mRNA and proteins of the 84-, 91-, and 113-kDa
proteins, but neither the protein nor mRNA is inducible by IFN-alpha or -gamma.
The 91-kDa protein IFN-gamma-activated factor fails to be activated into a
DNA-binding state after IFN-alpha or -gamma treatment. In addition, the 91-kDa
protein is unable to localize in the nucleus after IFN-alpha and -gamma
treatment, and the 113-kDa protein fails to translocate after IFN-alpha
treatment. Immunoprecipitation studies document a failure of phosphorylation of
the 84- or 91-kDa proteins after IFN-alpha or -gamma treatment. Similarly, no
tyrosine-phosphorylated 113-kDa protein was detected after IFN-alpha treatment.
The inability of class B mutants to phosphorylate the 84-, 91-, or 113-kDa
protein on tyrosine residues correlated with the loss of biological response to
IFN-alpha and -gamma. The genetic defect appears to be the absence of the
tyrosine kinase JAK1. Our data therefore confirm a recent report that JAK1 plays 
a critical early signaling role for both IFN-alpha/beta and IFN-gamma systems.

PMCID: PMC358577
PMID: 8114747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Biol Chem. 1994 Feb 25;269(8):5660-5.

Interferon alpha (IFN alpha) signaling in cells expressing the variant form of
the type I IFN receptor.

Colamonici OR(1), Domanski P, Krolewski JJ, Fu XY, Reich NC, Pfeffer LM, Sweet
ME, Platanias LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Tennessee, Memphis 38163.

Two different Type I interferon receptors (IFN-R) have been described: the normal
and the variant receptors. The alpha subunit of the Type I IFN-R has a molecular 
mass of 110 kDa in cells expressing normal and variant receptors. The beta
subunit has a molecular mass of approximately 100 kDa in cells that express
normal receptors and 55 kDa in cells expressing the variant form of the receptor.
The IFN alpha-resistant U-937 cell line expresses variant receptors and fails to 
down-regulate and phosphorylate the alpha subunit on tyrosine residues. We report
that two other myelomonocytic cell lines, YK-M2 and ML-2, also expressing the
variant form of the receptor, fail to down-regulate and phosphorylate the alpha
subunit on tyrosine residues. However, YK-M2 and ML-2 cells are sensitive to the 
antiproliferative and antiviral effects of IFN alpha 2, indicating that
phosphorylation of the alpha subunit is not necessary to elicit an IFN alpha
response and that expression of variant receptors is not a source of IFN alpha
resistance. We also determined if other proteins involved in the IFN alpha signal
transduction pathway had a different phosphorylation pattern. Treatment of cells 
expressing variant receptors induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the p135tyk2
tyrosine kinase, and the three interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 alpha (ISGF3
alpha) polypeptides (p113, p91, and p84), albeit at lower levels. These results
indicate that cells expressing either form of the Type I IFN-R phosphorylate a
similar set of proteins, with the exception of the alpha subunit.

PMID: 8119902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;14(2):1477-86.

Human cancer cell lines express a negative transcriptional regulator of the
interferon regulatory factor family of DNA binding proteins.

Petricoin E 3rd(1), David M, Fang H, Grimley P, Larner AC, Vande Pol S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Members of the interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of DNA binding
transcription factors have roles in growth regulation, antiviral responses, and
transcriptional induction of interferon (IFN)-activated early response genes. The
IRF family member ISGF3 gamma is the DNA binding component of IFN-stimulated gene
factor 3 (ISGF3), a multicomponent complex responsible for the stimulation of
IFN-alpha-responsive genes. IFN-alpha-stimulated formation of ISGF3 and
subsequent gene expression can be inhibited by phorbol esters or expression of
the adenovirus E1A protein. We have investigated IFN signaling in human malignant
tumor cell lines of the lung, colon, ovary, cervix, and hematopoietic organs and 
found some of these cells to be defective for IFN-alpha-induced formation of
ISGF3. In many cases, an inhibitory activity termed transcriptional knockout
(TKO) correlated with nonresponsiveness. TKO purified from a human
papillomavirus-negative cervical carcinoma cell line has a molecular size of 19
kDa. The purified protein interacted with the ISGF3 gamma component of ISGF3,
preventing binding of ISGF3 to DNA. Purified TKO displaced ISGF3 from its DNA
binding site in vitro and prevented ISGF3 gamma, IRF-1, and IRF-2 from
interacting with the IFN-stimulated response element. Partially purified TKO can 
also directly interact with ISGF3 gamma in the absence of DNA. This protein may
be involved with the development of malignancies and the inability of IFN to
exert its antiproliferative and antiviral effects.

PMCID: PMC358503
PMID: 8289823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Science. 1994 Jan 7;263(5143):89-92.

Association of transcription factor APRF and protein kinase Jak1 with the
interleukin-6 signal transducer gp130.

Lütticken C(1), Wegenka UM, Yuan J, Buschmann J, Schindler C, Ziemiecki A, Harpur
AG, Wilks AF, Yasukawa K, Taga T, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biochemistry, RWTH Aachen, Germany.

Interleukin-6 (IL-6), leukemia inhibitory factor, oncostatin M, interleukin-11,
and ciliary neurotrophic factor bind to receptor complexes that share the signal 
transducer gp130. Upon binding, the ligands rapidly activate DNA binding of
acute-phase response factor (APRF), a protein antigenically related to the p91
subunit of the interferon-stimulated gene factor-3 alpha (ISGF-3 alpha). These
cytokines caused tyrosine phosphorylation of APRF and ISGF-3 alpha p91. Protein
kinases of the Jak family were also rapidly tyrosine phosphorylated, and both
APRF and Jak1 associated with gp130. These data indicate that Jak family protein 
kinases may participate in IL-6 signaling and that APRF may be activated in a
complex with gp130.

PMID: 8272872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Dec;13(12):7515-21.

A nuclear tyrosine phosphatase downregulates interferon-induced gene expression.

David M(1), Grimley PM, Finbloom DS, Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Uniformed Services University of Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Alpha and gamma interferons rapidly induce several early response genes in
primary human diploid fibroblasts. The transcription rates of these genes are
maximal after 1 h of interferon treatment and return to basal levels within 8 h. 
Three different interferon-activated DNA-binding complexes (ISGF3, GAF, and FcRF 
gamma) that are responsible for transcriptional activation of cellular genes have
been characterized. Assembly of these complexes requires tyrosine phosphorylation
of one or more of the protein components. In this report, we demonstrate that a
nuclear tyrosine phosphatase is responsible for the deactivation of these
interferon-regulated transcription factors and the subsequent transcriptional
downregulation of the corresponding genes. Furthermore, tyrosine phosphorylation 
is required for nuclear localization of the 91-kDa protein that is part of all
three interferon-induced transcription complexes. These results provide the first
evidence for a nuclear tyrosine phosphatase activity as a mechanism of
transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC364823
PMID: 8246969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Nature. 1993 Nov 11;366(6451):129-35.

The protein tyrosine kinase JAK1 complements defects in interferon-alpha/beta and
-gamma signal transduction.

Müller M(1), Briscoe J, Laxton C, Guschin D, Ziemiecki A, Silvennoinen O, Harpur 
AG, Barbieri G, Witthuhn BA, Schindler C, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund Laboratories, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 1993 Nov 11;366(6451):114-6.

We have produced a cell line which lacks the protein tyrosine kinase JAK1 and is 
completely defective in interferon response. Complementation of this mutant with 
JAK1 restored the response, establishing the requirement for JAK1 in both the
interferon-alpha/beta and -gamma signal transduction pathways. The reciprocal
interdependence between JAK1 and Tyk2 activities in the interferon-alpha pathway,
and between JAK1 and JAK2 in the interferon-gamma pathway, may reflect a
requirement for these kinases in the correct assembly of interferon receptor
complexes.

PMID: 8232552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Nature. 1993 Nov 11;366(6451):166-70.

Complementation by the protein tyrosine kinase JAK2 of a mutant cell line
defective in the interferon-gamma signal transduction pathway.

Watling D(1), Guschin D, Müller M, Silvennoinen O, Witthuhn BA, Quelle FW, Rogers
NC, Schindler C, Stark GR, Ihle JN, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 1993 Nov 11;366(6451):114-6.

Interferons (IFNs) alpha/beta (type I) and gamma (type II) bind to distinct cell 
surface receptors, inducing transcription of overlapping sets of genes by
intracellular pathways that have recently attracted much attention. Previous
studies using cell lines selected for their inability to respond to IFN-alpha
(ref. 4) have shown that the protein kinase Tyk2 plays a central role in the IFN 
alpha/beta response. Here we report the isolation of the cell line gamma 1A,
selected for its inability to express IFN-gamma-inducible cell-surface markers,
that is deficient in all aspects of the IFN-gamma response tested, but responds
normally to IFNs alpha and beta. The mutant cells can be complemented by the
expression of another member of the JAK family of protein tyrosine kinases, JAK2 
(refs 6-9). Unlike IFNs alpha and beta, IFN-gamma induces rapid tyrosine
phosphorylation of JAK2 in wild-type cells, and JAK2 immunoprecipitates from
these cells show tyrosine kinase activity. These responses are absent in gamma 1A
cells. JAK2 is therefore required for the response to IFN-gamma but not to IFNs
alpha and beta.

PMID: 7901766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. EMBO J. 1993 Nov;12(11):4221-8.

Complementation of a mutant cell line: central role of the 91 kDa polypeptide of 
ISGF3 in the interferon-alpha and -gamma signal transduction pathways.

Müller M(1), Laxton C, Briscoe J, Schindler C, Improta T, Darnell JE Jr, Stark
GR, Kerr IM.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund Laboratories, London, UK.

Mutants in complementation group U3, completely defective in the response of all 
genes tested to interferons (IFNs) alpha and gamma, do not express the 91 and 84 
kDa polypeptide components of interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), a
transcription factor known to play a primary role in the IFN-alpha response
pathway. The 91 and 84 kDa polypeptides are products of a single gene. They
result from differential splicing and differ only in a 38 amino acid extension at
the C-terminus of the 91 kDa polypeptide. Complementation of U3 mutants with cDNA
constructs expressing the 91 kDa product at levels comparable to those observed
in induced wild-type cells completely restored the response to both IFN-alpha and
-gamma and the ability to form ISGF3. Complementation with the 84 kDa component
similarly restored the ability to form ISGF3 and, albeit to a lower level, the
IFN-alpha response of all genes tested so far. It failed, however, to restore the
IFN-gamma response of any gene analysed. The precise nature of the DNA motifs and
combination of factors required for the transcriptional response of all genes
inducible by IFN-alpha and -gamma remains to be established. The results
presented here, however, emphasize the apparent general requirement of the 91 kDa
polypeptide in the primary transcriptional response to both types of IFN.

PMCID: PMC413716
PMID: 7693454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cell. 1993 Sep 24;74(6):1135-45.

Transcription factor p91 interacts with the epidermal growth factor receptor and 
mediates activation of the c-fos gene promoter.

Fu XY(1), Zhang JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York
10029.

Transcription factor p91 contains a SH2 domain and is activated by tyrosine
phosphorylation. Here we demonstrate that epidermal growth factor (EGF) induces
rapid tyrosine phosphorylation and nuclear translocation of p91. Through its SH2 
domain, p91 directly interacts with the EGF receptor in a ligand-dependent
manner. p91 is a necessary component of an EGF-induced DNA-binding factor that
recognizes a previously identified regulatory element, SIE (c-sis-inducible
element), in the c-fos gene promoter. Activated p91 stimulates SIE-dependent
transcription in vitro. Cotransfection of an SIE-containing reporter with a p91
expression vector shows that p91 is a positive transcriptional regulator of the
c-fos gene promoter. These studies suggest that EGF uses a direct signaling
pathway to control nuclear transcriptional events.

PMID: 8402883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Science. 1993 Sep 24;261(5129):1736-9.

Ras-independent growth factor signaling by transcription factor tyrosine
phosphorylation.

Silvennoinen O(1), Schindler C, Schlessinger J, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
10016.

Comment in
    Science. 1993 Sep 24;261(5129):1694-5.

Interferons induce transcriptional activation through tyrosine phosphorylation of
the latent, cytoplasmic transcription factor interferon-stimulated gene factor-3 
(ISGF-3). Growth factors and cytokines were found to use a similar pathway: The
91-kilodalton subunit of ISGF-3 was activated and tyrosine phosphorylated in
response to epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor, and
colony stimulating factor-1. The tyrosine phosphorylated factor acquired DNA
binding activity and accumulated in nuclei. Activation required the major sites
for autophosphorylation on the EGF receptor that bind Src homology region 2
domain-containing proteins implicated in Ras activation. However, activation of
this factor was independent of the normal functioning of Ras.

PMID: 8378775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 1993 Jun 15;268(17):12380-7.

Interferon-gamma priming effects in the activation and deactivation of ISGF3 in
K562 cells.

Gao PQ(1), Sims SH, Chang DC, Deisseroth AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston 77030.

ISGF3 is a major protein factor which mediates the transcriptional activation of 
interferon-inducible genes. ISGF3 is composed of two subunits, ISGF3 gamma and
ISGF3 alpha, which are stimulated by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) and
interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha), respectively. In this paper, the effect of
pretreatment of IFN-gamma on the response of K562 cells to IFN-alpha, termed
"gamma-priming," is examined. Using techniques of gene transfection and mobility 
shift assay, we studied the gamma-priming effects on the kinetics of appearance
and disappearance of (i) the protein product of a luciferase reporter gene driven
by an IFN-inducible promoter and (ii) the binding of ISGF3 to the
interferon-stimulated response element. We found that exposure of cells to
IFN-gamma prior to IFN-alpha greatly increased both the levels and the rate of
ISGF3 binding activity during the early phase of IFN-alpha treatment and caused
the amount of ISGF3 bound to the interferon-stimulated response element to
decrease more rapidly with time during the later phase. Such effects were
reflected also on the kinetics of expression of the interferon-inducible
luciferase gene induced by IFN-alpha. In order to understand the basis of these
gamma-priming effects, we use an in vitro reconstitution method to examine the
kinetics of the subcomponents of ISGF3 in response to different IFN treatments in
K562 cells. It was found that gamma-priming not only increased the levels of
ISGF3 gamma, but it also stimulated both the rates of rise and fall of the
activated alpha-component of ISGF3. A molecular model is proposed to explain
these findings.

PMID: 8509377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Eur J Biochem. 1993 Jun 15;214(3):617-26.

The interferon-stimulable response elements of two human genes detect overlapping
sets of transcription factors.

Parrington J(1), Rogers NC, Gewert DR, Pine R, Veals SA, Levy DE, Stark GR, Kerr 
IM.

Author information: 
(1)Imperial Cancer Research Fund Laboratories, London, England.

We have previously reported three types of DNA-protein complexes, formed
specifically with the interferon-stimulable response elements (ISRE) in the 5'
flanking DNA of the interferon-inducible 6-16 and 9-27 genes, a type-I
interferon-inducible early complex involving factor E (ISGF3), M and G complexes 
induced more slowly in response to type-I and type-II interferons, respectively
and C1/C2, a constitutive complex(s). Similar complexes have been reported by
others. The operationally defined band-shift complexes M, G and C1/C2 are shown
here to be heterogeneous and to differ in their factor content, depending on the 
ISRE probe. With a 9-27 ISRE probe the M, G and C1/C2 complexes all contain the
gamma subunit of ISGF3, which is present constitutively but is induced in
response to IFN-alpha (to yield M) or IFN-gamma (to yield G). In contrast, a 6-16
ISRE probe forms band-shift complexes with IFN-alpha-inducible and
IFN-gamma-inducible IRF1 and IRF2. With a 6-16 ISRE probe, therefore, M and G
each correspond to two complexes which co-migrate in band-shift assays, one
corresponding to IRF1, the other to IRF2. With this probe, the constitutive
complex C1/C2 corresponds predominantly to IRF2. Consistent with this, IRF1 and
IRF2 have lower affinity for the 9-27 ISRE than the 6-16 ISRE, whereas the
reverse is true for E (ISGF3) and its gamma subunit. Relatively small differences
in affinity appear sufficient to determine whether or not a band-shift complex is
detected. In the case of IRF1 and IRF2, the different affinities for the 6-16 and
9-27 probes are dominated by a dinucleotide sequence in the centre of the
14-nucleotide 'core' ISRE. In contrast, preferential binding of E (ISGF3) by the 
39-nucleotide 9-27 ISRE-containing sequence, although ISRE dependent, appears to 
be mediated by sequences 3' of the 'core' ISRE. Accordingly, these complexes can 
be simultaneously assayed using a hybrid probe consisting of the 5' flanking
region and 'core' ISRE sequences from the 6-16 gene and sequences immediately 3' 
of the 'core' 9-27 ISRE sequence. No evidence was obtained for a modulatory role 
in factor binding for a pseudo-ISRE sequence close to ISRE in the 9-27 gene. The 
precise roles of IRF1 and IRF2 in the induction of IFN-beta and the control of
interferon-inducible gene expression remain to be established.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED
AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7686487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 May 1;90(9):4314-8.

Interferon gamma-induced transcription of the high-affinity Fc receptor for IgG
requires assembly of a complex that includes the 91-kDa subunit of transcription 
factor ISGF3.

Pearse RN(1), Feinman R, Shuai K, Darnell JE Jr, Ravetch JV.

Author information: 
(1)DeWitt Wallace Research Laboratory, Division of Molecular Biology,
Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10021.

A 39-nt DNA sequence, the interferon gamma (IFN-gamma) response region (GRR), is 
necessary for the IFN-gamma-induced transcription of the high-affinity Fc
receptor for IgG (Fc gamma RI) and sufficient for the IFN-gamma-induced
transcription of transfected plasmids. By using extracts from IFN-gamma-treated
cells, three protein complexes will assemble in vitro on a 9-nt core region in
the 3' domain of the GRR. The sequence of this core resembles the
IFN-gamma-activated sequence (GAS) described for the GBP gene. Mutations in this 
GAS core region prevent complex assembly and result in the loss of IFN-gamma
induction of reporter constructs containing the mutation. In addition to the GAS 
core region, a 5' region of the GRR is necessary for optimal IFN-gamma induction 
and for formation of one of the DNA-protein complexes. By antibody reactivity, we
show that a 91-kDa protein, first identified as a component of ISGF3, the
IFN-alpha-induced transcription complex, is present in at least two of the
DNA-protein complexes. IFN-alpha can induce the formation of the faster-migrating
91-kDa protein-GAS complex but not the slower-migrating complex. Furthermore,
IFN-alpha does not result in appreciable transcriptional activation of Fc gamma
RI or constructs containing the GRR. Thus, these data demonstrate that the
IFN-gamma-activated 91-kDa protein is required for IFN-gamma induction of Fc
gamma RI and suggest that an additional complex may be required for optimal
expression and specificity.

PMCID: PMC46497
PMID: 8483949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2182-92.

Two cis-DNA elements involved in myeloid-cell-specific expression and gamma
interferon (IFN-gamma) activation of the human high-affinity Fc gamma receptor
gene: a novel IFN regulatory mechanism.

Perez C(1), Wietzerbin J, Benech PD.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 196 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Section
Biologie, Institut Curie, Paris, France.

The human high-affinity receptor for the constant region of immunoglobulin G
(human Fc gamma R1) is encoded by two mRNAs induced selectively by gamma
interferon (IFN-gamma) and expressed in cells of myeloid lineage. The cis-DNA
element (GRR) previously found to confer IFN-gamma responsiveness to this gene
acts as an inducible enhancer and is the target of an IFN-gamma-activated
factor(s) (GIRE-BP) in cells of different origins. Although the GRR motif is not 
related to the DNA elements involved in the regulation of other IFN-stimulated
genes, GIRE-BP binding depends on the IFN-gamma-dependent activation of the
91-kDa protein known to be one of the factors of a transcriptional complex
activated by IFN-alpha. Deletions of the Fc gamma R1 promoter allowed us to
identify a 25-bp element, downstream from the GRR motif, conferring
cell-type-specific expression. This element, called MATE (myeloid activating
transcription element), is the DNA target for constitutive factors forming two
complexes, MATE-BP1 and MATE-BP2. In accordance with the functional analysis,
MATE-BP binding activities were detected in extracts prepared from myeloid cell
lines such as THP-1, HL-60, and U-937 but not in HeLa cell extracts. The MATE
motif is present not only in the promoter of other Fc receptor genes but also in 
several promoters of genes whose expression is restricted to monocytic cells. Our
results suggest that human Fc gamma R1 gene expression in myeloid cells is
initiated by the interaction of IFN-gamma-activated factors with
cell-type-specific factors through their binding to the GRR and MATE motifs.

PMCID: PMC359539
PMID: 8455606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Biol Chem. 1993 Mar 25;268(9):6593-9.

In vitro activation of the transcription factor ISGF3 by interferon alpha
involves a membrane-associated tyrosine phosphatase and tyrosine kinase.

David M(1), Romero G, Zhang ZY, Dixon JE, Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Interaction of interferon alpha (IFN alpha) with its cell surface receptor
rapidly activates the formation of the transcription complex ISGF3, which
subsequently translocates to the nucleus and stimulates the expression of a
variety of early response genes. We have recently developed a cell-free system
where IFN alpha can activate the formation of ISGF3 in vitro. This system has
enabled us to demonstrate that the component of the ISGF3 transcription complex
which is modified by IFN alpha treatment (ISGF3 alpha) is membrane-associated and
that its activation involves a protein kinase. Using a combination of specific
tyrosine kinase and phosphatase inhibitors and monoclonal anti-phosphotyrosine
antibodies we now are able to demonstrate that IFN alpha-activated transcription 
involves at least a two-step process where a membrane-associated tyrosine
phosphatase and a tyrosine kinase lead to modification of ISGF3 alpha and
subsequent formation of the complete complex. Furthermore, formation of the ISGF3
complex is specifically disrupted by protein tyrosine phosphatase and can be
reversibly dissociated by the phosphotyrosine analogue phenylphosphate. The
latter observation suggested that SH2 and/or SH3 domains may be required for the 
stable formation of this transcription complex.

PMID: 8454630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Biol Chem. 1993 Mar 5;268(7):5077-84.

Differential regulation of human indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase gene expression by
interferons-gamma and -alpha. Analysis of the regulatory region of the gene and
identification of an interferon-gamma-inducible DNA-binding factor.

Hassanain HH(1), Chon SY, Gupta SL.

Author information: 
(1)Hipple Cancer Research Center, Dayton, Ohio 45439.

The induction of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) activity has been implicated
in the antiproliferative action of interferon (IFN)-gamma on tumor cells and the 
inhibition of intracellular pathogens. Earlier studies have demonstrated that the
expression of the IDO gene is induced strongly by IFN-gamma, but very poorly by
IFN-alpha despite the presence of a sequence highly homologous to the
IFN-alpha-responsive sequence element (interferon-stimulated response element
(ISRE)) in its IFN-gamma-responsive control region. In addition, a sequence with 
a partial homology to the IFN-gamma-responsive sequence (GAS) identified by Lew
et al. (Lew, D.J., Decker, T., Strehlow, I., and Darnell, J.E., Jr. (1991) Mol.
Cell. Biol. 11, 182-191) in a human gene for a guanylate-binding protein and to
the X box sequence found in all major histocompatibility complex class II genes
was found. Deletion experiments have indicated that the ISRE homolog (but not the
GAS-related or the X box-related sequence) was essential for an inducibility by
IFN-gamma. To investigate the lack of inducibility by IFN-alpha despite the
presence of an ISRE homolog, the binding of this ISRE homolog to the
IFN-alpha-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) was examined. Gel mobility shift
experiments and competition experiments indicated that this ISRE homolog did not 
form a stable complex with ISGF3. This may account for a poor inducibility by
IFN-alpha. This inability to bind ISGF3 appears to be (at least in part) due to
minor differences between the nucleotide sequence of the ISRE homolog present in 
the IDO gene promoter and the ISRE consensus sequence found in
IFN-alpha-inducible genes. An IFN-gamma-inducible DNA-binding factor was
identified with characteristics different from ISGF3: (i) the IFN-gamma-inducible
factor was detected in the nuclear extracts, but not in the cytoplasmic extracts;
and (ii) the appearance of this DNA-binding factor required new protein
synthesis, which could explain the dependence on new protein synthesis for the
induction of IDO by IFN-gamma.

PMID: 8444884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jan;13(1):196-206.

Two domains of ISGF3 gamma that mediate protein-DNA and protein-protein
interactions during transcription factor assembly contribute to DNA-binding
specificity.

Veals SA(1), Santa Maria T, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York
10016.

Alpha interferon (IFN-alpha) induces the transcription of a large set of genes
through activation of multimeric transcription factor ISGF3. This factor can be
dissociated into two protein components, termed ISGF3 gamma and ISGF3 alpha.
ISGF3 gamma is a 48-kDa protein related at the amino terminus to members of the
IFN-regulatory factor (IRF) and Myb families of DNA-binding proteins; ISGF3 alpha
consists of three polypeptides of 84, 91, and 113 kDa that self-assemble to form 
an activated component in response to IFN-alpha. DNA-binding studies indicated
that ISGF3 gamma binds DNA alone, recognizing the IFN-stimulated response
element, while the ISGF3 alpha polypeptides alone display no specific
interactions with DNA. A complex between ISGF3 gamma and activated ISGF3 alpha
binds the IFN-stimulated response element with much greater affinity than does
the 48-kDa ISGF3 gamma protein alone. The DNA-binding domain of ISGF3 gamma and
regions responsible for protein-protein interaction with ISGF3 alpha were
identified by using deleted forms of ISGF3 gamma expressed in vitro. The
amino-terminal region of ISGF3 gamma homologous to the IRF and Myb proteins was
sufficient for interaction with DNA and displayed the binding specificity of the 
intact protein; phosphorylation of this region was necessary for activity. A
second region of 160 amino acids separated from the DNA-binding domain by over
100 amino acids contained a domain capable of associating with ISGF3 alpha and
was sufficient to confer specific ISGF3 alpha interaction to a heterologous
protein. Interaction of the ISGF3 alpha component with the protein interaction
domain of ISGF3 gamma altered the DNA-binding specificity of the resulting
complex, suggesting that one or more of the ISGF3 alpha polypeptides make
base-specific contacts with DNA. This interaction defines a mechanism through
which IRF-like proteins complexed with regulatory components can display novel
DNA-binding specificities.

PMCID: PMC358899
PMID: 8417326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Interferon Res. 1992 Dec;12(6):445-8.

Double-stranded RNA and interferon-alpha induce transcription through different
molecular mechanisms.

Decker T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Molecular Biology, Hannover, Germany.

Double-stranded (ds) RNA stimulates the synthesis of several mRNAs known to be
induced by type I interferons (IFNs). In this report, it is shown that the
IFN-alpha stimulated genes (ISGs) 15, 54, 56, and GBP are transcriptionally
induced by dsRNA. Transcriptional stimulation occurred in the presence of the
protein synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide (CHX), indicating that inducibility was
directly mediated by dsRNA through the action of preformed proteins. ISGF-3, the 
protein complex mediating primary transcriptional induction of ISGs by IFN-alpha,
was not activated by dsRNA in the presence of CHX. Additionally, DNA-binding
activity of ISGF-2/IRF-1, a protein involved in the regulation of the IFN-beta
gene and ISGs, did not correlate with dsRNA-induced transcriptional induction of 
ISGs. This suggests that dsRNA and IFN-alpha induce ISGs through different
molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 1289412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Dec 1;89(23):11411-5.

Tyrosine phosphorylation is required for activation of an alpha
interferon-stimulated transcription factor.

Gutch MJ(1), Daly C, Reich NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York, Stony Brook 11794.

The signal transduction pathway of alpha interferon utilizes tyrosine
phosphorylation to transmit a signal generated at the cell surface to the
transcriptional machinery in the nucleus. Activation of the interferon pathway
initiates with the binding of alpha interferon to its cell surface receptor. The 
ligand-receptor complex signals the activation of a latent cytoplasmic
transcription factor. The active form of the interferon-stimulated gene factor
(ISGF3) is phosphorylated on tyrosine residues. ISGF3 subsequently translocates
to the nucleus and binds to a DNA sequence, the interferon-stimulated response
element, found within the promoter of inducible genes. ISGF3 is a multicomponent 
factor consisting of four proteins of 113 kDa, 91 kDa, 84 kDa, and 48 kDa. Three 
proteins consistent with sizes of 113 kDa, 91 kDa, and 84 kDa copurify with ISGF3
and are phosphorylated on tyrosine residues after stimulation by alpha
interferon. Tyrosine phosphorylation is essential for activation of ISGF3.
Genistein, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, blocks the appearance of ISGF3 and blocks
the transcriptional stimulation of interferon-induced genes. This study shows
that tyrosine phosphorylation provides a link between the interferon-receptor
complex at the plasma membrane and specific activation of gene expression in the 
nucleus.

PMCID: PMC50560
PMID: 1280824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Virology. 1992 Sep;190(1):210-20.

Interferon-alpha-induced gene expression: evidence for a selective effect of
ouabain on activation of the ISGF3 transcription complex.

Nakagawa Y(1), Petricoin EF 3rd, Akai H, Grimley PM, Rupp B, Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cytokine Research, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892.

Binding of interferons (IFNs) to their cell surface receptors stimulates rapid
translocation of cytoplasmic proteins to the nucleus and the expression of a
variety of cellular genes within minutes. Translocated proteins subsequently bind
to the interferon-stimulated response element (ISRE) located in the promoters of 
all IFN-activated cellular genes. We report here that ouabain, a specific
inhibitor of the Na/K ATPase, selectively inhibited transcription of several
IFN-alpha-induced cellular RNAs under conditions in which some other
well-described signal transduction pathways remained intact. The latter included 
induction of human metallothionein 2A (HMT2A) by phorbol ester and induction of
IP-10 RNA by IFN-gamma. Ouabain itself induced RNA of the protooncogene c-fos
which conversely was inhibited by IFN-alpha. Specificity of the ouabain effects
on IFN alpha-induced RNAs with respect to a direct action on the Na/K ATPase was 
shown with a transfected monkey CV-1 cell line which expresses the
ouabain-insensitive rat alpha 1 subunit. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays
(EMSAs) using nuclear extracts from ouabain-treated cells demonstrated that
ouabain decreased IFN alpha-induced binding of the ISGF3 complex to the ISRE.
Reconstitution experiments showed that this effect of ouabain is not due to the
inhibition of IFN alpha activation of the ISGF3 alpha subcomponent, which occurs 
in the cytoplasm, but a selective depletion of the ISGF3 gamma factor which in
concert with activated ISGF3 alpha induces interferon-stimulated gene (54 kDa)
transcription. These findings imply that intracellular ion balance can
selectively regulate the half-life of the ISGF3 gamma protein or the ability of
this protein to complex with ISGF3 alpha to activate IFN alpha-regulated cellular
genes.

PMID: 1529530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Aug 15;89(16):7840-3.

The proteins of ISGF-3, the interferon alpha-induced transcriptional activator,
define a gene family involved in signal transduction.

Fu XY(1), Schindler C, Improta T, Aebersold R, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021-6399.

ISGF-3 is a multiprotein transcription factor that is very quickly activated in
the cell cytoplasm only after attachment of interferon alpha to the cell surface.
To understand the specific cytoplasmic activation of proteins that move to the
nucleus and direct increased transcription of specific genes, we have purified
and now report completion of the cloning of cDNA encoding the four proteins of
ISGF-3. With all of the sequences available, it is clear that three of these
proteins are encoded by members of a previously unrecognized gene family. We
suggest that proteins encoded by this gene family serve the function of
interpreting the fact that a cell surface receptor has bound its ligand so that
specific signal transduction to the nucleus can occur.

PMCID: PMC49807
PMID: 1502204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Aug 15;89(16):7836-9.

Proteins of transcription factor ISGF-3: one gene encodes the 91-and 84-kDa
ISGF-3 proteins that are activated by interferon alpha.

Schindler C(1), Fu XY, Improta T, Aebersold R, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

ISGF-3 is an interferon-dependent positive-acting transcription factor that is
cytoplasmically activated, possibly through direct interaction with the
interferon receptor. The factor has been purified, its component proteins have
been separated, and its peptide sequences have been obtained. From the sequences,
degenerate oligonucleotide probes were constructed to screen for cDNA clones.
Sequencing of the selected clones shows that the 91- and 84-kDa components
represent two forms of a previously unknown (to our knowledge) protein. Several
antibodies raised against these proteins prove that they indeed do encode protein
components of ISGF-3. This work provides reagents to explore the modification of 
this cytoplasmically activated transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC49806
PMID: 1502203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Science. 1992 Aug 7;257(5071):809-13.

Interferon-dependent tyrosine phosphorylation of a latent cytoplasmic
transcription factor.

Schindler C(1), Shuai K, Prezioso VR, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021.

Comment in
    Science. 1992 Aug 7;257(5071):744-5.

The interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha)-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3), a
transcriptional activator, contains three proteins, termed ISGF3 alpha proteins, 
that reside in the cell cytoplasm until they are activated in response to
IFN-alpha. Treatment of cells with IFN-alpha caused these three proteins to be
phosphorylated on tyrosine and to translocate to the cell nucleus where they
stimulate transcription through binding to IFN-alpha-stimulated response elements
in DNA. IFN-gamma, which activates transcription through a different receptor and
different DNA binding sites, also caused tyrosine phosphorylation of one of these
proteins. The ISGF3 alpha proteins may be substrates for one or more kinases
activated by ligand binding to the cell surface and may link occupation of a
specific polypeptide receptor with activation of transcription of a set of
specific genes.

PMID: 1496401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Aug;12(8):3315-24.

Subunit of an alpha-interferon-responsive transcription factor is related to
interferon regulatory factor and Myb families of DNA-binding proteins.

Veals SA(1), Schindler C, Leonard D, Fu XY, Aebersold R, Darnell JE Jr, Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Kaplan Comprehensive Cancer Center, NYU School of Medicine, New York 10016.

Alpha interferon stimulates transcription by converting the positive
transcriptional regulator ISGF3 from a latent to an active form. This
receptor-mediated event occurs in the cytoplasm, with subsequent translocation of
the activated factor to the nucleus. ISGF3 has two components, termed ISGF3 alpha
and ISGF3 gamma. ISGF3 gamma serves as the DNA recognition subunit, while ISGF3
alpha, which appears to consist of three polypeptides, is a target for alpha
interferon signaling and serves as a regulatory component whose activation is
required to form ISGF3. ISGF3 gamma DNA-binding activity was identified as a
48-kDa polypeptide, and partial amino acid sequence has allowed isolation of cDNA
clones. ISGF3 gamma translated in vitro from recombinant clones bound DNA with a 
specificity indistinguishable from that of ISGF3 gamma purified from HeLa cells. 
Sequencing of ISGF3 gamma cDNA clones revealed significant similarity to the
interferon regulatory factor (IRF) family of DNA binding proteins in the
amino-terminal 117 residues of ISGF3 gamma. The other IRF family proteins bind
DNA with a specificity related to but distinct from that of ISGF3 gamma. We note 
sequence similarities between the related regions of IRF family proteins and the 
imperfect tryptophan repeats which constitute the DNA-binding domain of the c-myb
oncoprotein. These sequence similarities suggest that ISGF3 gamma and IRF
proteins and the c-myb oncoprotein use a common structural motif for DNA
recognition. Recombinant ISGF3 gamma, like the natural protein, interacted with
HeLa cell ISGF3 alpha to form the mature ISGF3 DNA-binding complex. We suggest
that other IRF family members may participate in signaling pathways by
interacting with as yet unidentified regulatory subunits analogous to ISGF3
alpha.

PMCID: PMC364572
PMID: 1630447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Science. 1992 Aug 7;257(5071):813-5.

Activation of transcription factors by interferon-alpha in a cell-free system.

David M(1), Larner AC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cytokine Biology, Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research,
Bethesda, MD 20892.

Comment in
    Science. 1992 Aug 7;257(5071):744-5.

The signal transduction mechanisms of interferons (IFNs) remain unclear partly
because no effect of IFN has been reproducible in a cell-free system. IFN-alpha
rapidly induces the transcription of a set of early response genes, and a
multicomponent transcriptional activator, interferon stimulated gene factor 3
(ISGF3), is activated within minutes after binding of IFN-alpha to its receptor. 
A system was developed in which IFN-alpha activated ISGF3 in homogenates of HeLa 
cells. Subcellular fractionation revealed that incubation of a plasma
membrane-enriched fraction with IFN-alpha was sufficient to activate the
regulatory subcomponent of ISGF3.

PMID: 1496402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Interferon Res. 1992 Apr;12(2):87-94.

Interferon-gamma potentiates the antiviral activity and the expression of
interferon-stimulated genes induced by interferon-alpha in U937 cells.

Improta T(1), Pine R, Pfeffer LM.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

Binding of type I interferon (IFN-alpha/beta) to specific receptors results in
the rapid transcriptional activation, independent of protein synthesis, of
IFN-alpha-stimulated genes (ISGs) in human fibroblasts and HeLa and Daudi cell
lines. The binding of ISGF3 (IFN-stimulated gene factor 3) to the conserved
IFN-stimulated response element (ISRE) results in transcriptional activation.
This factor is composed of a DNA-binding protein (ISGF3 gamma), which normally is
present in the cytoplasm, and other IFN-alpha-activated proteins which preexist
as latent cytoplasmic precursors (ISGF3 alpha). We have found that ISG expression
in the monocytic U937 cell line differs from most cell lines previously examined.
U937 cells express both type I and type II IFN receptors, but only IFN-alpha is
capable of inducing antiviral protection in these cells. Pretreatment with
IFN-gamma potentiates the IFN-alpha-induced protection, but IFN-gamma alone does 
not have any antiviral activity. ISG15 mRNA accumulation in U937 cells is not
detectable before 6 h of IFN-alpha treatment, peaks at 24 h, and requires protein
synthesis. Although IFN-gamma alone does not induce ISG expression, IFN-gamma
pretreatment markedly increases and hastens ISG expression and transcriptional
induction. Nuclear extracts assayed for the presence of ISRE binding factors by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that ISGF3 is induced by IFN-alpha
within 6 h from undetectable basal levels in untreated U937 cells. Activation of 
ISGF3 alpha, the latent component of ISGF3, occurs rapidly. However, the increase
in ISGF3 activity ultimately correlates with the accumulation of ISGF3 gamma
induced by IFN-alpha or IFN-gamma.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 1315834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. J Biol Chem. 1992 Mar 25;267(9):6389-95.

Role of protein phosphorylation in activation of interferon-stimulated gene
factors.

Bandyopadhyay SK(1), Sen GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Ohio 44195-5285.

Possible involvement of protein phosphorylation in interferon (IFN)-mediated
activation of IFN-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) was investigated. For this
purpose, in vivo experiments with specific inhibitors of protein kinases and in
vitro experiments with protein phosphatases were carried out. In HeLaM cells,
2-aminopurine, an inhibitor of double-stranded RNA-dependent protein kinase,
blocked the induction of ISGF3 gamma subunit but not the activation of ISGF3
alpha subunit. A series of experiments using combinations of protein and RNA
synthesis inhibitors and 2-aminopurine indicated that the block elicited by
2-aminopurine was at the level of ISGF3 gamma mRNA synthesis. Activation of ISGF3
alpha, although insensitive to 2-aminopurine, was completely blocked by 10 nM
staurosporine, an inhibitor of protein kinase C. On the other hand, even 500 nM
staurosporine did not block the induction of ISGF3 gamma. Incubation of
cytoplasmic or nuclear extracts of IFN-treated HeLaM cells in vitro with alkaline
phosphatase completely eliminated their ability to form the ISGF3 complex but not
the ISGF1 complex. Treatment with acid phosphatase, on the other hand, changed
the electrophoretic mobility of the ISGF3 complex but did not obliterate it.
Complementation experiments revealed that ISGF3 alpha was the alkaline
phosphatase-sensitive component of the complex. These results suggest that a
protein kinase C-mediated phosphorylation step is involved in ISGF3 alpha
activation and a 2-aminopurine-sensitive component is involved in ISGF3 gamma
mRNA induction.

PMID: 1556141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Biol Chem. 1991 Dec 5;266(34):23471-6.

Protein kinase activity required for an early step in interferon-alpha signaling.

Kessler DS(1), Levy DE.

Author information: 
(1)Kaplan Cancer Center, New York, New York.

Interferon-alpha (IFN alpha) induces an immediate transcriptional response of a
restricted set of genes in target cells. Specific transcription is mediated by
the cytoplasmic activation of a transcription factor complex termed ISGF3. ISGF3 
is a multimeric protein complex composed of a regulatory component (ISGF3 alpha),
which is activated following IFN alpha treatment, and a DNA-binding component
(ISGF3 gamma), which recognizes the IFN alpha-stimulated response element (ISRE).
Following activation, ISGF3 alpha translocates to the nucleus where ISGF3
assembles as a high affinity complex on the ISRE. The biochemical basis for
receptor-mediated activation of ISGF3 is unknown. We report that two potent
protein kinase inhibitors, staurosporine and K-252a, ablated the transcriptional 
response to IFN alpha treatment. These inhibitors prevented the activation of the
ISGF3 alpha component without affecting the ISGF3 gamma component, resulting in
no accumulation of mature ISGF3 in nuclei of treated cells. Although these agents
are potent inhibitors of protein kinase C (PKC), PKC does not mediate ISGF3 alpha
activation. Down-regulation of PKC by chronic exposure of cells to
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, which led to complete loss of
PKC-immunoreactive material, failed to ablate the transcriptional response to IFN
alpha or the activation of ISGF3 alpha. The PKC-specific inhibitor calphostin C
did not perturb activation or nuclear accumulation of ISGF3. We conclude that a
novel, staurosporine/K-252a-sensitive kinase is required for ISGF3 activity and
may participate in receptor-mediated signal transduction.

PMID: 1744140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1990 Nov;87(21):8555-9.

ISGF3, the transcriptional activator induced by interferon alpha, consists of
multiple interacting polypeptide chains.

Fu XY(1), Kessler DS, Veals SA, Levy DE, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021.

Interferon-stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3) is the ligand-dependent
transcriptional activator that, in response to interferon treatment, is assembled
in the cell cytoplasm, is translocated to the nucleus, and binds the consensus
DNA site, the interferon-stimulated response element. We have purified ISGF3 and 
identified its constituent proteins: a DNA-binding protein of 48 kDa and three
larger polypeptides (84, 91, and 113 kDa), which themselves do not have
DNA-binding activity. The multisubunit structure of ISGF3 most likely reflects
its participation in receiving a ligand-dependent signal, translocating to the
nucleus, and binding to DNA to activate transcription.

PMCID: PMC54995
PMID: 2236065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. New Biol. 1990 Oct;2(10):923-8.

Interferon-dependent transcriptional activation: signal transduction without
second messenger involvement?

Levy D(1), Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, 10016.

Two specific macromolecular interactions are known to underlie the demonstrated
transcriptional stimulation of different sets of genes incident to the binding of
different polypeptide ligands to cells. The initial polypeptide-receptor
interaction is widely recognized to be specific. It is also well established that
the binding of specific transcription factors to well-defined DNA sites activates
specific genes. In this paper, we suggest that a third, equally specific
protein-protein interaction links the first two specific interactions and ensures
the high specificity required in these pathways. We propose that a
receptor-recognition protein is required to recognize the bound receptor. This
receptor-recognition protein might itself be part of a transcription factor or
might interact directly with a transcription factor that would thereby be
activated and translocated to the nucleus to participate in gene activation.
According to this hypothesis, no global changes in second messenger
concentrations are necessary, and the enzymatic properties of the
receptor-recognition protein(s) need not be specified. Phosphorylations of, or
by, receptor-bound proteins would not, of course, be excluded. But such
modifications during ligand-mediated signal transduction would not depend on
global second messenger changes. This model is derived from studies of the
proteins involved in interferon (IFN)-stimulated gene transcription. It is now
established that interferon-alpha (IFN alpha) activates a multisubunit
transcription factor in the cell cytoplasm, and that this factor then moves to
the nucleus to activate a set of IFN-stimulated genes.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

PMID: 1706625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


