
1. Inorg Chem. 2015 Dec 21;54(24):11993-2001. doi: 10.1021/acs.inorgchem.5b02387.
Epub 2015 Dec 4.

Anion-Anion Bonding and Topology in Ternary Iridium Seleno-Stannides.

Trump BA(1), Tutmaher JA(1), McQueen TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, ‡Institute for Quantum Matter, §Department of Physics
and Astronomy, and <U+2225>Department of Material Science, Johns Hopkins University ,
Baltimore, Maryland 21218, United States.

The synthesis and physical properties of two new and one known Ir-Sn-Se compound 
are reported. Their crystal structures are elucidated with transmission electron 
microscopy and powder X-ray diffraction. IrSn0.45Se1.55 is a pyrite phase which
consists of tilted corner-sharing IrX6 octahedra with randomly distributed
(Sn-Se)(4-) and (Se-Se)(2-) dimers. Ir2Sn3Se3 is a known trigonally distorted
skutterudite that consists of cooperatively tilted corner-sharing IrSn3Se3
octahedra with ordered (Sn-Se)2(4-) tetramers. Ir2SnSe5 is a layered, distorted
ß-MnO2 (pyrolusite) structure consisting of a double IrSe6 octrahedral row,
corner sharing in the a direction and edge sharing in the b direction. This
distorted pyrolusite contains (Se-Se)(2-) dimers and Se(2-) anions, and each
double row is "capped" with a (Sn-Se)n polymeric chain. Resistivity, specific
heat, and magnetization measurements show that all three have insulating and
diamagnetic behavior, indicative of low-spin 5d(6) Ir(3+). Electronic structure
calculations on Ir2Sn3Se3 show a single, spherical, nonspin-orbit split valence
band and suggest that Ir2Sn3Se3 is topologically nontrivial under tensile strain 
due to inversion of Ir-d and Se-p states.

PMID: 26636188  [PubMed - in process]


2. Nat Genet. 2014 Sep;46(9):957-63. doi: 10.1038/ng.3063. Epub 2014 Aug 10.

Genome-wide association analyses identify variants in developmental genes
associated with hypospadias.

Geller F(1), Feenstra B(1), Carstensen L(1), Pers TH(2), van Rooij IA(3), Körberg
IB(4), Choudhry S(5), Karjalainen JM(6), Schnack TH(1), Hollegaard MV(7), Feitz
WF(8), Roeleveld N(9), Hougaard DM(7), Hirschhorn JN(10), Franke L(6), Baskin
LS(5), Nordenskjöld A(4), van der Zanden LF(3), Melbye M(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology Research, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen,
Denmark. (2)1] Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [2] Center for Basic and Translational Obesity Research,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Medical and
Population Genetics Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. [4] Center for Biological Sequence Analysis, Department of
Systems Biology, Technical University of Denmark, Lyngby, Denmark. (3)Department 
for Health Evidence, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands. (4)1] Department of Women's and Children's Health, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. [2] Center of Molecular Medicine, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Department of Urology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. (6)Department of
Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen,
Groningen, the Netherlands. (7)Danish Centre for Neonatal Screening, Department
of Clinical Biochemistry, Immunology and Genetics, Statens Serum Institut,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (8)Department of Urology, Pediatric Urology, Amalia
Children's Hospital, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands. (9)1] Department for Health Evidence, Radboud University Medical
Center, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. [2] Department of Pediatrics, Amalia
Children's Hospital, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, the
Netherlands. (10)1] Division of Endocrinology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [2] Center for Basic and Translational Obesity
Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. [3] Medical and
Population Genetics Program, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. [4] Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (11)1] Department of Epidemiology Research, Statens Serum
Institut, Copenhagen, Denmark. [2] Department of Medicine, Stanford School of
Medicine, Stanford, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2014 Oct;11(10):540.

Hypospadias is a common congenital condition in boys in which the urethra opens
on the underside of the penis. We performed a genome-wide association study on
1,006 surgery-confirmed hypospadias cases and 5,486 controls from Denmark. After 
replication genotyping of an additional 1,972 cases and 1,812 controls from
Denmark, the Netherlands and Sweden, 18 genomic regions showed independent
association with P < 5 × 10(-8). Together, these loci explain 9% of the liability
to developing this condition. Several of the identified regions harbor genes with
key roles in embryonic development (including HOXA4, IRX5, IRX6 and EYA1).
Subsequent pathway analysis with GRAIL and DEPICT provided additional insight
into possible genetic mechanisms causing hypospadias.

PMID: 25108383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Yi Chuan. 2013 Oct;35(10):1198-208.

[Comparative analysis of conservation and regulatory network on core
transcription factors in mouse inner ear development].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZQ(1), Han XH(2), Wei QJ(2), Xing GQ(3), Cao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China. erwin_0108@sina.com (2)School of Basic Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (3)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

During vertebrate inner ear development, several core genes, such as Six1, Six4, 
Pax2, Pax8, Foxi1, Dlx5, Gbx2, Irx2/3, and Msx1, are crucial to the regulation of
the otic placode induction. In order to get the gene regulatory network during
inner ear development, bioinformatics methods were adopted to analyze
conservation and regulation of the core transcription factors in mice. Pax2,
Pax8, Foxi1, and Dlx5 remained to be the main regulators during inner ear
development, which was consistent with the gene regulatory network from
literature. Six1 was regulated by many transcription factors, and Gbx2, Irx2/3,
and Msx1 played important roles in the regulatory network. The differences in the
constructed regulatory network were reasonably analyzed. It was predicted that
Msxl regulated the expression of Six1 and Gbx2. In addition, several
transcription factors, such as Sox5, Lhx2, Rax, Otx1, Otx2, Pitxl, Pitx2, Nkx2-5,
Irx4, Irx6, Dlx2, Hmx1/2/3, Pou4f3, Pax4 and Tlx2, were found to be involved in
the regulatory network. Our results provide an improved understanding of the
regulatory mechanism during inner ear development.

PMID: 24459893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Cells. 2013 Apr;35(4):298-304. doi: 10.1007/s10059-013-2302-0. Epub 2013 Feb 
26.

Hypermethylation of EBF3 and IRX1 genes in synovial fibroblasts of patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis.

Park SH(1), Kim SK, Choe JY, Moon Y, An S, Park MJ, Kim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Arthritis and Autoimmunity Research
Center, School of Medicine, Catholic University of Daegu, Daegu 705-718, Korea.

Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a chronic, systemic inflammatory disease of unknown 
origin, which exhibits a complex heterogeneity in its pathophysiological
background, resulting in differential responses to a range of therapies and poor 
long-term prognosis. RA synovial fibroblasts (RASFs) are key player cells in RA
pathogenesis. Identification of DNA methylation biomarkers is a field that
provides potential for improving the process of diagnosis and prognosis of
various human diseases. We utilized a genome-wide technique, methylated DNA
isolation assay (MeDIA), in combination with a high resolution CpG microarray for
discovery of novel hypermethylated genes in RASFs. Thirteen genes (APEX1, EBF3,
EGR2, EN1, IRX1, IRX6, KIF12, LHX2, MIPOL1, SGTA, SIN3A, TOLLIP, and ZHX2) with
three consecutive hypermethylated probes were isolated as candidate genes through
two CpG microarrays. Pyrosequencing assay was performed to validate the
methylation status of TGF-ß signaling components, EBF3 and IRX1 genes in RASFs
and osteoarthritis (OA) SFs. Hypermethylation at CpG sites in the EBF3 and IRX1
genes was observed with a high methylation index (MI) in RASFs (52.5% and 41.4%, 
respectively), while a lower MI was observ ed in OASFs and h ealthy SFs (13.2%
for EBF3 and 4.3% for IRX1). In addition, RT-PCR analysis showed a remarkable
decrease in their mRNA expression in the RA group, compared with the OA or
healthy control, and their reduction levels correlated with MI. The current
findings suggest that methylation-associated down-regulation of EBF3 and IRX1
genes may play an important role in a pathogenic effect of TGF-ß on RASFs.
However, further clinical validation with large numbers of patients is needed in 
order to confirm our findings.

PMCID: PMC3887890
PMID: 23456299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Development. 2012 Dec;139(24):4644-55. doi: 10.1242/dev.081729.

Regulation of retinal interneuron subtype identity by the Iroquois homeobox gene 
Irx6.

Star EN(1), Zhu M, Shi Z, Liu H, Pashmforoush M, Sauve Y, Bruneau BG, Chow RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC V8W 3N5, Canada.

Interneuronal subtype diversity lies at the heart of the distinct molecular
properties and synaptic connections that shape the formation of the neuronal
circuits that are necessary for the complex spatial and temporal processing of
sensory information. Here, we investigate the role of Irx6, a member of the
Iroquois homeodomain transcription factor family, in regulating the development
of retinal bipolar interneurons. Using a knock-in reporter approach, we show
that, in the mouse retina, Irx6 is expressed in type 2 and 3a OFF bipolar
interneurons and is required for the expression of cell type-specific markers in 
these cells, likely through direct transcriptional regulation. In Irx6 mutant
mice, presumptive type 3a bipolar cells exhibit an expansion of their axonal
projection domain to the entire OFF region of the inner plexiform layer, and
adopt molecular features of both type 2 and 3a bipolar cells, highlighted by the 
ectopic upregulation of neurokinin 3 receptor (Nk3r) and Vsx1. These findings
reveal Irx6 as a key regulator of type 3a bipolar cell identity that prevents
these cells from adopting characteristic features of type 2 bipolar cells.
Analysis of the Irx6;Vsx1 double null retina suggests that the terminal
differentiation of type 2 bipolar cells is dependent on the combined expression
of the transcription factors Irx6 and Vsx1, but also points to the existence of
Irx6;Vsx1-independent mechanisms in regulating OFF bipolar subtype-specific gene 
expression. This work provides insight into the generation of neuronal subtypes
by revealing a mechanism in which opposing, yet interdependent, transcription
factors regulate subtype identity.

PMCID: PMC3509726
PMID: 23172916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Biol Reprod. 2011 May;84(5):1024-32. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.088559. Epub
2011 Feb 3.

The fused toes locus is essential for somatic-germ cell interactions that foster 
germ cell maturation in developing gonads in mice.

Kim B(1), Kim Y, Cooke PS, Rüther U, Jorgensen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA.

Ovarian development absolutely depends on communication between somatic and germ 
cell components. In contrast, it is not until after birth that interactions
between somatic and germ cells play an important role in testicular maturation
and spermatogenesis. Previously, we discovered that Irx3 expression was localized
specifically to female gonads during embryonic development; therefore, we sought 
to determine the function of this genetic locus in developing gonads of both
sexes. The fused toes (Ft) mutant mouse is missing 1.6 Mb of chromosome 8, which 
includes the entire IrxB cluster (Irx3, Irx5, Irx6), Ftm, Fts, and Fto genes.
Homozygote Ft mutant embryos die around embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5); therefore, to
assess later development, we harvested gonads at E11.5 and transplanted them into
nude mouse hosts. Our results show defects in somatic and germ cell maturation in
developing gonads of both sexes. Testis development was normal initially;
however, by 3-wk posttransplantation, expression of Sertoli and peritubular myoid
cell markers were decreased. In many cases, gonocytes failed to migrate to
structurally impaired basement membranes of seminiferous cords. Developmental
abnormalities of the ovary appeared earlier and were more severe. Over time, the 
Ft mutant ovary formed very few primordial or primary follicles, which contained 
oocytes that failed to grow and were surrounded by scarce granulosa cells that
expressed low levels of FOXL2. By 3 wk after transplantation, it was difficult to
identify ovarian tissue in Ft mutant ovary transplants. In summary, we conclude
that the Ft locus contains genes essential for somatic-germ cell interactions,
without which the germ cell niche fails to mature in both sexes.

PMID: 21293032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Am J Pathol. 2010 Nov;177(5):2609-21. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100130. Epub 2010 
Sep 16.

Deletions of 16q in Wilms tumors localize to blastemal-anaplastic cells and are
associated with reduced expression of the IRXB renal tubulogenesis gene cluster.

Mengelbier LH(1), Karlsson J, Lindgren D, Øra I, Isaksson M, Frigyesi I, Frigyesi
A, Bras J, Sandstedt B, Gisselsson D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, University and Regional Laboratories, Lund
University, Skåne University Hospital, SE 221 85 Lund, Sweden.

Wilms tumor is the most common pediatric renal neoplasm, but few molecular
prognostic markers have been identified for this tumor. Somatic deletion in the
long arm of chromosome 16 (16q) is known to predict a less favorable outcome in
Wilms tumor, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are not known. We show that 
16q deletions are typically confined to immature anaplastic-blastic tumor
elements, while deletions are absent in maturing tumor components. The smallest
region of deletion overlap mapped to a 1.8-Mb segment containing the IRXB gene
cluster including IRX3, IRX5, and IRX6, of which IRX3 is a recently identified
regulator of tubular maturation during nephrogenesis. Tumors with 16q deletion
showed a lower overall mRNA expression of IRXB genes, and 16q-deleted tumor cells
failed to express IRX3 while it was expressed in differentiating tubular tumor
elements with intact 16q. Consistent with a role for IRX3 in tubular
differentiation, gene sets linked to Notch signaling, Rho signaling, and ion
channel activity were enriched in tumors with high IRX3 expression, while WTs
with low expression were enriched for gene sets linked to cell cycle progression.
Low mRNA levels of IRXB genes were associated with diffuse anaplasia, high-stage 
disease, and death. A disturbed balance between tubular differentiation and
self-renewal of anaplastic-blastic elements may thus be one mechanism linking 16q
deletion to adverse outcome in Wilms tumor.

PMCID: PMC2966816
PMID: 20847289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Anat. 2010 Jun;216(6):683-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2010.01233.x. Epub 2010 
Apr 14.

Comparison of Iroquois gene expression in limbs/fins of vertebrate embryos.

McDonald LA(1), Gerrelli D, Fok Y, Hurst LD, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology & Biochemistry, University of Bath, Somerset, UK.

In Drosophila, Iroquois (Irx) genes have various functions including the
specification of the identity of wing veins. Vertebrate Iroquois (Irx) genes have
been reported to be expressed in the developing digits of mouse limbs. Here we
carry out a phylogenetic analysis of vertebrate Irx genes and compare expression 
in developing limbs of mouse, chick and human embryos and in zebrafish pectoral
fin buds. We confirm that the six Irx gene families in vertebrates are well
defined and that Clusters A and B are duplicates; in contrast, Irx1 and 3, Irx2
and 5, and Irx4 and 6 are paralogs. All Irx genes in mouse and chick are
expressed in developing limbs. Detailed comparison of the expression patterns in 
mouse and chick shows that expression patterns of genes in the same cluster are
generally similar but paralogous genes have different expression patterns. Mouse 
and chick Irx1 are expressed in digit condensations, whereas mouse and chick Irx6
are expressed interdigitally. The timing of Irx1 expression in individual digits 
in mouse and chick is different. Irx1 is also expressed in digit condensations in
developing human limbs, thus showing conservation of expression of this gene in
higher vertebrates. In zebrafish, Irx genes of all but six of the families are
expressed in early stage pectoral fin buds but not at later stages, suggesting
that these genes are not involved in patterning distal structures in zebrafish
fins.

PMCID: PMC2952381
PMID: 20408909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Dev Biol. 2009 May 15;329(2):258-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.028. Epub 2009 
Mar 4.

The Xenopus Irx genes are essential for neural patterning and define the border
between prethalamus and thalamus through mutual antagonism with the anterior
repressors Fezf and Arx.

Rodríguez-Seguel E(1), Alarcón P, Gómez-Skarmeta JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología del Desarrollo (CABD), Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas/Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Carretera de Utrera
Km1, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.

The Iroquois (Irx) genes encode homeoproteins conserved during evolution.
Vertebrate genomes contain six Irx genes organized in two clusters, IrxA (which
harbors Irx1, Irx2 and Irx4) and IrxB (which harbors Irx3, Irx5 and Irx6). To
determine the precise role of these genes during development and their putative
redundancies, we conducted a comparative expression analysis and a comprehensive 
loss-of-function study of all the early expressed Irx genes (Irx1-5) using
specific morpholinos in Xenopus. We found that the five Irx genes display largely
overlapping expression patterns and contribute to neural patterning. All Irx
genes are required for proper formation of posterior forebrain, midbrain,
hindbrain and, to a lesser an extent, spinal cord. Nevertheless, Irx1 and Irx3
seem to have a predominant role during regionalization of the neural plate. In
addition, we find that the common anterior limit of Irx gene expression, which
will correspond to the future border between the prethalamus and thalamus, is
defined by mutual repression between Fezf and Irx proteins. This mutual
repression is likely direct. Finally, we show that Arx, another anteriorly
expressed repressor, also contribute to delineate the anterior border of Irx
expression.

PMID: 19268445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Hand (N Y). 2009 Sep;4(3):294-301. doi: 10.1007/s11552-009-9164-0. Epub 2009 Jan 
29.

Differential gene expression analysis of subcutaneous fat, fascia, and skin
overlying a Dupuytren's disease nodule in comparison to control tissue.

Shih B(1), Brown JJ, Armstrong DJ, Lindau T, Bayat A.

Author information: 
(1)Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery Research, Manchester Interdisciplinary
Biocentre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Dupuytren's disease (DD) is a benign fibroproliferative tumor with an unknown
etiology and high recurrence postsurgery. Several observations suggest the
possible involvement of skin overlying nodule (SON) and the subcutaneous fat in
the pathogenesis of DD. This study aims to (1) compare the gene expression levels
of SON and subcutaneous fat in DD and normal subjects and (2) to compare
transverse palmar fascia (Skoog's fibers) from DD patients as internal control
tissue, with palmar fascia (transverse carpal ligament) from patients undergoing 
carpal tunnel release as external control. Skin, fat, and fascia were obtained
from five DD patients of Caucasian origin (age = 66 +/- 14) and from five control
subjects (age = 57 +/- 19) undergoing carpal tunnel release. Total ribonucleic
acids was extracted from each sample and used for complementary deoxyribonucleic 
acid synthesis. Real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction was used to
assess the gene expression levels of six candidate genes: A disintegrin and
metalloproteinase domain (ADAM12), aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family member A1
(ALDH1A1), iroquois homeoboxprotein 6 (IRX6), periostin, osteoblast specific
factor, proteoglycan 4, and tenascin C. Using independent t test, ADAM12,
ALDH1A1, and IRX6 expression levels in DD fats were significantly (p < 0.05)
higher than those in the controls. There is no significant difference in the gene
expression levels of all six genes when comparing disease and control fascia and 
skin. Interestingly, ADAM12 up-regulation has also been observed in several other
fibrotic and proliferative disorders. In conclusion, this study demonstrates
potential roles for subcutaneous fat in DD pathogenesis as well as supports the
use of transverse palmar fascia as appropriate control tissues in DD research.

PMCID: PMC2724615
PMID: 19184239  [PubMed]


11. J Hand Surg Am. 2009 Jan;34(1):124-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2008.09.017.

Identification of biomarkers in Dupuytren's disease by comparative analysis of
fibroblasts versus tissue biopsies in disease-specific phenotypes.

Shih B(1), Wijeratne D, Armstrong DJ, Lindau T, Day P, Bayat A.

Author information: 
(1)Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery Research, Manchester Interdisciplinary
Biocentre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

PURPOSE: Biomarkers are molecular mediators that can serve as indicators of
normal biological processes, pathologic processes, and therapeutic interventions.
This study aims to identify potential biomarkers in Dupuytren's disease (DD), a
fibroproliferative benign tumor with an unknown etiology and high recurrence
after surgery.
METHODS: Bioinformatic analytical techniques were employed to identify candidate 
genes that may be differentially expressed in DD, which included gene expression 
analysis of microarray data and thorough literature searches in genetic linkage
and other related biomolecular studies. All DD cases were males with advanced DD 
(n = 5, 66 years +/- 14). RNA was extracted from biopsies and corresponding
cultures of normal fascia (unaffected transverse palmar fascia), palmar nodule
and cord from each patient. Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reactions were performed to determine the gene expression levels for
disease-related transcripts.
RESULTS: The bioinformatic analysis revealed 25 candidate genes, which were
further short-listed to 6 genes via functional annotation. The 6 selected
candidate genes included: A disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain (ADAM12),
aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family member (ALDH1) A1, Iroquois homeobox protein 6
(IRX6), proteoglycan 4 (PRG4), tenascin C (TNC), and periostin (POSTN). The
culturing treatments were shown to have significant impact on the gene expression
for ALDH1A1, PRG4, and TNC. In tissue biopsies, significant fold changes were
observed for ADAM12, POSTN, and TNC in the cord and/or nodule when compared with 
that of normal fascia. ADAM12 and POSTN are associated with accelerated or
abnormal cell growth, whereas TNC has been associated with fibrotic diseases and 
cell migration.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated differential gene expression results in DD
tissue biopsies compared with that of their corresponding cultures. ADAM12,
POSTN, and TNC were identified from the cord and nodule biopsy samples as
potential biomarkers in relation to DD development.

PMID: 19121738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 1;304(1):208-20. Epub 2006 Dec 15.

Defects in brain patterning and head morphogenesis in the mouse mutant Fused
toes.

Anselme I(1), Laclef C, Lanaud M, Rüther U, Schneider-Maunoury S.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie du Développement, CNRS UMR7622, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 9
Quai Saint-Bernard, 75252 Paris Cedex 05, France.

During vertebrate development, brain patterning and head morphogenesis are
tightly coordinated. In this paper, we study these processes in the mouse mutant 
Fused toes (Ft), which presents severe head defects at midgestation. The Ft line 
carries a 1.6-Mb deletion on chromosome 8. This deletion eliminates six genes,
three members of the Iroquois gene family, Irx3, Irx5 and Irx6, which form the
IrxB cluster, and three other genes of unknown function, Fts, Ftm and Fto. We
show that in Ft/Ft embryos, both anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning of
the brain are affected. As soon as the beginning of somitogenesis, the forebrain 
is expanded caudally and the midbrain is reduced. Within the expanded forebrain, 
the most dorsomedial (medial pallium) and ventral (hypothalamus) regions are
severely reduced or absent. Morphogenesis of the forebrain and optic vesicles is 
strongly perturbed, leading to reduction of the eyes and delayed or absence of
neural tube closure. Finally, facial structures are hypoplastic. Given the
diversity, localisation and nature of the defects, we propose that some of them
are caused by the elimination of the IrxB cluster, while others result from the
loss of one or several of the Fts, Ftm and Fto genes.

PMID: 17241623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mech Dev. 2001 May;103(1-2):193-5.

Expression of Irx6 during mouse morphogenesis.

Mummenhoff J(1), Houweling AC, Peters T, Christoffels VM, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungs- und Molekularbiologie der Tiere (EMT),
Heinrich-Heine-Universität, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Iroquois (Irx) proteins comprise a family of homeodomain-containing transcription
factors involved in patterning and regionalization of embryonic tissues in both
vertebrates and invertebrates. The six murine Irx genes are organized in two
clusters, each consisting of three genes. Irx1, Irx2 and Irx4 belong to the IrxA 
cluster on chromosome 13, whereas Irx3, Irx5 and Irx6, comprising the IrxB
cluster, are located on chromosome 8 (Peters et al., Genome Res. 10 (2000) 1453).
Developmental expression patterns have so far only been reported for five Irx
genes. Here, we investigated the expression pattern of Irx6 during mouse
morphogenesis and early organogenesis. The pattern was found to be much more
restricted compared to the other five Irx genes, and its level of expression was 
much lower.

PMID: 11335133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genome Res. 2000 Oct;10(10):1453-62.

Organization of mouse Iroquois homeobox genes in two clusters suggests a
conserved regulation and function in vertebrate development.

Peters T(1), Dildrop R, Ausmeier K, Rüther U.

Author information: 
(1)Entwicklungs- und Molekularbiologie der Tiere, Heinrich-Heine-Universität,
40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Iroquois proteins comprise a conserved family of homeodomain-containing
transcription factors involved in patterning and regionalization of embryonic
tissues in both vertebrates and invertebrates. Earlier studies identified four
murine Iroquois (Irx) genes. Here we report the isolation of two additional
members of the murine gene family, Irx5 and Irx6. Phylogenetic analysis of the
Irx gene family revealed distinct clades for fly and vertebrate genes, and
vertebrate members themselves were classified into three pairs of cognate genes. 
Mapping of the murine Irx genes identified two gene clusters located on mouse
chromosomes 8 and 13, respectively. Each gene cluster is represented by three Irx
genes whose relative positions within both clusters are strictly conserved.
Combined results from phylogenetic, linkage, and physical mapping studies provide
evidence for the evolution of two Irx gene clusters by duplication of a larger
chromosomal region and dispersion to two chromosomal locations. The maintenance
of two cognate Irx gene clusters during vertebrate evolution suggests that their 
genomic organization is important for the regulation, expression, and function of
Irx genes during embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC310936
PMID: 11042145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):317-21.

Expression of two novel mouse Iroquois homeobox genes during neurogenesis.

Cohen DR(1), Cheng CW, Cheng SH, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Members of the Drosophila Iroquois homeobox gene family are implicated in the
development of peripheral nervous system and the regionalization of wing and eye 
imaginal discs. Recent studies suggest that Xenopus Iroquois homeobox (Irx) genes
are also involved in neurogenesis. Three mouse Irx genes, Irx1, Irx2 and Irx3,
have been previously identified and are expressed with distinct spatio-temporal
patterns during neurogenesis. We report here the cloning and expression analysis 
of two novel mouse Irx genes, Irx5 and Irx6. Although Irx5 and Irx6 proteins are 
structurally more related to one another, we find that Irx5 displays a
developmental expression pattern strikingly similar to that of Irx3, whereas Irx6
expression resembles that of Irx1. Consistent with the notion that Mash1 is a
putative target gene of the Irx proteins, all four Irx genes display an
overlapping expression pattern with Mash1 in the developing CNS. In contrast, the
Irx genes and Mash1 are expressed in complementary domains in the developing eye 
and olfactory epithelium.

PMID: 10704856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


