
1. Biol Reprod. 2016 Mar 2. pii: biolreprod.115.138115. [Epub ahead of print]

Epigenetic Modulation of Collagen 1A1: Therapeutic Implications in Fibrosis and
Endometriosis.

Zheng Y, Khan Z, Zanfagnin V, Correa LF, Delaney AA, Daftary GS.

Progressive fibrosis is recalcitrant to conventional therapy and commonly
complicates chronic diseases and surgical healing. We evaluate here a novel
mechanism that regulates scar-tissue Collagen (COL1A1/Col1a1) expression and
characterize its translational relevance as targeted therapy for fibrosis in an
endometriosis disease model. Endometriosis is caused by displacement and
implantation of uterine endometrium onto abdominal organs and spreads with
progressive scarring. Transcription factor KLF11 is specifically diminished in
endometriosis lesions. Loss of KLF11 mediated repression of COL1A1/Col1a1
expression resulted in increased fibrosis. To determine the biological
significance of COL1A1/Col1a1 expression on fibrosis, we modulated its
expression. In T-HESC human endometrial-stromal fibroblasts, KLF11 recruited
SIN3A/HDAC (Histone Deacetylase) resulting in COL1A1-promoter deacetylation and
repression. This role of KLF11 was pharmacologically replicated by a Histone
Acetyl Transferase Inhibitor (HATI: Garcinol). In contrast, opposite effects were
obtained with a HDAC Inhibitor (HDACI: Suberoyl Anilide Hydroxamic Acid [SAHA]), 
confirming regulatory specificity for these reciprocally-active epigenetic
mechanisms. Fibrosis was concordantly reversed in Klf11-/- animals by HATI and in
wildtype animals by HDACI treatments. Aberrant lesional COL1A1 regulation is
significant, as fibrosis depended on lesion rather than host genotype. This is
the first report demonstrating feasibility for targeted pharmacological reversal 
of fibrosis, an intractable phenotype of diverse chronic diseases.

Copyright 2016 by The Society for the Study of Reproduction.

PMID: 26935598  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Neuropharmacology. 2016 Jan 22;105:329-340. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2016.01.024. [Epub ahead of print]

Binge ethanol exposure increases the Krüppel-like factor 11-monoamine oxidase
(MAO) pathway in rats: Examining the use of MAO inhibitors to prevent
ethanol-induced brain injury.

Duncan JW(1), Zhang X(1), Wang N(2), Johnson S(2), Harris S(2), Udemgba C(2), Ou 
XM(2), Youdim MB(3), Stockmeier CA(2), Wang JM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS
39216, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry
and Human Behavior, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, 
USA. (3)Technion-Rappaport Family Faculty of Medicine, Eve Topf Center of
Excellence, For Neurodegenerative Diseases Research, Haifa, 31096, Israel.
(4)Program in Neuroscience, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS
39216, USA; Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA; Department of Pathology,
University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA. Electronic
address: jwang@umc.edu.

Binge drinking induces several neurotoxic consequences including oxidative stress
and neurodegeneration. Because of these effects, drugs which prevent
ethanol-induced damage to the brain may be clinically beneficial. In this study, 
we investigated the ethanol-mediated KLF11-MAO cell death cascade in the frontal 
cortex of Sprague-Dawley rats exposed to a modified Majchowicz 4-day binge
ethanol model and control rats. Moreover, MAO inhibitors (MAOIs) were
investigated for neuroprotective activity against binge ethanol. Binge
ethanol-treated rats demonstrated a significant increase in KLF11, both MAO
isoforms, protein oxidation and caspase-3, as well as a reduction in BDNF
expression in the frontal cortex compared to control rats. MAOIs prevented these 
binge ethanol-induced changes, suggesting a neuroprotective benefit. Neither
binge ethanol nor MAOI treatment significantly affected protein expression levels
of the oxidative stress enzymes, SOD2 or catalase. Furthermore, ethanol-induced
antinociception was enhanced following exposure to the 4-day ethanol binge. These
results demonstrate that the KLF11-MAO pathway is activated by binge ethanol
exposure and MAOIs are neuroprotective by preventing the binge ethanol-induced
changes associated with this cell death cascade. This study supports KLF11-MAO as
a mechanism of ethanol-induced neurotoxicity and cell death that could be
targeted with MAOI drug therapy to alleviate alcohol-related brain injury.
Further examination of MAOIs to reduce alcohol use disorder-related brain injury 
could provide pivotal insight to future pharmacotherapeutic opportunities.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26805422  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2016 Jan 5;371(1685):20150040. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2015.0040.

Loss of neurogenesis in Hydra leads to compensatory regulation of neurogenic and 
neurotransmission genes in epithelial cells.

Wenger Y(1), Buzgariu W(1), Galliot B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Evolution, Institute of Genetics and Genomics in
Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences, University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest
Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. (2)Department of Genetics and Evolution,
Institute of Genetics and Genomics in Geneva (IGe3), Faculty of Sciences,
University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest Ansermet, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland
brigitte.galliot@unige.ch.

Hydra continuously differentiates a sophisticated nervous system made of
mechanosensory cells (nematocytes) and sensory-motor and ganglionic neurons from 
interstitial stem cells. However, this dynamic adult neurogenesis is dispensable 
for morphogenesis. Indeed animals depleted of their interstitial stem cells and
interstitial progenitors lose their active behaviours but maintain their
developmental fitness, and regenerate and bud when force-fed. To characterize the
impact of the loss of neurogenesis in Hydra, we first performed transcriptomic
profiling at five positions along the body axis. We found neurogenic genes
predominantly expressed along the central body column, which contains stem cells 
and progenitors, and neurotransmission genes predominantly expressed at the
extremities, where the nervous system is dense. Next, we performed
transcriptomics on animals depleted of their interstitial cells by hydroxyurea,
colchicine or heat-shock treatment. By crossing these results with
cell-type-specific transcriptomics, we identified epithelial genes up-regulated
upon loss of neurogenesis: transcription factors (Dlx, Dlx1, DMBX1/Manacle, Ets1,
Gli3, KLF11, LMX1A, ZNF436, Shox1), epitheliopeptides (Arminins, PW peptide),
neurosignalling components (CAMK1D, DDCl2, Inx1), ligand-ion channel receptors
(CHRNA1, NaC7), G-Protein Coupled Receptors and FMRFRL. Hence epitheliomuscular
cells seemingly enhance their sensing ability when neurogenesis is compromised.
This unsuspected plasticity might reflect the extended multifunctionality of
epithelial-like cells in early eumetazoan evolution.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4685579
PMID: 26598723  [PubMed - in process]


4. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Mar;5(2):135-44. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.01.004. Epub
2015 Feb 25.

Bile acid nuclear receptor FXR and digestive system diseases.

Ding L(1), Yang L(2), Wang Z(2), Huang W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Complex Prescriptions and MOE Key Laboratory for
Standardization of Chinese Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica,
Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China ;
Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases Research, Beckman Research
Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.
(2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Complex Prescriptions and MOE Key Laboratory for
Standardization of Chinese Medicines, Institute of Chinese Materia Medica,
Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Shanghai 201203, China.
(3)Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases Research, Beckman Research
Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Bile acids (BAs) are not only digestive surfactants but also important cell
signaling molecules, which stimulate several signaling pathways to regulate some 
important biological processes. The bile-acid-activated nuclear receptor,
farnesoid X receptor (FXR), plays a pivotal role in regulating bile acid, lipid
and glucose homeostasis as well as in regulating the inflammatory responses,
barrier function and prevention of bacterial translocation in the intestinal
tract. As expected, FXR is involved in the pathophysiology of a wide range of
diseases of gastrointestinal tract, including inflammatory bowel disease,
colorectal cancer and type 2 diabetes. In this review, we discuss current
knowledge of the roles of FXR in physiology of the digestive system and the
related diseases. Better understanding of the roles of FXR in digestive system
will accelerate the development of FXR ligands/modulators for the treatment of
digestive system diseases.

PMCID: PMC4629217
PMID: 26579439  [PubMed]


5. Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol. 2015 Oct 2. pii: 027516. [Epub ahead of print]

Modulating the Genomic Programming of Adipocytes.

Loft A(1), Schmidt SF(1), Mandrup S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
Denmark, Odense M 5230, Denmark. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense M 5230, Denmark
s.mandrup@bmb.sdu.dk.

The ability to modify the transcriptional program in response to external signals
provides a way for mammalian cells to alter their biological fate and properties,
thereby adapting to changes in the environment. Adipocytes are excellent examples
of differentiated cells that possess a striking transcriptional plasticity when
exposed to physiological and metabolic stimuli. In our work, we have focused on
understanding the processes responsible for modulating the genomic programming in
response to different external signals. Thus, we have shown that browning of
human adipocytes with rosiglitazone, an antidiabetic agonist of the key adipocyte
transcription factor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>),
involves redistribution of PPAR<U+03B3> binding to form browning-selective PPAR<U+03B3>
super-enhancers that drive expression of key browning genes. These include genes 
encoding transcriptional regulators, such as Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11) that 
are essential for modulating the genomic program in white adipocytes to induce
browning. Furthermore, we have shown that acute suppression of adipocyte genes by
the proinflammatory cytokine, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), involves
redistribution of cofactors to enhancers activated by the master inflammatory
regulator, nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells
(NF-<U+03BA>B). Interestingly, this redistribution occurs selectively from enhancers
with high-cofactor occupancies, thereby predominantly affecting super-enhancers
and their associated genes. We propose that this is a general mechanism
contributing to transcriptional repression associated with activation of
signal-dependent transcription factors.

Copyright © 2015 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 26432526  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Endocrinology. 2015 Oct;156(10):3581-95. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1145. Epub 2015 Aug
6.

Phenotypic Characterization of Mice Carrying Homozygous Deletion of KLF11, a Gene
in Which Mutations Cause Human Neonatal and MODY VII Diabetes.

Mathison A(1), Escande C(1), Calvo E(1), Seo S(1), White T(1), Salmonson A(1),
Faubion WA Jr(1), Buttar N(1), Iovanna J(1), Lomberk G(1), Chini EN(1), Urrutia
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics (A.M., A.S., W.A.F., N.B.,
G.L., R.U.), Gastroenterology Research Unit, Departments of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Biophysics, Medicine, Epigenomics Translation Program Center
for Individualized Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905; Metabolic
Diseases and Aging Laboratory (C.E.), Institut Pasteur Montevideo, Montevideo
11400, Uruguay; Department of Anesthesia and Robert and Arlene Kogod Center on
Aging (C.E., T.W., E.N.C.), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905;
Endocrinology and Nephrology (E.C.), Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec
Research Center and Laval University, Québec, Québec, G1V 4G2, Canada; Lieber
Institute for Brain Development (S.S.), Baltimore, Maryland 21205; and Centre de 
Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille (J.I.), INSERM U1068, Centre Nationale de 
la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7258, Aix-Marseille Université
and Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Parc Scientifique et Technologique de Luminy,
Marseille, 13288, France.

We have previously shown that amino acid changes in the human Kruppel-Like Factor
(KLF) 11 protein is associated with the development of maturity onset diabetes of
the young VII, whereas complete inactivation of this pathway by the -331 human
insulin mutation causes neonatal diabetes mellitus. Here, we report that Klf11-/-
mice have decreased circulating insulin levels, alterations in the control of
blood glucose and body weight, as well as serum dyslipidemia, but do not develop 
diabetes. Functional assays using ex vivo liver tissue sections demonstrate that 
Klf11-/- mice display increased insulin sensitivity. Genome-wide experiments
validated by pathway-specific quantitative PCR arrays reveal that the Klf11-/-
phenotype associates to alterations in the regulation of gene networks involved
in lipid metabolism, in particular those regulated by peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3>. Combined, these results demonstrate that the
major phenotype given by the whole-body deletion of Klf11 in mouse is not
diabetes but increased insulin sensitivity, likely due to altered transcriptional
regulation in target tissues. The absence of diabetes in the Klf11-/- mouse
either indicates an interspecies difference for the role of this transcription
factor in metabolic homeostasis between mouse and humans, or potentially
highlights the fact that other molecular factors can compensate for its absence. 
Nevertheless, the data of this study, gathered at the whole-organism level,
further support a role for KLF11 in metabolic processes like insulin sensitivity,
which regulation is critical in several forms of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4588811
PMID: 26248217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Nov 1;28(11-12):1265-71. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2014-0430.

Molecular diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) in Turkish
children by using targeted next-generation sequencing.

Anik A, Çatli G, Abaci A, Sari E, Yesilkaya E, Korkmaz HA, Demir K, Altincik A,
Tuhan HÜ, Kizildag S, Özkan B, Ceylaner S, Böber E.

AIM: To perform molecular analysis of pediatric maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) patients by next-generation sequencing, which enables simultaneous
analysis of multiple genes in a single test, to determine the genetic etiology of
a group of Turkish children clinically diagnosed as MODY, and to assess
genotype-phenotype relationship.
METHODS: Forty-two children diagnosed with MODY and their parents were enrolled
in the study. Clinical and laboratory characteristics of the patients at the time
of diagnosis were obtained from hospital records. Molecular analyses of GCK,
HNF1A, HNF4A, HNF1B, PDX1, NEUROD1, KLF11, CEL, PAX4, INS, and BLK genes were
performed on genomic DNA by using next-generation sequencing. Pathogenicity for
novel mutations was assessed by bioinformatics prediction software programs and
segregation analyses.
RESULTS: A mutation in MODY genes was identified in 12 (29%) of the cases. GCK
mutations were detected in eight cases, and HNF1B, HNF1A, PDX1, and BLK mutations
in the others. We identified five novel missense mutations - three in GCK
(p.Val338Met, p.Cys252Ser, and p.Val86Ala), one in HNF1A (p.Cys241Ter), and one
in PDX1 (p.Gly55Asp), which we believe to be pathogenic.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study showed that mutations in the GCK gene are
the leading cause of MODY in our population. Moreover, genetic diagnosis could be
made in 29% of Turkish patients, and five novel mutations were identified.

PMID: 26226118  [PubMed - in process]


8. Dev Dyn. 2015 Oct;244(10):1328-46. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24310. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Kruppel-like factor family genes are expressed during Xenopus embryogenesis and
involved in germ layer formation and body axis patterning.

Gao Y(1), Cao Q(1), Lu L(1), Zhang X(1), Zhang Z(1), Dong X(1), Jia W(1), Cao
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Model Animal Research Center of Nanjing University and MOE Key Laboratory of
Model Animals for Disease Study, Pukou High-Tech Zone, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Kruppel-like factors (Klfs) are a family of transcription factors
consisting of 17 members in mammals, Klf1-Klf17, which are involved in
fundamental cellular physiological procedures, such as cell proliferation,
differentiation, and apoptosis. However, their functions in embryonic development
have been poorly understood. Our previous study has demonstrated that the
pluripotency factor Klf4 participates in germ layer formation and axis patterning
of Xenopus embryos by means of the regulation of key developmental signals. In
the present study, we further investigated comprehensively the expression and
functions of the klf family genes, klf2, klf5, klf6, klf7, klf8, klf11, klf15,
and klf17, during the embryogenesis of Xenopus laevis.
RESULTS: Spatio-temporal expression analyses demonstrate that these genes are
transcribed both maternally and zygotically in Xenopus embryos, and during
organogenesis and tissue differentiation, they are localized to a variety of
placodes and tissues. Gain and loss of function studies manifest that Klf factors
play different roles in germ layer formation and body axis patterning. Moreover, 
each Klf factor exhibits distinct regulatory effects on the expression of genes
that are essential for germ layer formation and body axis patterning.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Klf factors are involved in the
fine-tuning of these genes during early embryogenesis.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26198170  [PubMed - in process]


9. Gene. 2015 Nov 15;573(1):91-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.07.031. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

C2H2 zinc finger proteins of the SP/KLF, Wilms tumor, EGR, Huckebein, and
Klumpfuss families in metazoans and beyond.

Pei J(1), Grishin NV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX, USA. Electronic address: jpei@chop.swmed.edu. (2)Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX, USA; Department of Biophysics and Department of Biochemistry,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA.

Specificity proteins (SPs) and Krüppel-Like Factors (KLFs) are C2H2-type zinc
finger transcription factors that play essential roles in differentiation,
development, proliferation and cell death. SP/KLF proteins, similarly to Wilms
tumor protein 1 (WT1), Early Growth Response (EGR), Huckebein, and Klumpfuss,
prefer to bind GC-rich sequences such as GC-box and CACCC-box (GT-box). We
searched various genomes and transcriptomes of metazoans and single-cell
holozoans for members of these families. Seven groups of KLFs (KLFA-G) and three 
groups of SPs (SPA-C) were identified in the three lineages of Bilateria
(Deuterostomia, Ecdysozoa, and Lophotrochozoa). The last ancestor of jawed
vertebrates was inferred to have at least 18 KLFs (group A: KLF1/2/4/17, group B:
KLF3/8/12; group C: KLF5/5l; group D: KLF6/7; group E: KLF9/13/16; group F:
KLF10/KLF11; group G: KLF15/15l) and 10 SPs (group A: SP1/2/3/4; group B: SP5/5l;
group C: SP6/7/8/9), since they were found in both cartilaginous and boned
fishes. Placental mammals have added KLF14 (group E) and KLF18 (group A), and
lost KLF5l (KLF5-like) and KLF15l (KLF15-like). Multiple KLF members were found
in basal metazoans (Ctenophora, Porifera, Placozoa, and Cnidaria). Ctenophora has
the least number of KLFs and no SPs, which could be attributed to its proposed
sister group relationship to other metazoans or gene loss. While SP, EGR and
Klumpfuss were only detected in metazoans, KLF, WT1, and Huckebein are present in
nonmetazoan holozoans. Of the seven metazoan KLF groups, only KLFG, represented
by KLF15 in human, was found in nonmetazoans. In addition, two nonmetazoan groups
of KLFs are present in Choanoflagellatea and Filasterea. WT1 could be
evolutionarily the earliest among these GC/GT-box-binding families due to its
sole presence in Ichthyosporea.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26187067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Diabetes. 2015 Jul;64(7):2369-75. doi: 10.2337/db15-0203. Epub 2015 Jun 7.

Transcriptional Regulatory Circuits Controlling Brown Fat Development and
Activation.

Seale P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA sealep@upenn.edu.

Brown and beige adipose tissue is specialized for heat production and can be
activated to reduce obesity and metabolic dysfunction in animals. Recent studies 
also have indicated that human brown fat activity levels correlate with leanness.
This has revitalized interest in brown fat biology and has driven the discovery
of many new regulators of brown fat development and function. This review
summarizes recent advances in our understanding of the transcriptional mechanisms
that control brown and beige fat cell development.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4477361 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26050669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2015 Jul;54(7):453-62. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22257. Epub
2015 Apr 30.

Promoter DNA methylation is associated with KLF11 expression in epithelial
ovarian cancer.

Wang G(1), Li X(2), Tian W(3), Wang Y(4), Wu D(1), Sun Z(5), Zhao E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tianjin Central Hospital of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tianjin, 300100, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410078, China.
(3)Tianjin Research Center of Basic Medical Science, Tianjin Medical University, 
Tianjin, 300070, China. (4)Institute of Psychology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, 100101, China. (5)Beijing Institute of Life Science, Chinese Academy of 
Science, Beijing, 100101, China. (6)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, 100853, China.

As a transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß)-inducible gene, the expression of
Krüppel-like transcription factor 11 (KLF11) is altered in several types of
cancer. In the current study, through using human 9K CpG island array, KLF11 was 
identified as one of hypermethylated genes in RAS-transformed ovarian T29H cells.
Methylation of the KLF11 promoter was also observed in ovarian cancer tissue
samples accompanied by significantly reduced KLF11 gene expression.
Interestingly, the expression of SMAD2, SMAD3, and SMAD7 genes was reduced in the
tumour, whilst no change was found in TGF-ß expression. Our data suggest a
relationship between promoter DNA methylation and KLF11 gene expression in
ovarian cancer tumorigenesis.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25931269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Reprod Sci. 2016 Feb;23(2):163-75. doi: 10.1177/1933719115584449. Epub 2015 Apr
28.

The Mechanism and Function of Epigenetics in Uterine Leiomyoma Development.

Yang Q(1), Mas A(2), Diamond MP(2), Al-Hendy A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translation Research, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Georgia Regents University, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA, USA
QYANG@gru.edu. (2)Division of Translation Research, Department of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology, Georgia Regents University, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA, 
USA.

Uterine leiomyomas, also known as uterine fibroids, are the most common pelvic
tumors, occurring in nearly 70% of all reproductive-aged women and are the
leading indication for hysterectomy worldwide. The development of uterine
leiomyomas involve a complex and heterogeneous constellation of hormones, growth 
factors, stem cells, genetic, and epigenetic abnormalities. An increasing body of
evidence emphasizes the important contribution of epigenetics in the pathogenesis
of leiomyomas. Genome-wide methylation analysis demonstrates that a subset of
estrogen receptor (ER) response genes exhibit abnormal hypermethylation levels
that are inversely correlated with their RNA expression. Several tumor suppressor
genes, including Kruppel-like factor 11 (KLF11), deleted in lung and esophageal
cancer 1 (DLEC1), keratin 19 (KRT19), and death-associated protein kinase 1
(DAPK1) also display higher hypermethylation levels in leiomyomas when compared
to adjacent normal tissues. The important role of active DNA demethylation was
recently identified with regard to the ten-eleven translocation protein 1 and
ten-eleven translocation protein 3-mediated elevated levels of
5-hydroxymethylcytosine in leiomyoma. In addition, both histone deacetylase and
histone methyltransferase are reported to be involved in the biology of
leiomyomas. A number of deregulated microRNAs have been identified in leiomyomas,
leading to an altered expression of their targets. More recently, the existence
of side population (SP) cells with characteristics of tumor-initiating cells have
been characterized in leiomyomas. These SP cells exhibit a tumorigenic capacity
in immunodeficient mice when exposed to 17ß-estradiol and progesterone, giving
rise to fibroid-like tissue in vivo. These new findings will likely enhance our
understanding of the crucial role epigenetics plays in the pathogenesis of
uterine leiomyomas as well as point the way to novel therapeutic options.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25922306  [PubMed - in process]


13. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Jul;146(1):157-69. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfv081. Epub 2015 Apr
24.

MicroRNA-30 Protects Against Carbon Tetrachloride-induced Liver Fibrosis by
Attenuating Transforming Growth Factor Beta Signaling in Hepatic Stellate Cells.

Tu X(1), Zheng X(1), Li H(1), Cao Z(1), Chang H(1), Luan S(1), Zhu J(1), Chen
J(1), Zang Y(2), Zhang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)*State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of Life Science,
Nanjing University, State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Life
Science, Nanjing University and Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for microRNA 
Biology and Biotechnology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, People's Republic 
of China. (2)*State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School of
Life Science, Nanjing University, State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry
for Life Science, Nanjing University and Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for 
microRNA Biology and Biotechnology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, People's 
Republic of China *State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, School
of Life Science, Nanjing University, State Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry
for Life Science, Nanjing University and Jiangsu Engineering Research Center for 
microRNA Biology and Biotechnology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210093, People's 
Republic of China jfzhang@nju.edu.cn.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ß) is crucial for transdifferentiation of
hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) and the blunting of TGF-ß signaling in HSCs can
effectively prevent liver fibrosis. Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11) is an early
response transcription factor that potentiates TGF-ß/Smad signaling by
suppressing the transcription of inhibitory Smad7. Using a mouse model of carbon 
tetrachloride (CCl4)-induced liver fibrosis, we observed significant upregulation
of KLF11 in the activated HSCs during liver fibrogenesis. Meanwhile, the
downregulation of miR-30 was observed in the HSCs isolated from fibrotic liver.
Adenovirus-mediated ectopic expression of miR-30 was under the control of smooth 
muscle a-actin promoter, showing that the increase in miR-30 in HSC greatly
reduced CCl4-induced liver fibrosis. Subsequent investigations showed that miR-30
suppressed KLF11 expression in HSC and led to a significant upregulation of Smad7
in vivo. Mechanistic studies further confirmed that KLF11 was the direct target
of miR-30, and revealed that miR-30 blunted the profibrogenic TGF-ß signaling in 
HSC by suppressing KLF11 expression and thus enhanced the negative feedback loop 
of TGF-ß signaling imposed by Smad7. Finally, we demonstrated that miR-30
facilitated the reversal of activated HSC to a quiescent state as indicated by
the inhibition of proliferation and migration, the loss of activation markers,
and the gain of quiescent HSC markers. In conclusion, our results define miR-30
as a crucial suppressor of TGF-ß signaling in HSCs activation and provide useful 
insights into the mechanisms underlying liver fibrosis.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25912033  [PubMed - in process]


14. Neurochem Int. 2015 Apr-May;83-84:41-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2015.02.007. Epub
2015 Mar 6.

All trans retinoic acid (ATRA) mediated modulation of N-methyl D-aspartate
receptor (NMDAR) and Kruppel like factor 11 (KLF11) expressions in the mitigation
of ethanol induced alterations in the brain.

Nair SS(1), Prathibha P(1), Syam Das S(1), Kavitha S(1), Indira M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Kerala, Kariavattom,
Thiruvananthapuram-695 581, Kerala, India. (2)Department of Biochemistry,
University of Kerala, Kariavattom, Thiruvananthapuram-695 581, Kerala, India.
Electronic address: indiramadambath@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Damaging effects that chronic ethanol exposure causes to the brain
and the neurons are well documented. Ethanol and its toxic metabolites increase
the oxidative stress in brain. Chronic exposure to ethanol leads to upregulation 
of N-methyl D-aspartate receptors (NMDAR) and also activates Kruppel like factor 
11 (KLF11) mediated death cascade and thereby neurodegeneration.
OBJECTIVE: Ethanol depletes vitamin A stores. But supplementation of vitamin A
exacerbates ethanol induced toxicity since alcohol and its metabolites are
competitive inhibitors of the enzymes involved in the metabolism of vitamin A.
Hence, in this study we investigated the impact of co-administration of ethanol
and all trans retinoic acid (ATRA), active metabolite of vitamin A, on ethanol
induced alterations to the brain.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Sprague Dawley rats, adolescent, were grouped as
follows and maintained for 90 days. I - Control, II - Ethanol (4<U+2009>g/kg b.w.), III 
- ATRA (100<U+2009>µg/kg b.w.), IV - Ethanol (4<U+2009>g/kg b.w.), +ATRA (100<U+2009>µg/kg b.w.).
Oxidative stress and the mRNA expression of various receptors for the
neurotransmitter involved in glutamergic, serotonergic and gabaergic pathways
were studied in the brain homogenate.
RESULTS: Ethanol treatment was shown to decrease brain weight and it was
increased on ATRA treatment. Increase in oxidative stress due to ethanol
treatment was also brought down on ATRA administration. Ethanol induced
upregulation of NMDAR and KLF11 was also downregulated on ATRA supplementation.
The alterations in the levels of neurotransmitters and the expression of their
receptors due to ethanol treatment also were ameliorated on ATRA supplementation.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that ATRA supplementation mitigates the ethanol
induced alterations in the brain by reducing oxidative stress in the brain with
concurrent suppression of NMDAR and KLF11 expression leading to enhanced
catabolism of neurotransmitters.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25754253  [PubMed - in process]


15. Neurotox Res. 2015 Jul;28(1):18-31. doi: 10.1007/s12640-015-9524-1. Epub 2015 Mar
5.

Chronic Social Stress and Ethanol Increase Expression of KLF11, a Cell Death
Mediator, in Rat Brain.

Duncan J(1), Wang N, Zhang X, Johnson S, Harris S, Zheng B, Zhang Q, Rajkowska G,
Miguel-Hidalgo JJ, Sittman D, Ou XM, Stockmeier CA, Wang JM.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neuroscience, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson,
MS, USA.

Major depressive disorder and alcoholism are significant health burdens that can 
affect executive functioning, cognitive ability, job responsibilities, and
personal relationships. Studies in animal models related to depression or
alcoholism reveal that the expression of Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11, also
called TIEG2) is elevated in frontal cortex, which suggests that KLF11 may play a
role in stress- or ethanol-induced psychiatric conditions. KLF11 is a
transcriptional activator of monoamine oxidase A and B, but also serves other
functions in cell cycle regulation and apoptotic cell death. In the present
study, immunohistochemistry was used to quantify intensity of nuclear KLF11,
combined with an unbiased stereological approach to assess nuclei in
fronto-limbic, limbic, and other brain regions of rats exposed chronically to
social defeat or ethanol. KLF11 immunoreactivity was increased significantly in
the medial prefrontal cortex, frontal cortex, and hippocampus of both stressed
rats and rats fed ethanol. However, expression of KLF11 protein was not
significantly affected in the thalamus, hypothalamus, or amygdala in either
treatment group compared to respective control rats. Triple-label
immunofluorescence revealed that KLF11 protein was localized in nuclei of neurons
and astrocytes. KLF11 was also co-localized with the immunoreactivity of cleaved 
caspase-3. In addition, Western blot analysis revealed a significant reduction in
anti-apoptotic protein, Bcl-xL, but an increase of caspase-3 expression in the
frontal cortex of ethanol-treated rats compared to ethanol-preferring controls.
Thus, KLF11 protein is up-regulated following chronic exposure to stress or
ethanol in a region-specific manner and may contribute to pro-apoptotic signaling
in ethanol-treated rats. Further investigation into the KLF11 signaling cascade
as a mechanism for neurotoxicity and cell death in depression and alcoholism may 
provide novel pharmacological targets to lessen brain damage and maximize
neuroprotection in these disorders.

PMCID: PMC4699184 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25739536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Genes Dev. 2015 Jan 1;29(1):7-22. doi: 10.1101/gad.250829.114. Epub 2014 Dec 12.

Browning of human adipocytes requires KLF11 and reprogramming of PPAR<U+03B3>
superenhancers.

Loft A(1), Forss I(1), Siersbæk MS(1), Schmidt SF(1), Larsen AS(1), Madsen JG(2),
Pisani DF(3), Nielsen R(1), Aagaard MM(1), Mathison A(4), Neville MJ(5), Urrutia 
R(4), Karpe F(5), Amri EZ(3), Mandrup S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
Denmark, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark; (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5230 Odense M, Denmark; The Novo
Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen,
DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark; (3)UMR 7277, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, U1091, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Institute of Biology Valrose, University Nice Sophia Antipolis, 06100 Nice,
France; (4)Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA; (5)National Institute for Health Research,
Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, OX3 7LE Oxford, United Kingdom. (6)Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, DK-5230
Odense M, Denmark; s.mandrup@bmb.sdu.dk.

Long-term exposure to peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>)
agonists such as rosiglitazone induces browning of rodent and human adipocytes;
however, the transcriptional mechanisms governing this phenotypic switch in
adipocytes are largely unknown. Here we show that rosiglitazone-induced browning 
of human adipocytes activates a comprehensive gene program that leads to
increased mitochondrial oxidative capacity. Once induced, this gene program and
oxidative capacity are maintained independently of rosiglitazone, suggesting that
additional browning factors are activated. Browning triggers reprogramming of
PPAR<U+03B3> binding, leading to the formation of PPAR<U+03B3> "superenhancers" that are
selective for brown-in-white (brite) adipocytes. These are highly associated with
key brite-selective genes. Based on such an association, we identified an
evolutionarily conserved metabolic regulator, Kruppel-like factor 11 (KLF11), as 
a novel browning transcription factor in human adipocytes that is required for
rosiglitazone-induced browning, including the increase in mitochondrial oxidative
capacity. KLF11 is directly induced by PPAR<U+03B3> and appears to cooperate with PPAR<U+03B3> 
in a feed-forward manner to activate and maintain the brite-selective gene
program.

© 2015 Loft et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4281566
PMID: 25504365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015 May;40(6):1373-82. doi: 10.1038/npp.2014.321. Epub 
2014 Dec 15.

Evidence revealing deregulation of the KLF11-MAO A pathway in association with
chronic stress and depressive disorders.

Harris S(1), Johnson S(1), Duncan JW(2), Udemgba C(1), Meyer JH(3), Albert PR(4),
Lomberk G(5), Urrutia R(5), Ou XM(1), Stockmeier CA(6), Wang JM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Jackson, MS, USA. (2)1]
Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Jackson, MS, USA [2] Program in
Neuroscience, Jackson, MS, USA. (3)Centre for Addiction and Mental Health and
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (Neuroscience), Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics Laboratory, GI Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN, USA. (6)1] Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Jackson,
MS, USA [2] Department of Psychiatry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland,
OH, USA. (7)1] Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Jackson, MS, USA [2] 
Program in Neuroscience, Jackson, MS, USA [3] Department of Pathology, University
of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA.

The biochemical pathways underlying major depressive disorder (MDD) and chronic
stress are not well understood. However, it has been reported that monoamine
oxidase A (MAO A, a major neurotransmitter-degrading enzyme) is significantly
increased in the brains of human subjects affected with MDD and rats exposed to
chronic social defeat (CSD) stress, which is used to model depression. In the
current study, we compared the protein levels of a MAO A-transcriptional
activator, Kruppel-like factor 11 (KLF11 , also recognized as transforming growth
factor-beta-inducible early gene 2) between the brains of 18 human subjects with 
MDD and 18 control subjects. We found that, indeed, the expression of KLF11 is
increased by 36% (p<0.02) in the postmortem prefrontal cortex of human subjects
with MDD compared with controls. We also observed a positive correlation between 
KLF11 levels and those of its target gene, MAO A, both in association with MDD.
KLF11 protein expression was also increased by 44% (p<0.02) in the frontal cortex
of KLF11 wild-type mice (Klf11(+/+)) vs Klf11(-/-) when both exposed to CSD
stress. In contrast, locomotor activities, central box duration and sucrose
preference were significantly reduced in the stressed Klf11(+/+) mice, suggesting
that Klf11(+/+) mice are more severely affected by the stress model compared with
Klf11(-/-) mice. These results serve to assign an important role of KLF11 in
upregulating MAO A in MDD and chronic social stress, suggesting that inhibition
of the pathways regulated by this transcription factor may aid in the
therapeutics of neuropsychiatric illnesses. Thus, the new knowledge derived from 
the current study extends our understanding of transcriptional mechanisms that
are operational in the pathophysiology of common human diseases and thus bears
significant biomedical relevance.

PMCID: PMC4397395 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25502632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e104452. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104452.
eCollection 2014.

Gene-specific function prediction for non-synonymous mutations in monogenic
diabetes genes.

Li Q(1), Liu X(2), Gibbs RA(3), Boerwinkle E(4), Polychronakos C(1), Qu HQ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Genetics Lab, The McGill University Health Center (Montreal
Children's Hospital), Montréal, Québec, Canada. (2)Human Genetics Center,
Division of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and Environmental Sciences, The
University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston, Texas, United States of
America. (3)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas, United States of America; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (4)Human
Genetics Center, Division of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and Environmental
Sciences, The University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston, Texas, United
States of America; Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

The rapid progress of genomic technologies has been providing new opportunities
to address the need of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) molecular
diagnosis. However, whether a new mutation causes MODY can be questionable. A
number of in silico methods have been developed to predict functional effects of 
rare human mutations. The purpose of this study is to compare the performance of 
different bioinformatics methods in the functional prediction of nonsynonymous
mutations in each MODY gene, and provides reference matrices to assist the
molecular diagnosis of MODY. Our study showed that the prediction scores by
different methods of the diabetes mutations were highly correlated, but were more
complimentary than replacement to each other. The available in silico methods for
the prediction of diabetes mutations had varied performances across different
genes. Applying gene-specific thresholds defined by this study may be able to
increase the performance of in silico prediction of disease-causing mutations.

PMCID: PMC4138110
PMID: 25136813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Endocrinology. 2014 Nov;155(11):4507-20. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1139. Epub 2014 Jul
30.

Epigenetic regulation of uterine biology by transcription factor KLF11 via
posttranslational histone deacetylation of cytochrome p450 metabolic enzymes.

Zheng Y(1), Tabbaa ZM, Khan Z, Schoolmeester JK, El-Nashar S, Famuyide A, Keeney 
GL, Daftary GS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Epigenetics in Reproduction (Y.Z., Z.M.T., Z.K.,
G.S.D.) and Departments of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology (J.K.S., G.L.K.) and
Obstetrics and Gynecology (Y.Z., Z.M.T., Z.K., S.E.-N., A.F., G.S.D.), Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905.

Endocrine regulation of uterine biology is critical for embryo receptivity and
human reproduction. Uterine endometrium depends on extrinsic sex steroid input
and hence likely has mechanisms that enable adaptation to hormonal variation.
Emerging evidence suggests that sex steroid bioavailability in the endometrium is
determined by adjusting their metabolic rate and fate via regulation of
cytochrome (CYP) p450 enzymes. The CYP enzymes are targeted by ubiquitously
expressed Sp/Krüppel-like (Sp/KLF) transcription factors. Specifically, KLF11 is 
highly expressed in reproductive tissues, regulates an array of
endocrine/metabolic pathways via epigenetic histone-based mechanisms and, when
aberrantly expressed, is associated with diabetes and reproductive tract
diseases, such as leiomyoma and endometriosis. Using KLF11 as a model to
investigate epigenetic regulation of endometrial first-pass metabolism, we
evaluated the expression of a comprehensive array of metabolic enzymes in
Ishikawa cells. KLF11 repressed most endometrial CYP enzymes. To characterize
KLF11-recruited epigenetic regulatory mechanisms, we focused on the
estrogen-metabolizing enzyme CYP3A4. KLF11 expression declined in secretory phase
endometrial epithelium associated with increased CYP3A4 expression. Additionally,
KLF11 bound to CYP3A4 promoter GC elements and thereby repressed promoter,
message, protein as well as enzymatic function. This repression was
epigenetically mediated, because KLF11 colocalized with and recruited the
corepressor SIN3A/histone deacetylase resulting in selective deacetylation of the
CYP3A4 promoter. Repression was reversed by a mutation in KLF11 that abrogated
cofactor recruitment and binding. This repression was also pharmacologically
reversible with an histone deacetylase inhibitor. Pharmacological alteration of
endometrial metabolism could have long-term translational implications on human
reproduction and uterine disease.

PMID: 25076120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. BMC Mol Biol. 2014 May 25;15:10. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-15-10.

Single and combinatorial chromatin coupling events underlies the function of
transcript factor Krüppel-like factor 11 in the regulation of gene networks.

Calvo E, Grzenda A, Lomberk G, Mathison A, Iovanna J, Urrutia R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. currutia.raul@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Krüppel-like factors (KLFs) are a group of master regulators of gene 
expression conserved from flies to human. However, scant information is available
on either the mechanisms or functional impact of the coupling of KLF proteins to 
chromatin remodeling machines, a deterministic step in transcriptional
regulation.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: In the current study, we use genome-wide analyses of
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP-on-Chip) and Affymetrix-based expression
profiling to gain insight into how KLF11, a human transcription factor involved
in tumor suppression and metabolic diseases, works by coupling to three co-factor
groups: the Sin3-histone deacetylase system, WD40-domain containing proteins, and
the HP1-histone methyltransferase system. Our results reveal that KLF11 regulates
distinct gene networks involved in metabolism and growth by using single or
combinatorial coupling events.
CONCLUSION: This study, the first of its type for any KLF protein, reveals that
interactions with multiple chromatin systems are required for the full gene
regulatory function of these proteins.

PMCID: PMC4049485
PMID: 24885560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 26;9(2):e89552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089552. eCollection
2014.

Involvement of KLF11 in hepatic glucose metabolism in mice via suppressing of
PEPCK-C expression.

Zhang H(1), Chen Q(2), Jiao T(2), Cui A(3), Sun X(4), Fang W(5), Xie L(6), Liu
Y(7), Fang F(2), Chang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medicine,
Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China ; National Laboratory of Medical Molecular
Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Science
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. (2)National Laboratory of
Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Science, Chinese Academy of
Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China. (3)Department
of Biochemistry, Jining Medical University, Jining, China. (4)Beijing Friendship 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing Key Laboratory for Precancerous
Lesion of Digestive Diseases, Beijing Digestive Disease Center, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Chemistry, School of Basic Medicine, Anhui Medical University,
Hefei, China. (6)Integrative and Molecular Physiology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America. (7)Department of Endocrinology,
The Hospital Affiliated to Liaoning University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Shenyang, China.

BACKGROUND: Abnormal hepatic gluconeogenesis is related to hyperglycemia in
mammals with insulin resistance. Despite the strong evidences linking
Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11) gene mutations to development of Type 2 diabetes, 
the precise physiological functions of KLF11 in vivo remain largely unknown.
RESULTS: In current investigation, we showed that KLF11 is involved in modulating
hepatic glucose metabolism in mice. Overexpression of KLF11 in primary mouse
hepatocytes could inhibit the expression of gluconeogenic genes, including
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (cytosolic isoform, PEPCK-C) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), subsequently
decreasing the cellular glucose output. Diabetic mice with overexpression of
KLF11 gene in livers significantly ameliorated hyperglycemia and glucose
intolerance; in contrast, the knockdown of KLF11 expression in db/m and C57BL/6J 
mice livers impaired glucose tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data strongly indicated the involvement of KLF11 in hepatic
glucose homeostasis via modulating the expression of PEPCK-C.

PMCID: PMC3935883
PMID: 24586865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Feb;38(2):401-8. doi: 10.1111/acer.12258. Epub 2014
Jan 15.

Diabetes-causing gene, kruppel-like factor 11, modulates the antinociceptive
response of chronic ethanol intake.

Ou XM(1), Udemgba C, Wang N, Dai X, Lomberk G, Seo S, Urrutia R, Wang J, Duncan
J, Harris S, Fairbanks CA, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior , University of Mississippi
Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol (EtOH [ethanol]) is an antinociceptive agent, working in
part, by reducing sensitivity to painful stimuli. The transcription factor
Kruppel-like factor 11 (KLF11), a human diabetes-causing gene that also regulates
the neurotransmitter metabolic enzymes monoamine oxidase (MAO), has recently been
identified as an EtOH-inducible gene. However, its role in antinociception
remains unknown. Consequently, we investigated the function of KLF11 in chronic
EtOH-induced antinociception using a genetically engineered knockout mouse model.
METHODS: Wild-type (Klf11(+/+) ) and KLF11 knockout (Klf11(-/-) ) mice were fed a
liquid diet containing EtOH for 28 days with increasing amounts of EtOH from 0%
up to a final concentration of 6.4%, representing a final diet containing 36% of 
calories primarily from EtOH. Control mice from both genotypes were fed liquid
diet without EtOH for 28 days. The EtOH-induced antinociceptive effect was
determined using the tail-flick test before and after EtOH exposure (on day 29). 
In addition, the enzyme activity and mRNA levels of MAO A and MAO B were measured
by real-time RT-PCR and enzyme assays, respectively.
RESULTS: EtOH produced an antinociceptive response to thermal pain in Klf11(+/+) 
mice, as expected. In contrast, deletion of KLF11 in the Klf11(-/-) mice
abolished the EtOH-induced antinociceptive effect. The mRNA and protein levels of
KLF11 were significantly increased in the brain prefrontal cortex of Klf11(+/+)
mice exposed to EtOH compared with control Klf11(+/+) mice. Furthermore, MAO
enzyme activities were affected differently in Klf11 wild-type versus Klf11
knockout mice exposed to chronic EtOH. Chronic EtOH intake significantly
increased MAO B activity in Klf11(+/+) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The data show KLF11 modulation of EtOH-induced antinociception. The 
KLF11-targeted MAO B enzyme may contribute more significantly to EtOH-induced
antinociception. Thus, this study revealed a new role for the KLF11 gene in the
mechanisms underlying the antinociceptive effects of chronic EtOH exposure.

Copyright © 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMID: 24428663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 10;443(2):683-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.024. Epub 2013 Dec 11.

Krüppel-like transcription factor 11 (KLF11) overexpression inhibits cardiac
hypertrophy and fibrosis in mice.

Zheng Y(1), Kong Y(1), Li F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Surgery Department, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University, China. (2)Cardiovascular Surgery Department, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, China. Electronic address: cardiologylab@163.com.

The Krüppel-like factors (KLFs) belong to a subclass of Cys2/His2 zinc-finger
DNA-binding proteins. The KLF family member KLF11 is originally identified as a
transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß)-inducible gene and is one of the most
studied in this family. KLF11 is expressed ubiquitously and participates in
diabetes and regulates hepatic lipid metabolism. However, the role of KLF11 in
cardiovascular system is largely unknown. Here in this study, we reported that
KLF11 expression is down-regulated in failing human hearts and hypertrophic
murine hearts. To evaluate the roles of KLF11 in cardiac hypertrophy, we
generated cardiac-specific KLF11 transgenic mice. KLF11 transgenic mice do not
show any difference from their littermates at baseline. However, cardiac-specific
KLF11 overexpression protects mice from TAC-induced cardiac hypertrophy, with
reduced radios of heart weight (HW)/body weight (BW), lung weight/BW and HW/tibia
length, decreased left ventricular wall thickness and increased fractional
shortening. We also observe lower expression of hypertrophic fetal genes in
TAC-challenged KLF11 transgenic mice compared with WT mice. In addition, KLF11
reduces cardiac fibrosis in mice underwent hypertrophy. The expression of
fibrosis markers are also down-regulated when KLF11 is overexpressed in
TAC-challenged mice. Taken together, our findings identify a novel
anti-hypertrophic and anti-fibrotic role of KLF11, and KLF11 activator may serve 
as candidate drug for heart failure patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24333413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 17;8(9):e75311. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075311. eCollection
2013.

Role for Krüppel-like transcription factor 11 in mesenchymal cell function and
fibrosis.

Mathison A(1), Grzenda A, Lomberk G, Velez G, Buttar N, Tietz P, Hendrickson H,
Liebl A, Xiong YY, Gores G, Fernandez-Zapico M, Larusso NF, Faubion W, Shah VH,
Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States of America ; Division of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America.

Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11) and the highly homologous KLF10 proteins are
transcription factors originating from duplication of the Drosophila melanogaster
ancestor cabut. The function of these proteins in epithelial cells has been
previously characterized. In the current study, we report a functional role for
KLF11 in mesenchymal cells and in mesenchymal cell dysfunction, namely, fibrosis,
and subsequently perform a detailed cellular, molecular, and in vivo
characterization of this phenomenon. We find that, in cultured mesenchymal cells,
enhanced expression of KLF11 results in activated extracellular matrix pathways, 
including collagen gene silencing and matrix metalloproteinases activation
without changes in tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases. Combined, reporter
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrate that KLF11 interacts
directly with the collagen 1a2 (COL1A2) promoter in mesenchymal cells to repress 
its activity. Mechanistically, KLF11 regulates collagen gene expression through
the heterochromatin protein 1 gene-silencing pathway as mutants defective for
coupling to this epigenetic modifier lose the ability to repress COL1A2.
Expression studies reveal decreased levels of KLF11 during liver fibrogenesis
after chemically induced injury in vivo. Congruently, KLF11(-/-) mice, which
should be deficient in the hypothesized anti-fibrogenic brake imposed by this
transcription factor, display an enhanced response to liver injury with increased
collagen fibril deposition. Thus, KLFs expands the repertoire of transcription
factors involved in the regulation of extracellular matrix proteins in
mesenchymal cells and define a novel pathway that modulates the fibrogenic
response during liver injury.

PMCID: PMC3775729
PMID: 24069400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Reprod Sci. 2014 Mar;21(3):319-28. doi: 10.1177/1933719113503407. Epub 2013 Sep
23.

KLF11 epigenetically regulates glycodelin-A, a marker of endometrial biology via 
histone-modifying chromatin mechanisms.

Tabbaa ZM(1), Zheng Y, Daftary GS.

Author information: 
(1)1Laboratory of Translational Epigenetics in Reproduction, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

Endometrial biology is characterized by programmed proliferation and
differentiation that is synchronous with ovarian folliculogenesis to maximize the
chance of pregnancy. Glycodelin-A, an endometrial secretory protein, promotes
pregnancy mostly through immunomodulatory mechanisms. Glycodelin-A is repressed
during the proliferative and early secretory phase and activated thereafter.
Progesterone activates glycodelin via the Sp1 (Specificity Protein 1)
transactivator. We identify a novel role for Kruppel-like transcription factor 11
(KLF11) as a glycodelin-A repressor. Although KLF11 bound 2 distinct regulatory
elements, it regulated glycodelin promoter activity differentially through each
element. Whereas KLF11 weakly activated glycodelin promoter activity via a region
that also bound Sp1, the dominant effect of KLF11 was repression of promoter
activity, messenger RNA (mRNA), and protein expression via a novel, specific
binding element. KLF11 mediated this repression by recruiting the SIN3/histone
deacetylase (HDAC) corepressor complex to the glycodelin promoter. KLF11 may
solely, or by competing with Sp1, repress glycodelin-A levels and thereby
influence its role in the endometrium.

PMID: 24060634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 29;8(7):e70301. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070301. Print 2013.

Genetic associations with diabetes: meta-analyses of 10 candidate polymorphisms.

Tang L(1), Wang L, Liao Q, Wang Q, Xu L, Bu S, Huang Y, Zhang C, Ye H, Xu X, Liu 
Q, Ye M, Mai Y, Duan S.

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathophysiology, School of Medicine,
Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang, China.

AIMS: The goal of our study is to investigate the combined contribution of 10
genetic variants to diabetes susceptibility.
METHODS: Bibliographic databases were searched from 1970 to Dec 2012 for studies 
that reported on genetic association study of diabetes. After a comprehensive
filtering procedure, 10 candidate gene variants with informative genotype
information were collected for the current meta-anlayses. Using the REVMAN
software, odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated
to evaluate the combined contribution of the selected genetic variants to
diabetes.
RESULTS: A total of 37 articles among 37,033 cases and 54,716 controls were
involved in the present meta-analyses of 10 genetic variants. Three variants were
found to be significantly associated with type 1 diabetes (T1D): NLRP1 rs12150220
(OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.71, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.55-0.92, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01), IL2RA rs11594656 (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.86, 95%
CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.82-0.91, P<0.00001), and CLEC16A rs725613 (OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.71, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.55-0.92, 
P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.01). APOA5 -1131T/C polymorphism was shown to be significantly associated
with of type 2 diabetes (T2D, OR<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.27, 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.03-1.57, P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03). No
association with diabetes was showed in the meta-analyses of other six genetic
variants, including SLC2A10 rs2335491, ATF6 rs2070150, KLF11 rs35927125, CASQ1
rs2275703, GNB3 C825T, and IL12B 1188A/C.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated that IL2RA rs11594656 and CLEC16A rs725613
are protective factors of T1D, while NLRP1 rs12150220 and APOA5 -1131T/C are
risky factors of T1D and T2D, respectively.

PMCID: PMC3726433
PMID: 23922971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Jan;38(1):144-51. doi: 10.1111/acer.12229. Epub 2013
Aug 5.

The expression of KLF11 (TIEG2), a monoamine oxidase B transcriptional activator 
in the prefrontal cortex of human alcohol dependence.

Udemgba C(1), Johnson S, Stockmeier CA, Luo J, Albert PR, Wang J, May WL,
Rajkowska G, Harris S, Sittman DB, Ou XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior , University of Mississippi
Medical Center, Jackson, Mississippi.

BACKGROUND: The biochemical pathways underlying alcohol abuse and dependence are 
not well understood, although brain cell loss and neurotoxicity have been
reported in subjects with alcohol dependence. Monoamine oxidase B (MAO B; an
enzyme that catabolizes neurotransmitters such as dopamine) is consistently
increased in this psychiatric illness. MAO B has been implicated in the
pathogenesis of alcohol dependence and alcohol-induced brain neurotoxicity.
Recently, the cell growth inhibitor protein, Kruppel-like factor 11 (KLF11), has 
been reported to be an MAO transcriptional activator. KLF11 is also known as
TIEG2 (transforming growth factor-beta-inducible early gene 2) and mediates
apoptotic cell death. This study investigates the protein expression of KLF11 and
its relationship with MAO B using human postmortem prefrontal cortex from
subjects with alcohol dependence.
METHODS: Twelve subjects with alcohol dependence and the respective
psychiatrically normal control subjects were investigated. Expression of KLF11
and MAO B proteins in the prefrontal cortex was measured by Western blot
analysis. Correlation studies involving KLF11 and MAO B protein expression were
performed. Localization of KLF11 in the human prefrontal cortex was also
determined by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Levels of KLF11 protein were significantly increased by 44% (p < 0.03)
in the postmortem prefrontal cortex of subjects with alcohol dependence as
compared to age- and gender-matched, psychiatrically normal control subjects.
Furthermore, KLF11 levels were significantly and positively correlated with both 
the increased MAO B protein levels and blood alcohol content in alcohol-dependent
subjects. In addition, KLF11 protein expression was visualized in both neuronal
and glial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This novel study shows the important role of KLF11, an MAO
transcriptional activator, in human alcohol dependence. It further supports that 
the KLF11-MAO B cell death cascade may contribute to chronic alcohol-induced
brain damage. This argues a case for KLF11-MAO B inhibition as a novel
therapeutic strategy that may impact this highly prevalent illness.

Copyright © 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMCID: PMC3946920
PMID: 23915421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jun 14;288(24):17745-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.434670. Epub
2013 Apr 15.

Krüppel-like factor 11 regulates the expression of metabolic genes via an
evolutionarily conserved protein interaction domain functionally disrupted in
maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Lomberk G(1), Grzenda A, Mathison A, Escande C, Zhang JS, Calvo E, Miller LJ,
Iovanna J, Chini EN, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics and Chromatin Dynamics, Epigenomics Translational
Program, Mayo Clinic Center for Individualized Medicine, Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The function of Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11) in the regulation of metabolic
pathways is conserved from flies to human. Alterations in KLF11 function result
in maturity onset diabetes of the young 7 (MODY7) and neonatal diabetes; however,
the mechanisms underlying the role of this protein in metabolic disorders remain 
unclear. Here, we investigated how the A347S genetic variant, present in MODY7
patients, modulates KLF11 transcriptional activity. A347S affects a previously
identified transcriptional regulatory domain 3 (TRD3) for which co-regulators
remain unknown. Structure-oriented sequence analyses described here predicted
that the KLF11 TRD3 represents an evolutionarily conserved protein domain.
Combined yeast two-hybrid and protein array experiments demonstrated that the
TRD3 binds WD40, WWI, WWII, and SH3 domain-containing proteins. Using one of
these proteins as a model, guanine nucleotide-binding protein ß2 (Gß2), we
investigated the functional consequences of KLF11 coupling to a TRD3 binding
partner. Combined immunoprecipitation and biomolecular fluorescence
complementation assays confirmed that activation of three different metabolic G
protein-coupled receptors (ß-adrenergic, secretin, and cholecystokinin) induces
translocation of Gß2 to the nucleus where it directly binds KLF11 in a manner
that is disrupted by the MODY7 A347S variant. Using genome-wide expression
profiles, we identified metabolic gene networks impacted upon TRD3 disruption.
Furthermore, A347S disrupted KLF11-mediated increases in basal insulin levels and
promoter activity and blunted glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Thus, this
study characterizes a novel protein/protein interaction domain disrupted in a KLF
gene variant that associates to MODY7, contributing to our understanding of gene 
regulation events in complex metabolic diseases.

PMCID: PMC3682574
PMID: 23589285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e60165. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0060165. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

A novel role of the Sp/KLF transcription factor KLF11 in arresting progression of
endometriosis.

Daftary GS(1), Zheng Y, Tabbaa ZM, Schoolmeester JK, Gada RP, Grzenda AL,
Mathison AJ, Keeney GL, Lomberk GA, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Epigenetics in Reproduction, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
daftary.gaurang@mayo.edu

Endometriosis affects approximately 10% of young, reproductive-aged women.
Disease associated pelvic pain; infertility and sexual dysfunction have a
significant adverse clinical, social and financial impact. As precise disease
etiology has remained elusive, current therapeutic strategies are empiric,
unfocused and often unsatisfactory. Lack of a suitable genetic model has impaired
further translational research in the field. In this study, we evaluated the role
of the Sp/KLF transcription factor KLF11/Klf11 in the pathogenesis of
endometriosis. KLF11, a human disease-associated gene is etiologically implicated
in diabetes, uterine fibroids and cancer. We found that KLF11 expression was
diminished in human endometriosis implants and further investigated its
pathogenic role in Klf11-/- knockout mice with surgically induced endometriotic
lesions. Lesions in Klf11-/- animals were large and associated with prolific
fibrotic adhesions resembling advanced human disease in contrast to wildtype
controls. To determine phenotype-specificity, endometriosis was also generated in
Klf9-/- animals. Unlike in Klf11-/- mice, lesions in Klf9-/- animals were neither
large, nor associated with a significant fibrotic response. KLF11 also bound to
specific elements located in the promoter regions of key fibrosis-related genes
from the Collagen, MMP and TGF-ß families in endometrial stromal cells. KLF11
binding resulted in transcriptional repression of these genes. In summary, we
identify a novel pathogenic role for KLF11 in preventing de novo
disease-associated fibrosis in endometriosis. Our model validates in vivo the
phenotypic consequences of dysregulated Klf11 signaling. Additionally, it
provides a robust means not only for further detailed mechanistic investigation
but also the ability to test any emergent translational ramifications thereof, so
as to expand the scope and capability for treatment of endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC3610699
PMID: 23555910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Brain. 2013 Apr;136(Pt 4):1274-87. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt002. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

KLF11 mediates PPAR<U+03B3> cerebrovascular protection in ischaemic stroke.

Yin KJ(1), Fan Y, Hamblin M, Zhang J, Zhu T, Li S, Hawse JR, Subramaniam M, Song 
CZ, Urrutia R, Lin JD, Chen YE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Centre, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical Centre, NCRC Bld 26, Rm 361S, 2800 Plymouth Rd, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>) is emerging as a major
regulator in neurological diseases. However, the role of (PPAR<U+03B3>) and its
co-regulators in cerebrovascular endothelial dysfunction after stroke is unclear.
Here, we have demonstrated that (PPAR<U+03B3>) activation by pioglitazone significantly 
inhibited both oxygen-glucose deprivation-induced cerebral vascular endothelial
cell death and middle cerebral artery occlusion-triggered cerebrovascular damage.
Consistent with this finding, selective (PPAR<U+03B3>) genetic deletion in vascular
endothelial cells resulted in increased cerebrovascular permeability and brain
infarction in mice after focal ischaemia. Moreover, we screened for (PPAR<U+03B3>)
co-regulators using a genome-wide and high-throughput co-activation system and
revealed KLF11 as a novel (PPAR<U+03B3>) co-regulator, which interacted with (PPAR<U+03B3>) and
regulated its function in mouse cerebral vascular endothelial cell cultures.
Interestingly, KLF11 was also found as a direct transcriptional target of
(PPAR<U+03B3>). Furthermore, KLF11 genetic deficiency effectively abolished pioglitazone
cytoprotection in mouse cerebral vascular endothelial cell cultures after
oxygen-glucose deprivation, as well as pioglitazone-mediated cerebrovascular
protection in a mouse middle cerebral artery occlusion model. Mechanistically, we
demonstrated that KLF11 enhanced (PPAR<U+03B3>) transcriptional suppression of the
pro-apoptotic microRNA-15a (miR-15a) gene, resulting in endothelial protection in
cerebral vascular endothelial cell cultures and cerebral microvasculature after
ischaemic stimuli. Taken together, our data demonstrate that recruitment of KLF11
as a novel (PPAR<U+03B3>) co-regulator plays a critical role in the cerebrovascular
protection after ischaemic insults. It is anticipated that elucidating the
coordinated actions of KLF11 and (PPAR<U+03B3>) will provide new insights into
understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying (PPAR<U+03B3>) function in the
cerebral vasculature and help to develop a novel therapeutic strategy for the
treatment of stroke.

PMCID: PMC3613710
PMID: 23408111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Mar;33(3):621-8. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300665. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Fenofibrate inhibits endothelin-1 expression by peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor a-dependent and independent mechanisms in human endothelial cells.

Glineur C(1), Gross B, Neve B, Rommens C, Chew GT, Martin-Nizard F,
Rodríguez-Pascual F, Lamas S, Watts GF, Staels B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Immunity, Center for Infection and Immunity of Lille, 
Inserm U1019, CNRS UMR8204, Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France.
corine.glineur@pasteur-lille.fr

OBJECTIVE: Dyslipidemia contributes to endothelial dysfunction in type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Fenofibrate (FF), a ligand of the peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-a (PPARa), has beneficial effects on microvascular complications. FF may
act on the endothelium by regulating vasoactive factors, including endothelin-1
(ET-1). In vitro, FF decreases ET-1 expression in human microvascular endothelial
cells. We investigated the molecular mechanisms involved in the effect of FF
treatment on plasma levels of ET-1 in type 2 diabetes mellitus patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: FF impaired the capacity of transforming growth factor-ß to 
induce ET-1 gene expression. PPARa activation by FF increased expression of the
transcriptional repressor Krüppel-like factor 11 and its binding to the ET-1 gene
promoter. Knockdown of Krüppel-like factor 11 expression potentiated basal and
transforming growth factor-ß-stimulated ET-1 expression, suggesting that
Krüppel-like factor 11 downregulates ET-1 expression. FF, in a PPARa-independent 
manner, and insulin enhanced glycogen synthase kinase-3ß phosphorylation thus
reducing glycogen synthase kinase-3 activity that contributes to the FF-mediated 
reduction of ET-1 gene expression. In type 2 diabetes mellitus, improvement of
flow-mediated dilatation of the brachial artery by FF was associated with a
decrease in plasma ET-1.
CONCLUSIONS: FF decreases ET-1 expression by a PPARa-dependent mechanism, via
transcriptional induction of the Krüppel-like factor 11 repressor and by
PPARa-independent actions via inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 activity.

PMID: 23329136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Hepatol. 2013 Apr;58(4):763-70. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.11.024. Epub 2012 Nov 
23.

Mouse KLF11 regulates hepatic lipid metabolism.

Zhang H(1), Chen Q, Yang M, Zhu B, Cui Y, Xue Y, Gong N, Cui A, Wang M, Shen L,
Zhang S, Fang F, Chang Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Missense mutations in human Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11)
lead to the development of diabetes, as a result of impaired insulin synthesis in
the pancreas. However, the role of KLF11 in peripheral tissues is largely
unknown. The aim of this study is to evaluate the role of KLF11 in the regulation
of hepatic lipid homeostasis using different mouse models.
METHODS: Adenoviruses expressing KLF11 (Ad-KLF11) or KLF11-specific shRNA
(Ad-shKLF11) were injected into db/db diabetic, high-fat diet-induced obese
(DIO), or normal C57BL/6J mice. Histological analysis of the fatty liver
phenotype and biochemical analysis of hepatic and serum TG levels in these mice
were performed. The molecular mechanism by which KLF11 regulates lipid metabolism
in primary hepatocytes and mouse livers was explored.
RESULTS: The expression of the transcription factor KLF11 gene is dysregulated in
the livers of db/db and DIO mice. Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of KLF11 in 
the livers of db/db and DIO mice activates the PPARa signaling pathway,
subsequently markedly improving the fatty liver phenotype. Conversely, knockdown 
of KLF11, by adenovirus (Ad-shKLF11) in livers of wild type C57BL/6J and db/m
mice, increases hepatic triglyceride (TG) levels, owing to decreased fatty acid
oxidation. Finally, the treatment of diabetic mice with Ad-shPPARa abolishes
KLF11 stimulatory effects on the expression of genes involved in fatty acid
oxidation and inhibitory effects on hepatic TG content. In contrast, PPARa rescue
restores the increased hepatic TG levels in Ad-shKLF11-infected db/m mice to
normal levels.
CONCLUSIONS: KLF11 is an important regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23183531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Eur J Immunol. 2013 Jan;43(1):258-69. doi: 10.1002/eji.201242697. Epub 2012 Nov
27.

Klf10 inhibits IL-12p40 production in macrophage colony-stimulating
factor-induced mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages.

Zhang W(1), Wang X, Xia X, Liu X, Suo S, Guo J, Li M, Cao W, Cai Z, Hui Z,
Subramaniam M, Spelsberg TC, Wang J, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou,
China.

Bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) treated with granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) or macrophage colony-stimulating factor
(M-CSF), differentiate into GM-CSF-induced mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages 
(GM-BMMs) or M-CSF-induced mouse bone marrow-derived macrophages (M-BMMs), which 
have an M1 or M2 profile, respectively. GM-BMMs produce large amounts of
proinflammatory cytokines and mediate resistance to pathogens, whereas M-BMMs
produce antiinflammatory cytokines that contribute to tissue repair and
remodeling. M-BMMs stimulated with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) are in an
antiinflammatory state, with an IL-12(low) IL-10(high) phenotype. However, the
regulation of this process remains unclear. Klf10 belongs to the family of
Krüppel-like transcription factors and was initially described as a TGF-ß
inducible early gene 1. IL-12p40 is upregulated in LPS-stimulated M-BMMs from
Klf10-deficient mice, but downregulated during Klf10 overexpression. Klf11,
another member of the Krüppel-like factor family, can also repress the production
of IL-12p40. Furthermore, Klf10 binds to the CACCC element of the IL-12p40
promoter and inhibits its transcription. We have therefore identified Klf10 as a 
transcription factor that regulates the expression of IL-12p40 in M-BMMs.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3842096
PMID: 23065757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Dec;32(12):2981-8. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300349. Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Krüppel-like factor-11, a transcription factor involved in diabetes mellitus,
suppresses endothelial cell activation via the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B signaling
pathway.

Fan Y(1), Guo Y, Zhang J, Subramaniam M, Song CZ, Urrutia R, Chen YE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Center, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan
Medical Center, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Endothelial cell (EC) inflammatory status is critical to many vascular
diseases. Emerging data demonstrate that mutations of Krüppel-like factor-11
(KLF11), a gene coding maturity-onset diabetes mellitus of the young type 7
(MODY7), contribute to the development of neonatal diabetes mellitus. However,
the function of KLF11 in the cardiovascular system still remains to be uncovered.
In this study, we aimed to investigate the role of KLF11 in vascular endothelial 
inflammation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: KLF11 is highly expressed in vascular ECs and induced by
proinflammatory stimuli. Adenovirus-mediated KLF11 overexpression inhibits
expression of tumor necrosis factors-a-induced adhesion molecules. Moreover,
small interfering RNA-mediated KLF11 knockdown augments the proinflammatory
status in ECs. KLF11 inhibits promoter activity of adhesion molecules induced by 
tumor necrosis factor-a and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B p65 overexpression.
Mechanistically, KLF11 potently inhibits nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway via 
physical interaction with p65. Furthermore, KLF11 knockdown results in increased 
binding of p65 to vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 and E-selectin promoters. At 
the whole organism level, KLF11(-/-) mice exhibit a significant increase in
leukocyte recruitment to ECs after lipopolysaccharide administration.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data demonstrate for the first time that KLF11
is a suppressor of EC inflammatory activation, suggesting that KLF11 constitutes 
a novel potential molecular target for inhibition of vascular inflammatory
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3556387
PMID: 23042817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. FASEB J. 2012 Dec;26(12):4937-50. doi: 10.1096/fj.12-209502. Epub 2012 Aug 28.

Genome-wide methylation screen in low-grade breast cancer identifies novel
epigenetically altered genes as potential biomarkers for tumor diagnosis.

Faryna M(1), Konermann C, Aulmann S, Bermejo JL, Brugger M, Diederichs S, Rom J, 
Weichenhan D, Claus R, Rehli M, Schirmacher P, Sinn HP, Plass C, Gerhauser C.

Author information: 
(1)German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Division of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk 
Factors, Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Aberrant DNA methylation constitutes a well-established epigenetic marker for
breast cancer. Changes in methylation early in cancer development may be
clinically relevant for cancer detection and prognosis-based therapeutic
decisions. In the present study, a combination of methyl-CpG immunoprecipitation 
(MCIp) and human CpG island (CGI) arrays was applied to compare genome-wide DNA
methylation profiles in 10 low-grade in situ and invasive breast cancers against 
10 normal breast samples. In total, 214 CGIs were found to be hypermethylated in 
=6 of 10 tumors. Functional term enrichment analyses revealed an
overrepresentation of homeobox genes and genes involved in transcription and
regulation of transcription. Significant hypermethylation of 11 selected genes in
tumor vs. normal tissue was validated in two independent sample sets (45 tumors
and 11 controls, 43 tumors and 8 controls) using quantitative EpiTyper
technology. In tumors, median methylation levels of BCAN, HOXD1, KCTD8, KLF11,
NXPH1, POU4F1, SIM1, and TCF7L1 were =30% higher than in normal samples,
representing potential biomarkers for tumor diagnosis. Using the 90th percentile 
of methylation levels in normal tissue as cutoff value, 62-92% of in situ samples
(n=13), 72-97% of invasive samples from the first validation set (n=32), and
86-100% of invasive samples from the second validation set (n=43) were classified
as hypermethylated. Hypermethylation of KLF11 and SIM1 might also be associated
with increased risk of developing metastases. In summary, early methylation
changes are frequent in the low-grade pathway of breast cancer and may be useful 
in the development of differential diagnostic and possibly also prognostic
markers.

PMID: 22930747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Drug Discov Ther. 2012 Jun;6(3):112-22.

Monoamine oxidases in major depressive disorder and alcoholism.

Duncan J(1), Johnson S, Ou XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of Mississippi Medical
Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA.

Monoamine oxidases play an integral role in brain function. Both monoamine
oxidase A (MAO-A) and monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) regulate neurochemistry by
degrading monoamine neurotransmitters (serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine). 
Any alteration in MAO levels can have devastating effects on the brain and
behavior by lowering or raising neurotransmitter levels and producing toxic
reactive oxygen species. In this review article, MAO is examined in terms of
function and genetic organization, with special focus on recent discoveries
related to the transcriptional regulation of MAO. In recent studies,
transcriptional regulation involves a repressor protein, R1, for MAO-A and an
activator protein, KLF11 (a Krüppel-like factor; also referred to as transforming
growth factor-beta early inducible gene 2, TIEG2), for both MAO-A and MAO-B, by
binding to Sp/KLF sites in the core promoters of MAO and regulating MAO gene
expression. Furthermore, KLF11 may influence MAO-B expression and augment
glyceraldehyde-3 phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) to upregulate MAO-B
transcription upon exposure to ethanol. Finally, we review recent progress in MAO
research and highlight the roles that MAOs play in several psychiatric
conditions, including chronic stress, major depressive disorder and alcohol
dependence. Further research in this area is needed to better understand MAOs,
their transcription factors and signaling pathways in psychiatric illnesses in
order to develop new strategies for pharmacological advancement.

PMID: 22890201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Nov 5;363(1-2):20-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.07.003.
Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Human Krüppel-like factor 11 differentially regulates human insulin promoter
activity in ß-cells and non-ß-cells via p300 and PDX1 through the regulatory
sites A3 and CACCC box.

Perakakis N(1), Danassi D, Alt M, Tsaroucha E, Mehana AE, Rimmer N, Laubner K,
Wang H, Wollheim CB, Seufert J, Päth G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Department of Internal Medicine II,
University Hospital of Freiburg, Hugstetter Strasse 55, 79106 Freiburg, Germany.

Human Krüppel-like factor 11 (hKLF11) has been characterised to both activate and
inhibit human insulin promoter (hInsP) activity. Since KLF11 is capable to
differentially regulate genes dependent on recruited cofactors, we investigated
the effects of hKLF11 on cotransfected hInsP in both ß-cells and non-ß-cells.
hKLF11 protein interacts with hp300 but not with hPDX1. Overexpressed hKLF11
stimulates PDX1-transactivation of hInsP in HEK293 non-ß-cells, but confers
inhibition in INS-1E ß-cells. Both hKLF11 functions can be neutralised by the
p300 inhibitor E1A, increased hp300 levels (INS-1E), dominant negative (DN)-PDX1 
and by mutation of the PDX1 binding site A3 or the CACCC box. In summary, hKLF11 
differentially regulates hInsP activity depending on the molecular context via
modulation of p300:PDX1 interactions with the A3 element and CACCC box. We
postulate that KLF11 has a role in fine-tuning insulin transcription in certain
cellular situations rather than representing a major transcriptional activator or
repressor of the insulin gene.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22801105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 13;287(29):24195-206. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.373936. Epub
2012 May 24.

Mechanistic role for a novel glucocorticoid-KLF11 (TIEG2) protein pathway in
stress-induced monoamine oxidase A expression.

Grunewald M(1), Johnson S, Lu D, Wang Z, Lomberk G, Albert PR, Stockmeier CA,
Meyer JH, Urrutia R, Miczek KA, Austin MC, Wang J, Paul IA, Woolverton WL, Seo S,
Sittman DB, Ou XM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of Mississippi Medical
Center, Jackson, Mississippi 39216, USA.

Chronic stress is a risk factor for psychiatric illnesses, including depressive
disorders, and is characterized by increased blood glucocorticoids and brain
monoamine oxidase A (MAO A, which degrades monoamine neurotransmitters). This
study elucidates the relationship between stress-induced MAO A and the
transcription factor Kruppel-like factor 11 (KLF11, also called TIEG2, a member
of the Sp/KLF- family), which inhibits cell growth. We report that 1) a
glucocorticoid (dexamethasone) increases KLF11 mRNA and protein levels in
cultured neuronal cells; 2) overexpressing KLF11 increases levels of MAO A mRNA
and enzymatic activity, which is further enhanced by glucocorticoids; in
contrast, siRNA-mediated KLF11 knockdown reduces glucocorticoid-induced MAO A
expression in cultured neurons; 3) induction of KLF11 and translocation of KLF11 
from the cytoplasm to the nucleus are key regulatory mechanisms leading to
increased MAO A catalytic activity and mRNA levels because of direct activation
of the MAO A promoter via Sp/KLF-binding sites; 4) KLF11 knockout mice show
reduced MAO A mRNA and catalytic activity in the brain cortex compared with
wild-type mice; and 5) exposure to chronic social defeat stress induces blood
glucocorticoids and activates the KLF11 pathway in the rat brain, which results
in increased MAO A mRNA and enzymatic activity. Thus, this study reveals for the 
first time that KLF11 is an MAO A regulator and is produced in response to
neuronal stress, which transcriptionally activates MAO A. The novel
glucocorticoid-KLF11-MAO A pathway may play a crucial role in modulating distinct
pathophysiological steps in stress-related disorders.

PMCID: PMC3397846
PMID: 22628545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Jul;10(7):979-91. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0421. Epub
2012 May 23.

Human ESC self-renewal promoting microRNAs induce epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in hepatocytes by controlling the PTEN and TGFß tumor suppressor
signaling pathways.

Jung CJ(1), Iyengar S, Blahnik KR, Jiang JX, Tahimic C, Torok NJ, de vere White
RW, Farnham PJ, Zern M.

Author information: 
(1)Transplant Research Program & UC Davis Institute for Regenerative Cures,
University of California Davis, Sacramento, CA 95817, USA. cjjung@ucdavis.edu

The self-renewal capacity ascribed to embryonic stem cells (ESC) is reminiscent
of cancer cell proliferation, raising speculation that a common network of genes 
may regulate these traits. A search for general regulators of these traits
yielded a set of microRNAs for which expression is highly enriched in human ESCs 
and liver cancer cells (HCC) but attenuated in differentiated quiescent
hepatocytes. Here, we show that these microRNAs promote hESC self-renewal, as
well as HCC proliferation, and when overexpressed in normally quiescent
hepatocytes, induce proliferation and activate cancer signaling pathways.
Proliferation in hepatocytes is mediated through translational repression of
Pten, Tgfbr2, Klf11, and Cdkn1a, which collectively dysregulates the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR and TGFß tumor suppressor signaling pathways. Furthermore, aberrant
expression of these miRNAs is observed in human liver tumor tissues and induces
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hepatocytes. These findings suggest that
microRNAs that are essential in normal development as promoters of ESC
self-renewal are frequently upregulated in human liver tumors and harbor
neoplastic transformation potential when they escape silencing in quiescent human
hepatocytes.

Mol Cancer Res; 10(7); 979-91. ©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4166560
PMID: 22622027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33284. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033284. Epub 2012 Mar 13.

Genome-wide DNA methylation indicates silencing of tumor suppressor genes in
uterine leiomyoma.

Navarro A(1), Yin P, Monsivais D, Lin SM, Du P, Wei JJ, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Uterine leiomyomas, or fibroids, represent the most common benign
tumor of the female reproductive tract. Fibroids become symptomatic in 30% of all
women and up to 70% of African American women of reproductive age. Epigenetic
dysregulation of individual genes has been demonstrated in leiomyoma cells;
however, the in vivo genome-wide distribution of such epigenetic abnormalities
remains unknown.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We characterized and compared genome-wide DNA methylation and
mRNA expression profiles in uterine leiomyoma and matched adjacent normal
myometrial tissues from 18 African American women. We found 55 genes with
differential promoter methylation and concominant differences in mRNA expression 
in uterine leiomyoma versus normal myometrium. Eighty percent of the identified
genes showed an inverse relationship between DNA methylation status and mRNA
expression in uterine leiomyoma tissues, and the majority of genes (62%)
displayed hypermethylation associated with gene silencing. We selected three
genes, the known tumor suppressors KLF11, DLEC1, and KRT19 and verified promoter 
hypermethylation, mRNA repression and protein expression using bisulfite
sequencing, real-time PCR and western blot. Incubation of primary leiomyoma
smooth muscle cells with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor restored KLF11, DLEC1 
and KRT19 mRNA levels.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest a possible functional role of promoter DNA
methylation-mediated gene silencing in the pathogenesis of uterine leiomyoma in
African American women.

PMCID: PMC3302826
PMID: 22428009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 13;287(16):12723-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.351395. Epub
2012 Feb 28.

Krüppel-like factor 11 differentially couples to histone acetyltransferase and
histone methyltransferase chromatin remodeling pathways to transcriptionally
regulate dopamine D2 receptor in neuronal cells.

Seo S(1), Lomberk G, Mathison A, Buttar N, Podratz J, Calvo E, Iovanna J,
Brimijoin S, Windebank A, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Mayo Graduate School, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

The importance of Krüppel-like factor (KLF)-mediated transcriptional pathways in 
the biochemistry of neuronal differentiation has been recognized relatively
recently. Elegant studies have revealed that KLF proteins are important
regulators of two major molecular and cellular processes critical for neuronal
cell differentiation: neurite formation and the expression of
neurotransmitter-related genes. However, whether KLF proteins mediate these key
processes in a separate or coordinated fashion remains unknown. Moreover,
knowledge on the contribution of chromatin dynamics to the biochemical mechanisms
utilized by these proteins to perform their function is absent. Here we report
the characterization of two antagonistic, chromatin-mediated mechanisms by which 
KLF11, also known as TIEG2 (transforming growth factor-ß-inducible early gene 2) 
and MODY VII (maturity onset diabetes of the young VII), regulates transcription 
of the fopamine D2 receptor (Drd2) gene. First, KLF11 activates transcription by 
binding to a distinct Sp-KLF site within the Drd2 promoter (-98 to -94) and
recruiting the p300 histone acetyltransferase. Second, Drd2 transcriptional
activation is partially antagonized by heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1), the code 
reader for histone H3 lysine 9 methylation. Interestingly, KLF11 regulates
neurotransmitter receptor gene expression in differentiating neuronal cell
populations without affecting neurite formation. Overall, these studies highlight
histone methylation and acetylation as key biochemical mechanisms modulating
KLF-mediated neurotransmitter gene transcription. These data extend our knowledge
of chromatin-mediated biochemical events that maintain key phenotypic features of
differentiated neuronal cells.

PMCID: PMC3339994
PMID: 22375010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31429. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031429. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

miRNA-mediated relationships between Cis-SNP genotypes and transcript intensities
in lymphocyte cell lines.

Zhang W(1), Edwards A, Zhu D, Flemington EK, Deininger P, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Xavier University of Louisiana, New Orleans,
Louisiana, United States of America.

In metazoans, miRNAs regulate gene expression primarily through binding to target
sites in the 3' UTRs (untranslated regions) of messenger RNAs (mRNAs). Cis-acting
variants within, or close to, a gene are crucial in explaining the variability of
gene expression measures. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the 3' UTRs
of genes can affect the base-pairing between miRNAs and mRNAs, and hence disrupt 
existing target sites (in the reference sequence) or create novel target sites,
suggesting a possible mechanism for cis regulation of gene expression. Moreover, 
because the alleles of different SNPs within a DNA sequence of limited length
tend to be in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD), we hypothesize the variants of 
miRNA target sites caused by SNPs potentially function as bridges linking the
documented cis-SNP markers to the expression of the associated genes. A
large-scale analysis was herein performed to test this hypothesis. By
systematically integrating multiple latest information sources, we found 21
significant gene-level SNP-involved miRNA-mediated post-transcriptional
regulation modules (SNP-MPRMs) in the form of SNP-miRNA-mRNA triplets in
lymphocyte cell lines for the CEU and YRI populations. Among the cognate genes,
six including ALG8, DGKE, GNA12, KLF11, LRPAP1, and MMAB are related to multiple 
genetic diseases such as depressive disorder and Type-II diabetes. Furthermore,
we found that ~35% of the documented transcript intensity-related cis-SNPs (~950)
in a recent publication are identical to, or in significant linkage
disequilibrium (LD) (p<0.01) with, one or multiple SNPs located in miRNA target
sites. Based on these associations (or identities), 69 significant exon-level
SNP-MPRMs and 12 disease genes were further determined for two populations. These
results provide concrete in silico evidence for the proposed hypothesis. The
discovered modules warrant additional follow-up in independent laboratory
studies.

PMCID: PMC3279374
PMID: 22348086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 13;287(16):13026-39. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.342634. Epub
2012 Feb 8.

Sequence-specific recruitment of heterochromatin protein 1 via interaction with
Krüppel-like factor 11, a human transcription factor involved in tumor
suppression and metabolic diseases.

Lomberk G(1), Mathison AJ, Grzenda A, Seo S, DeMars CJ, Rizvi S, Bonilla-Velez J,
Calvo E, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Iovanna J, Buttar NS, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Laboratory of Epigenetics
and Chromatin Dynamics, GIH Division, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905,
USA. lomberk.gwen@mayo.edu

Heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) proteins are "gatekeepers" of epigenetic gene
silencing that is mediated by lysine 9 of histone H3 methylation (H3K9me).
Current knowledge supports a paradigm whereby HP1 proteins achieve repression by 
binding to H3K9me marks and interacting to H3K9 histone methyltransferases
(HMTs), such as SUV39H1, which methylate this residue on adjacent nucleosomes
thereby compacting chromatin and silencing gene expression. However, the
mechanism underlying the recruitment of this epigenetic regulator to target gene 
promoters remains poorly characterized. In the current study, we reveal for the
first time a mechanism whereby HP1 is recruited to promoters by a well
characterized Krüppel-like transcription factor (KLF), in a sequence-specific
manner, to mediate complex biological phenomena. A PXVXL HP1-interacting domain
identified at position 487-491 of KLF11 mediates the binding of HP1a and KLF11 in
vitro and in cultured cells. KLF11 also recruits HP1a and its histone
methyltransferase, SUV39H1, to promoters to limit KLF11-mediated gene activation.
Indeed, a KLF11<U+0394>HP1 mutant derepresses KLF11-regulated cancer genes, by
inhibiting HP1-SUV39H1 recruitment, decreasing H3K9me3, while increasing
activation-associated marks. Biologically, impairment of KLF11-mediated HP1-HMT
recruitment abolishes tumor suppression, providing direct evidence that HP1-HMTs 
act in a sequence-specific manner to achieve this function rather than its well
characterized binding to methylated chromatin without intermediary. Collectively,
these studies reveal a novel role for HP1 as a cofactor in tumor suppression,
expand our mechanistic understanding of a KLF associated to human disease, and
outline cellular and biochemical mechanisms underlying this phenomenon,
increasing the specificity of targeting HP1-HMT complexes to gene promoters.

PMCID: PMC3339955
PMID: 22318730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Comp Immunol. 2012 Jan;36(1):121-9. doi: 10.1016/j.dci.2011.06.008. Epub 2011
Jun 28.

Role of Penaeus monodon Kruppel-like factor (PmKLF) in infection by white spot
syndrome virus.

Chang LK(1), Huang PH, Shen WT, Yang SH, Liu WJ, Lo CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Science and Technology, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei 106, Taiwan, ROC. changlk@ntu.edu.tw

Sp1-like proteins and Kruppel-like factors (KLFs) are highly related zinc-finger 
proteins that have crucial roles in transcription. One expressed sequence tag
(EST, HPA-N-S01-EST0038) from shrimps is homologous to Sp1. This study reports
the cloning and characteristics of a KLF from shrimp, Penaeus monodon (PmKLF).
The full-length PmKLF cDNA is 1702 bp, encoding a polypeptide of 360 amino acids.
Sequence analysis revealed that the sequence of PmKLF is similar to that of KLF11
in humans, mice and zebrafish. RT-PCR analysis indicated that PmKLF mRNA is
expressed in all examined tissues. Additionally, immunofluorescence analysis
revealed that GFP-KLF fusion protein is located in the nucleus as dots in an
insect cell line, Sf9. Localization of PmKLF in the nucleus is also observed in
the hemolymph from white spot syndrome virus (WSSV)-infected and WSSV-uninfected 
Litopenaeus vannamei. Knockdown of the expression of PmKLF transcript in
WSSV-infected shrimp resulted in delayed cumulative mortalities, suggesting that 
PmKLF is important to WSSV infection. Moreover, inhibition of PmKLF expression
reduced the copy number of WSSV and ie1 expression, revealing that PmKLF affects 
WSSV infection via interfering with ie1 expression.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21740926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 12;286(32):28414-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.215822. Epub
2011 May 18.

Disruption of a novel Kruppel-like transcription factor p300-regulated pathway
for insulin biosynthesis revealed by studies of the c.-331 INS mutation found in 
neonatal diabetes mellitus.

Bonnefond A(1), Lomberk G, Buttar N, Busiah K, Vaillant E, Lobbens S, Yengo L,
Dechaume A, Mignot B, Simon A, Scharfmann R, Neve B, Tanyolaç S, Hodoglugil U,
Pattou F, Cavé H, Iovanna J, Stein R, Polak M, Vaxillaire M, Froguel P, Urrutia
R.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR-8199, Lille Pasteur Institute, Lille Nord de France University,
F-59800 Lille, France.

Krüppel-like transcription factors (KLFs) have elicited significant attention
because of their regulation of essential biochemical pathways and, more recently,
because of their fundamental role in the mechanisms of human diseases. Neonatal
diabetes mellitus is a monogenic disorder with primary alterations in insulin
secretion. We here describe a key biochemical mechanism that underlies neonatal
diabetes mellitus insulin biosynthesis impairment, namely a homozygous mutation
within the insulin gene (INS) promoter, c.-331C>G, which affects a novel
KLF-binding site. The combination of careful expression profiling,
electromobility shift assays, reporter experiments, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrates that, among 16 different KLF proteins tested,
KLF11 is the most reliable activator of this site. Congruently, the c.-331C>G INS
mutation fails to bind KLF11, thus inhibiting activation by this transcription
factor. Klf11(-/-) mice recapitulate the disruption in insulin production and
blood levels observed in patients. Thus, these data demonstrate an important role
for KLF11 in the regulation of INS transcription via the novel c.-331 KLF site.
Lastly, our screening data raised the possibility that other members of the KLF
family may also regulate this promoter under distinct, yet unidentified, cellular
contexts. Collectively, this study underscores a key role for KLF proteins in
biochemical mechanisms of human diseases, in particular, early infancy onset
diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC3151084
PMID: 21592955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cell Tissue Res. 2012 Jan;347(1):65-72. doi: 10.1007/s00441-011-1186-6. Epub 2011
May 17.

Klf10 and Klf11 as mediators of TGF-beta superfamily signaling.

Spittau B(1), Krieglstein K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology, Department of Molecular Embryology,
Albert Ludwigs University Freiburg, Albertstrasse 17, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
bjoern.spittau@anat.uni-freiburg.de

Klf10 and Klf11 belong to the family of Sp1/Krüppel-like zinc finger
transcription factors that play important roles in a variety of cell types and
tissues. Although Klf10 and Klf11 were initially introduced as transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)-inducible genes, several studies have described
their upregulation by a plethora of growth factors, cytokines and hormones. Here,
we review the current knowledge of the inductive cues for Klf10 and Klf11 and
focus on their transcriptional regulation by members of the TGF-beta superfamily.
We further summarize their involvement in the regulation of the TGF-beta
signaling pathway and discuss their possible role as molecules mediating
crosstalk between various signaling pathways. Finally, we provide an overview of 
the pro-apoptotic and anti-proliferative functions of Klf10 and Klf11.

PMID: 21574058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Immunol. 2011 Apr 1;186(7):4183-90. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1002802. Epub 2011
Mar 2.

Angiopoietin 2 stimulates TIE2-expressing monocytes to suppress T cell activation
and to promote regulatory T cell expansion.

Coffelt SB(1), Chen YY, Muthana M, Welford AF, Tal AO, Scholz A, Plate KH, Reiss 
Y, Murdoch C, De Palma M, Lewis CE.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Inflammation and Tumour Targeting, University of Sheffield,
Sheffield S10 2RX, United Kingdom.

Angiopoietin 2 (ANGPT2) is a proangiogenic cytokine whose expression is often
upregulated by endothelial cells in tumors. Expression of its receptor, TIE2,
defines a highly proangiogenic subpopulation of myeloid cells in circulation and 
tumors called TIE2-expressing monocytes/macrophages (TEMs). Genetic depletion of 
TEMs markedly reduces tumor angiogenesis in various tumor models, emphasizing
their essential role in driving tumor progression. Previously, we demonstrated
that ANGPT2 augments the expression of various proangiogenic genes, the potent
immunosuppressive cytokine, IL-10, and a chemokine for regulatory T cells
(Tregs), CCL17 by TEMs in vitro. We now show that TEMs also express higher levels
of IL-10 than TIE2(-) macrophages in tumors and that ANGPT2-stimulated release of
IL-10 by TEMs suppresses T cell proliferation, increases the ratio of CD4(+) T
cells to CD8(+) T cells, and promotes the expansion of CD4(+)CD25(high)FOXP3(+)
Tregs. Furthermore, syngeneic murine tumors expressing high levels of ANGPT2
contained not only high numbers of TEMs but also increased numbers of Tregs,
whereas genetic depletion of tumor TEMs resulted in a marked reduction in the
frequency of Tregs in tumors. Taken together, our data suggest that
ANGPT2-stimulated TEMs represent a novel, potent immunosuppressive force in
tumors.

PMID: 21368233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Biochem J. 2011 Apr 15;435(2):529-37. doi: 10.1042/BJ20100773.

A functional family-wide screening of SP/KLF proteins identifies a subset of
suppressors of KRAS-mediated cell growth.

Fernandez-Zapico ME(1), Lomberk GA, Tsuji S, DeMars CJ, Bardsley MR, Lin YH,
Almada LL, Han JJ, Mukhopadhyay D, Ordog T, Buttar NS, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, 
Rochester, MN 55901, USA.

SP/KLF (Specificity protein/Krüppel-like factor) transcription factors comprise
an emerging group of proteins that may behave as tumour suppressors.
Incidentally, many cancers that display alterations in certain KLF proteins are
also associated with a high incidence of KRAS (V-Ki-ras2 Kirsten rat sarcoma
viral oncogene homologue) mutations. Therefore in the present paper we
investigate whether SP/KLF proteins suppress KRAS-mediated cell growth, and more 
importantly, the potential mechanisms underlying these effects. Using a
comprehensive family-wide screening of the 24 SP/KLF members, we discovered that 
SP5, SP8, KLF2, KLF3, KLF4, KLF11, KLF13, KLF14, KLF15 and KLF16 inhibit cellular
growth and suppress transformation mediated by oncogenic KRAS. Each protein in
this subset of SP/KLF members individually inhibits BrdU (5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine)
incorporation in KRAS oncogenic-mutant cancer cells. SP5, KLF3, KLF11, KLF13,
KLF14 and KLF16 also increase apoptosis in these cells. Using KLF11 as a
representative model for mechanistic studies, we demonstrate that this protein
inhibits the ability of cancer cells to form both colonies in soft agar and
tumour growth in vivo. Molecular studies demonstrate that these effects of KLF11 
are mediated, at least in part, through silencing cyclin A via binding to its
promoter and leading to cell-cycle arrest in S-phase. Interestingly, similar to
KLF11, KLF14 and KLF16 mechanistically share the ability to modulate the
expression of cyclin A. Collectively, the present study stringently defines a
distinct subset of SP/KLF proteins that impairs KRAS-mediated cell growth, and
that mechanistically some members of this subset accomplish this, at least in
part, through regulation of the cyclin A promoter.

PMCID: PMC3130109
PMID: 21171965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Sep 10;400(1):175-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.08.039. Epub 2010 Aug 13.

Transcriptional regulation of a brown adipocyte-specific gene, UCP1, by KLF11 and
KLF15.

Yamamoto K(1), Sakaguchi M, Medina RJ, Niida A, Sakaguchi Y, Miyazaki M, Kataoka 
K, Huh NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

Several growth factors and transcription factors have been reported to play
important roles in brown adipocyte differentiation and modulation of thermogenic 
gene expression, especially the expression of UCP1. In this study, we focused on 
KLF11 and KLF15, which were expressed highly in brown adipose tissue. Our data
demonstrated that KLF11 and KLF15 interacted directly with the UCP1 promoter
using GC-box and GT-boxes, respectively. Co-transfection of KLF11 and KLF15 in
the mesenchymal stem cell line muBM3.1 during brown adipocyte differentiation
enhanced the expression level of UCP1. KLF11, but not KLF15, was essential for
UCP1 expression during brown adipocyte differentiation of muBM3.1.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20709022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Pathol. 2010 Aug;221(4):433-42. doi: 10.1002/path.2725.

Global DNA methylation in fetal human germ cells and germ cell tumours:
association with differentiation and cisplatin resistance.

Wermann H(1), Stoop H, Gillis AJ, Honecker F, van Gurp RJ, Ammerpohl O, Richter
J, Oosterhuis JW, Bokemeyer C, Looijenga LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC-Erasmus University Medical Center, Daniel 
den Hoed Cancer Center, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Differences in the global methylation pattern, ie hyper- as well as
hypo-methylation, are observed in cancers including germ cell tumours (GCTs).
Related to their precursor cells, GCT methylation status differs according to
histology. We investigated the methylation pattern of normal fetal, infantile,
and adult germ cells (n = 103) and GCTs (n = 251) by immunohistochemical staining
for 5-(m)cytidine. The global methylation pattern of male germ cells changes from
hypomethylation to hypermethylation, whereas female germ cells remain
unmethylated at all stages. Undifferentiated GCTs (seminomas, intratubular germ
cell neoplasia unclassified, and gonadoblastomas) are hypomethylated, whereas
more differentiated GCTs (teratomas, yolk sac tumours, and choriocarcinomas) show
a higher degree of methylation. Embryonal carcinomas show an intermediate
pattern. Resistance to cisplatin was assessed in the seminomatous cell line
TCam-2 before and after demethylation using 5-azacytidine. Exposure to
5-azacytidine resulted in decreased resistance to cisplatin. Furthermore, after
demethylation, the stem cell markers NANOG and POU5F1 (OCT3/4), as well as the
germ cell-specific marker VASA, showed increased expression. Following treatment 
with 5-azacytidine, TCam-2 cells were analysed using a high-throughput
methylation screen for changes in the methylation sites of 14,000 genes. Among
the genes revealing changes, interesting targets were identified: ie
demethylation of KLF11, a putative tumour suppressor gene, and hypermethylation
of CFLAR, a gene previously described in treatment resistance in GCTs.

PMID: 20593487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2010 Jun;108(6):1706-10. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.00356.2010. Epub 2010 Apr 8.

Molecular structure of tail tendon fibers in TIEG1 knockout mice using
synchrotron diffraction technology.

Gumez L(1), Bensamoun SF, Doucet J, Haddad O, Hawse JR, Subramaniam M, Spelsberg 
TC, Pichon C.

Author information: 
(1)Biomécanique et Bioingénierie, UMR CNRS 6600, UTC-Centre de Recherches de
Royallieu, BP 20529, Rue personne de Roberval, 60205 Compiègne cedex, France.

The purpose of this study was to characterize the effect of TIEG1 on the
molecular structure of collagen within tail tendon fibers using 3-mo-old female
C57BL/6 wild-type (WT) and TIEG1 KO mice. Synchrotron X-ray microdiffraction
experiments were carried out on single tendon fibers extracted from the WT and
TIEG1 KO dorsal tail tendon. The fibers were scanned in the radial direction, and
X-ray patterns were obtained. From these patterns, the meridional direction was
analyzed through X-ray intensity profile. In addition, collagen content was
investigated using hydroxyproline assays, and qualitative real-time PCR
experiments were performed on RNA isolated from fibroblasts to examine specific
gene expression changes. The results showed different X-ray diffraction patterns 
between WT and TIEG1 KO tendon fibers, indicating a disorganization of the
collagen structure for the TIEG1 KO compared with WT mice. Furthermore, the
analyses of the X-ray intensity profiles exhibited a higher (23 A) period of
collagen for the TIEG1 KO compared with the WT mice. The results of the
hydroxyproline assays revealed a significant decrease in the TIEG1 KO compared
with WT mice, leading to a decrease in the total amount of collagen present
within the TIEG1 KO tendons. Moreover, qualitative real-time PCR results showed
differences in the expression profiles of specific genes known to play important 
roles in tendon fiber development. These data further elucidate the role of TIEG1
on tendon structure and could explain the previous defects in the
structure-function relationship found for TIEG1 KO tendon fibers.

PMCID: PMC3774169
PMID: 20378701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2010 May;293(5):858-64. doi: 10.1002/ar.21108.

Dynamic transcriptional changes of TIEG1 and TIEG2 during mouse tissue
development.

Jiang L(1), Chen Y, Chan CY, Lu G, Wang H, Li JC, Kung HF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, People's Republic of
China.

TGF-beta-inducible early-response gene (TIEG) is a family of primary response
genes induced by TGF-beta, which are well recognized in regulating cellular
proliferation and apoptosis. However, their expression profile has never been
investigated during embryogenesis in different organs. In this study, we aimed to
investigate the transcriptional level of both TIEG1 and TIEG2 during development 
in various mice organs, including the brain cortex, cerebellum and stem, brain
striatum, muscle, heart, liver, kidney, and lung. Quantitative real-time PCR was 
used to profile the change of transcriptional level of the two TIEG members in
the mice tissues at six developmental stages. Taken together, the expression of
TIEG1 and TIEG2 was specific in different organs yet varied with different
developmental time points. Their dynamic changes were moderately consistent in
most organs including the brain cortex, striatum, liver, kidney, and lung.
However, their mRNA expression in both the heart and muscle was significantly
different at all developmental stages, which might propose a compensation of
functions in the TIEG family. Nevertheless, our data indicate that both the TIEG 
genes are essential in regulating the normal organ development and functioning in
murine model, as their expressions were ubiquitous and tissue specific at various
developmental stages.

PMID: 20201061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 9;285(15):11433-44. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.077065. Epub 2010
Feb 12.

Distinct role of Kruppel-like factor 11 in the regulation of prostaglandin E2
biosynthesis.

Buttar NS(1), DeMars CJ, Lomberk G, Rizvi S, Bonilla-Velez J, Achra S, Rashtak S,
Wang KK, Fernandez-Zapico ME, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55902, USA.
buttar.navtej@mayo.edu

Kruppel-like factor (KLF) proteins are emerging as key regulators of lipid
metabolism, diabetes, and the biosynthesis of immunological cytokines. However,
their role in the synthesis of prostaglandins, widely known biochemical mediators
that act in a myriad of cell biological processes remain poorly understood.
Consequently, in this study a comprehensive investigation at the cellular,
biochemical, and molecular levels reveal that KLF11 inhibits prostaglandin E(2)
synthesis via transcriptional silencing of the promoter of its biosynthetic
enzyme, cytosolic phospholipase A2alpha. Mechanistically, KLF11 accomplishes this
function by binding to the promoter via specific GC-rich sites and recruiting the
Sin3-histone deacetylase chromatin remodeling complex. Further functional
characterization reveals that this function of KLF11 can be reversed by epidermal
growth factor receptor-AKT-mediated post-translational modification of threonine 
56, a residue within its Sin3-binding domain. This is the first evidence
supporting a relevant role for any KLF protein in doing both: transcriptionally
inhibiting prostaglandin biosynthesis and its reversibility by an epidermal
growth factor receptor-AKT signaling-mediated posttranslational mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2857022
PMID: 20154088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Res. 2010 Feb 15;70(4):1722-30. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2612. Epub
2010 Feb 2.

Transcription factor KLF11 integrates progesterone receptor signaling and
proliferation in uterine leiomyoma cells.

Yin P(1), Lin Z, Reierstad S, Wu J, Ishikawa H, Marsh EE, Innes J, Cheng Y,
Pearson K, Coon JS 5th, Kim JJ, Chakravarti D, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine at Northwestern University, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

Uterine leiomyoma is the most common tumor of the female genital tract and the
leading cause of hysterectomy. Although progesterone stimulates the proliferation
of uterine leiomyoma cells, the mechanism of progesterone action is not well
understood. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-cloning approach to
identify progesterone receptor (PR) target genes in primary uterine leiomyoma
smooth muscle cells. We identified 18 novel PR-binding sites, one of which was
located 20.5 kb upstream of the transcriptional start site of the Krüppel-like
transcription factor 11 (KLF11) gene. KLF11 mRNA levels were minimally
downregulated by progesterone but robustly upregulated by the progesterone
antagonist RU486. Luciferase reporter assays showed significant baseline and
RU486-inducible promoter activity in the KLF11 basal promoter or distal
PR-binding region, both of which contained multiple Sp1-binding sequences but
lacked classic progesterone response elements. RU486 stimulated recruitment of
Sp1, RNA polymerase II, PR, and the coactivators SRC-1 and SRC-2 to the distal
region and basal promoter. siRNA knockdown of PR increased KLF11 expression,
whereas knockdown of KLF11 increased leiomyoma cell proliferation and abolished
the antiproliferative effect of RU486. In vivo, KLF11 expression was
significantly lower in leiomyoma tissues compared with adjacent myometrial
tissues. Taken together, using a ChIP-cloning approach, we uncovered KLF11 as an 
integrator of PR signaling and proliferation in uterine leiomyoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2822899
PMID: 20124487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Mar;1802(3):363-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2010.01.002.
Epub 2010 Jan 7.

The bile acid sensor FXR regulates insulin transcription and secretion.

Renga B(1), Mencarelli A, Vavassori P, Brancaleone V, Fiorucci S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine, University of Perugia,
Perugia, Italy. barbara.renga@unipg.it

Farnesoid X Receptor plays an important role in maintaining bile acid,
cholesterol homeostasis and glucose metabolism. Here we investigated whether FXR 
is expressed by pancreatic beta-cells and regulates insulin signaling in
pancreatic beta-cell line and human islets. We found that FXR activation induces 
positive regulatory effects on glucose-induced insulin transcription and
secretion by genomic and non-genomic activities. Genomic effects of FXR
activation relay on the induction of the glucose regulated transcription factor
KLF11. Indeed, results from silencing experiments of KLF11 demonstrate that this 
transcription factor is essential for FXR activity on glucose-induced insulin
gene transcription. In addition FXR regulates insulin secretion by non-genomic
effects. Thus, activation of FXR in betaTC6 cells increases Akt phosphorylation
and translocation of the glucose transporter GLUT2 at plasma membrane, increasing
the glucose uptake by these cells. In vivo experiments on Non Obese Diabetic
(NOD) mice demonstrated that FXR activation delays development of signs of
diabetes, hyperglycemia and glycosuria, by enhancing insulin secretion and by
stimulating glucose uptake by the liver. These data established that an FXR-KLF11
regulated pathway has an essential role in the regulation of insulin
transcription and secretion induced by glucose.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20060466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Fertil Steril. 2010 May 15;93(8):2668-73. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.11.031. 
Epub 2010 Jan 8.

The selective progesterone receptor modulator CDB4124 inhibits proliferation and 
induces apoptosis in uterine leiomyoma cells.

Luo X(1), Yin P, Coon V JS, Cheng YH, Wiehle RD, Bulun SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effects of selective P receptor (PR) modulator CDB4124
on cell proliferation and apoptosis in cultured human uterine leiomyoma smooth
muscle (LSM) cells and control myometrial smooth muscle (MSM) cells in matched
uteri.
DESIGN: Laboratory research.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
PATIENT(S): Premenopausal women (n = 12) undergoing hysterectomy for
leiomyoma-related symptoms.
INTERVENTION(S): Treatment of primary LSM and MSM cells with CDB4124
(10(-8)-10(-6) M) or vehicle for 24, 48, or 72 hours.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Western blot for protein expression of proliferating
cell nuclear antigen, cleaved polyadenosine 5'-diphosphate-ribose polymerase,
Bcl-2, and Krüppel-like transcription factor 11;
93-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay to
evaluate viable cell numbers; and real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to
quantify messenger RNA (mRNA) levels.
RESULT(S): Treatment with CDB4124 significantly decreased levels of the
proliferation marker proliferating cell nuclear antigen, the number of viable LSM
cells, and the antiapoptotic protein Bcl-2. On the other hand, treatment with
CDB4124 increased levels of the apoptosis marker cleaved polyadenosine
5'-diphosphate-ribose polymerase and the tumor suppressor Krüppel-like
transcription factor 11 in a dose- and time-dependent manner in LSM cells. In
matched MSM cells, however, CDB4124 did not affect cell proliferation or
apoptosis.
CONCLUSION(S): CDB4124 selectively inhibits proliferation and induces apoptosis
in LSM but not in MSM cells.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2872031
PMID: 20056218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Biol Psychiatry. 2010 May 1;67(9):855-63. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.10.032.
Epub 2009 Dec 22.

A novel role for glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase and monoamine oxidase B
cascade in ethanol-induced cellular damage.

Ou XM(1), Stockmeier CA, Meltzer HY, Overholser JC, Jurjus GJ, Dieter L, Chen K, 
Lu D, Johnson C, Youdim MB, Austin MC, Luo J, Sawa A, May W, Shih JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of Mississippi Medical
Center, Jackson, Mississippi 39216, USA. xou@psychiatry.umsmed.edu

BACKGROUND: Alcoholism is a major psychiatric condition at least partly
associated with ethanol (EtOH)-induced cell damage. Although brain cell loss has 
been reported in subjects with alcoholism, the molecular mechanism is unclear.
Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) 
reportedly play a role in cellular dysfunction under stressful conditions and
might contribute to EtOH-induced cell damage.
METHODS: Expression of GAPDH and MAO B protein was studied in human glioblastoma 
and neuroblastoma cell lines exposed to physiological concentrations of EtOH.
Expression of these proteins was also examined in the prefrontal cortex from
human subjects with alcohol dependence and in rats fed with an EtOH diet.
Coimmunoprecipitation, subcellular fractionation, and luciferase assay were used 
to address nuclear GAPDH-mediated MAO B activation. To test the effects of
inactivation, RNA interference and pharmacological intervention were used, and
cell damage was assessed by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase (TdT)-mediated 
dUTP Nick End Labeling (TUNEL) and hydrogen peroxide measurements.
RESULTS: Ethanol significantly increases levels of GAPDH, especially nuclear
GAPDH, and MAO B in neuronal cells as well as in human and rat brains. Nuclear
GAPDH interacts with the transcriptional activator, transforming growth
factor-beta-inducible early gene 2 (TIEG2), and augments TIEG2-mediated MAO B
transactivation, which results in cell damage in neuronal cells exposed to EtOH. 
Knockdown expression of GAPDH or treatment with MAO B inhibitors selegiline
(deprenyl) and rasagiline (Azilect) can block this cascade.
CONCLUSIONS: Ethanol-elicited nuclear GAPDH augments TIEG2-mediated MAO B, which 
might play a role in brain damage in subjects with alcoholism. Compounds that
block this cascade are potential candidates for therapeutic strategies.

Copyright 2010 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854240
PMID: 20022592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Eur J Haematol. 2010 Apr;84(4):298-303. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2009.01389.x.
Epub 2009 Nov 28.

Epigenetic inactivation of tumour suppressor gene KLF11 in myelodysplastic
syndromes*.

Potapova A(1), Hasemeier B, Römermann D, Metzig K, Göhring G, Schlegelberger B,
Länger F, Kreipe H, Lehmann U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany.

The identification of aberrantly hypermethylated genes may lead to the
development of new diagnostic markers and the identification of novel targets of 
epigenetic therapy in myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). We therefore investigated 
the methylation status of transcription factor genes KLF5, KLF11, and MAFB, shown
to be aberrantly methylated in myelogeneous leukaemia cells, in a series of 115
MDS patient as well as in 25 control subjects. Using quantitative high-resolution
pyrosequencing methodology, KLF11, MAFB, and KLF5 were shown for the first time
to be hypermethylated in 17 (15%), 8 (7%), and 2 (1.7%) cases, respectively, but 
not in any of the patients with an isolated 5q-deletion. Patient samples
harbouring KLF11 methylation displayed reduced KLF11 mRNA expression and KLF11
hypermethylation correlated with a high International Prognostic Scoring System
score (P < 0.05). In conclusion, epigenetic inactivation and subsequent
transcriptional repression of the KLF11 gene is quite frequent in MDS. Patients
with an isolated 5q-deletion seem to harbour a distinct epigenetic profile.

PMID: 20002157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 25;284(52):36482-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.028852. Epub
2009 Oct 20.

MODY7 gene, KLF11, is a novel p300-dependent regulator of Pdx-1 (MODY4)
transcription in pancreatic islet beta cells.

Fernandez-Zapico ME(1), van Velkinburgh JC, Gutiérrez-Aguilar R, Neve B, Froguel 
P, Urrutia R, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
55905, USA.

Pdx-1 (pancreatic-duodenal homeobox-1), a MODY4 homeodomain transcription factor,
serves as a master regulator in the pancreas because of its importance during
organogenesis and in adult islet insulin-producing beta cell activity. Here, we
show that KLF11, an SP/Krüppel-like (SP/KLF) transcription factor, mutated in
French maturity onset diabetes of the young patients (MODY7), regulates Pdx-1
transcription in beta cells through two evolutionarily conserved GC-rich motifs
in conserved Area II, a control region essential to islet beta cell-enriched
expression. These regulatory elements, termed GC1 (human base pair -2061/-2055)
and GC2 (-2036/-2027), are also nearly identical to the consensus KLF11 binding
sequence defined here by random oligonucleotide binding analysis. KLF11
specifically associates with Area II in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
while preventing binding to GC1- and/or GC2-compromised Pdx1-driven reporter
activity in beta cell lines. Mechanistically, we find that KLF11 interacts with
the coactivator p300 via its zinc finger domain in vivo to mediate Pdx-1
activation. Together, our data identified a hierarchical regulatory cascade for
these two MODY genes, suggesting that gene regulation in MODY is more complex
than anticipated previously. Furthermore, because KLF11 like most MODY-associated
transcription factors uses p300, these data further support a role for this
coactivator as a critical chromatin link in forms of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2794764
PMID: 19843526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 27;4(8):e6796. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006796.

Comparative analysis of gene regulation by the transcription factor PPARalpha
between mouse and human.

Rakhshandehroo M(1), Hooiveld G, Müller M, Kersten S.

Author information: 
(1)Nutrigenomics Consortium, Top Institute (TI) Food and Nutrition, Wageningen,
The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Studies in mice have shown that PPARalpha is an important regulator
of hepatic lipid metabolism and the acute phase response. However, little
information is available on the role of PPARalpha in human liver. Here we set out
to compare the function of PPARalpha in mouse and human hepatocytes via analysis 
of target gene regulation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Primary hepatocytes from 6 human and 6 mouse
donors were treated with PPARalpha agonist Wy14643 and gene expression profiling 
was performed using Affymetrix GeneChips followed by a systems biology analysis. 
Baseline PPARalpha expression was similar in human and mouse hepatocytes.
Depending on species and time of exposure, Wy14643 significantly induced the
expression of 362-672 genes. Surprisingly minor overlap was observed between the 
Wy14643-regulated genes from mouse and human, although more substantial overlap
was observed at the pathway level. Xenobiotics metabolism and apolipoprotein
synthesis were specifically regulated by PPARalpha in human hepatocytes, whereas 
glycolysis-gluconeogenesis was regulated specifically in mouse hepatocytes. Most 
of the genes commonly regulated in mouse and human were involved in lipid
metabolism and many represented known PPARalpha targets, including CPT1A, HMGCS2,
FABP1, ACSL1, and ADFP. Several genes were identified that were specifically
induced by PPARalpha in human (MBL2, ALAS1, CYP1A1, TSKU) or mouse (Fbp2, lgals4,
Cd36, Ucp2, Pxmp4). Furthermore, several putative novel PPARalpha targets were
identified that were commonly regulated in both species, including CREB3L3,
KLF10, KLF11 and MAP3K8.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our results suggest that PPARalpha activation has a
major impact on gene regulation in human hepatocytes. Importantly, the role of
PPARalpha as master regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism is generally
well-conserved between mouse and human. Overall, however, PPARalpha regulates a
mostly divergent set of genes in mouse and human hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC2729378
PMID: 19710929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Neurotox Res. 2009 Aug;16(2):148-59. doi: 10.1007/s12640-009-9064-7. Epub 2009
May 28.

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase-monoamine oxidase B-mediated cell
death-induced by ethanol is prevented by rasagiline and 1-R-aminoindan.

Ou XM(1), Lu D, Johnson C, Chen K, Youdim MB, Rajkowska G, Shih JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology & Behavioral Research, Department of Psychiatry and
Human Behavior (G-109), University of Mississippi Medical Center, 2500 N. State
Street, Jackson, MS 39216, USA. xou@psychiatry.umsmed.edu

The inhibitors of monoamine oxidase B (MAO B) are effectively used as therapeutic
drugs for neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases. However, their
mechanism of action is not clear, since the neuroprotective effect of MAO B
inhibitors is associated with the blockage of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH)-death cascade, rather than the inhibition of MAO B. Here,
we provide evidence that GAPDH potentiates the ethanol-induced activity of MAO B 
and brain cell toxicity. The levels of nuclear GAPDH and MAO B activity are
significantly increased in brain-derived cell lines upon 75 mM ethanol-induced
cell death. Over-expression of GAPDH in cells enhances ethanol-induced cell
death, and also increases the ethanol-induced activation of MAO B. In contrast,
the MAO B inhibitors rasagiline and selegiline (0.25 nM) and the rasagiline
metabolite, 1-R-aminoindan (1 muM) decreases the ethanol-induced MAO B, prevents 
nuclear translocation of GAPDH and reduces cell death. In addition, GAPDH
interacts with transforming growth factor-beta-inducible early gene (TIEG2), a
transcriptional activator for MAO B, and this interaction is increased in the
nucleus by ethanol but reduced by MAO B inhibitors and 1-R-aminoindan.
Furthermore, silencing TIEG2 using RNAi significantly reduces GAPDH-induced MAO B
upregulation and neurotoxicity. In summary, ethanol-induced cell death,
attenuated by MAO B inhibitors, may result from disrupting the movement of GAPDH 
with the transcriptional activator into the nucleus and secondly inhibit MAO B
gene expression. Thus, the neuroprotective effects of rasagiline or
1-R-aminoindan on ethanol-induced cell death mediated by a novel GAPDH-MAO B
pathway may provide a new insight in the treatment of neurobiological diseases
including alcohol-use disorders.

PMCID: PMC2862453
PMID: 19526291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Endocr J. 2009;56(2):275-86. Epub 2008 Dec 27.

Identification of minimal promoter and genetic variants of Kruppel-like factor 11
gene and association analysis with type 2 diabetes in Japanese.

Kuroda E(1), Horikawa Y, Enya M, Oda N, Suzuki E, Iizuka K, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Division of Molecule and Structure, 
Gifu University School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

Genetic analysis of the KLF11 gene revealed two rare variants, A347S and T220M,
segregating in families with early-onset type 2 diabetes, and one frequent
polymorphic Q62R variant significantly associated with type 2 diabetes in
Northern Europeans. Furthermore, it has been reported that over-expression of
KLF11 has a deleterious effect on insulin promoter activity. Thus, an altered
expression level of KLF11 may contribute to the occurrence of type 2 diabetes. To
investigate the contribution of KLF11 to type 2 diabetes in Japanese, we surveyed
the 5' flanking region of KLF11 by reporter assay and identified the minimal
promoter region of the gene. The promoter region from -250 to +162 bp including
five Sp1 binding sites showed basal promoter activity both in MIN6-m9 and HepG2
cells. We also examined the entire region of KLF11 to detect genetic variants. A 
total of 19 polymorphisms, six of which are novel, were identified, but none of
them showed association with the occurrence of type 2 diabetes. Two of the
identified polymorphisms, R29Q and S124F, are novel coding variants. Functional
analyses of these variants were performed, and similarly reduced effects on
transcriptional activities of insulin, catalase1, and the Smad7 gene were found. 
We conclude that variants of KLF11 are not a major factor in the occurrence of
type 2 diabetes in Japanese. The promoter region of KLF11 identified in the
present study should be useful in further elucidation of the transcriptional
regulation mechanism of the gene and genetic analyses of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 19122346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Ethnopharmacol. 2008 Dec 8;120(3):437-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2008.09.024. Epub 
2008 Oct 1.

Molecular pharmacological basis of the YiSui ShenXu Granule in beta-thalassemia
therapy.

Zhang C(1), Wu ZK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory of Guang'anmen Hospital, China Academy of Chinese
Medical Sciences, Beijing 100053, China.

OBJECTIVES: To study the molecular pharmacological basis of the YiSui ShenXu
Granule, a complex prescription of the Chinese traditional medicine used to treat
beta-thalassemia.
METHODS: Real-time quantitative PCR method had been applied to analyze the genes 
expression: gamma-globin, Ckit, EpoR, Spi, FKLF, GATA1 and GATA2 in K562 cell
treated and untreated with this complex prescription and its each single herbal
medicine.
RESULTS: The results showed that this complex prescription increased the
gamma-globin, EpoR, Spi and FKLF expression and decreased the Ckit, GATA1 and
GATA2 expression. And all single herbal medicines of this complex prescription
could change some of those gene expressions, but not the same as the complex
prescription. Even that, this study results indicated that the YiSui ShenXu
Granule has its molecular pharmacological basis in treating beta-thalassemia.

PMID: 18951967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Anticancer Res. 2008 May-Jun;28(3A):1531-9.

TGFbeta regulated gene expression by Smads and Sp1/KLF-like transcription factors
in cancer.

Ellenrieder V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Laboratory, Internal Medicine, Department of
Gastroenterology and Endocrinology, University of Marburg, Marburg, Germany.
ellenrie@med.unimarburg.de

Transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) controls vital cellular functions
through its ability to regulate gene expression. TGFbeta binding to its
transmembrane receptor kinases initiates distinct intracellular signalling
cascades including the Smad signalling and transcription factors and also
Smad-independent pathways. In normal epithelial cells, TGFbeta stimulation
induces a cytostatic program which includes the transcriptional repression of the
c-Myc oncogene and the later induction of the cell cycle inhibitors p15(INK4b)
and p21(Cip1). During carcinogenesis, however, many tumor cells lose their
ability to respond to TGFbeta with growth inhibition, and instead, activate genes
involved in cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis. Strong efforts have been
made during recent years to characterize Smad-mediated transcriptional processes 
and to identify those TGFbeta-regulated transcription factors that control gene
expression independent of the Smads. These studies have led to the identification
of a novel family of TGFbeta-inducible Sp1/KLF-(Krüppel-like factors) like
transcription factors (KLF10 and KLF11) which play remarkable roles in TGFbeta
mediated cell growth control and differentiation. In this article, the current
knowledge on the peculiar roles of Sp1/KLF-like proteins in Smad dependent and
-independent gene regulation initiated by TGFbeta, are summarized.

PMID: 18630508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Sep;93(9):3644-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0546. Epub
2008 Jul 1.

Association analysis of Krüppel-like factor 11 variants with type 2 diabetes in
Pima Indians.

Ma L(1), Hanson RL, Que LN, Mack JL, Franks PW, Infante AM, Kobes S, Bogardus C, 
Baier LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Molecular Genetics Section, Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical
Research Branch, National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases,
NIH, Phoenix, Arizona 85004, USA.

CONTEXT: Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11) is a transcription factor of the zinc
finger domain family that has been shown to regulate expression of the insulin
gene. An initial study reported that a KLF11 variant predicting a Q62R was
associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in French Caucasians; however, subsequent
studies have failed to identify an association between this variant and T2D in
subjects from a similar Northern-European ancestry.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to determine whether the Q62R or other variants within KLF11
were associated with T2D in Pima Indians, a population with an extremely high
prevalence of this disease.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND SUBJECTS: KLF11 was sequenced in 24 Pima Indians to identify
potentially novel variants. There were 18 variants genotyped in a family-based
sample of 1337 Pima Indians to analyze the linkage disequilibrium pattern of this
gene and identify representative variants. Four representative variants were
further genotyped in a population-based sample of 3501 full-heritage Pima Indians
for association analyses. Among these subjects, 413 had undergone metabolic
studies when they were nondiabetic to measure traits that predict T2D.
RESULTS: Neither the Q62R nor any other common variant in KLF11 was associated
with T2D in the Pima population. In addition, no variant was associated with
insulin secretion or insulin-stimulated glucose disposal rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Common variation in KLF11 variation does not appear to influence the
population-based risk for developing T2D among full-heritage Pima Indians. Thus, 
KLF11 is unlikely to play a major role in the etiology of T2D among this Native
American population.

PMCID: PMC2729234
PMID: 18593768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Aug;93(8):3128-35. doi: 10.1210/jc.2007-2504. Epub 
2008 May 27.

Genetic analysis of Kruppel-like zinc finger 11 variants in 5864 Danish
individuals: potential effect on insulin resistance and modified signal
transducer and activator of transcription-3 binding by promoter variant -1659G>C.

Gutiérrez-Aguilar R(1), Froguel P, Hamid YH, Benmezroua Y, Jørgensen T,
Borch-Johnsen K, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Neve B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unit Mixte de Recherche
8090-Institute of Biology, Lille, France.

CONTEXT: The transcription factor Krüppel-like zinc finger 11 (KLF11) has been
suggested to contribute to genetic risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Our previous
results showed that four KLF11 variants, in strong linkage disequilibrium (LD
block including +185 A>G/Gln62Arg and -1659 G>C) were associated with T2D in a
north European case-control study. Here we further analyzed these variants for
T2D association in a general Danish population and assess their possible effect
on gene function.
METHODS: We genotyped Gln62Arg variant, representative for the LD block, in 5864 
subjects of the INTER99 study to assess association to T2D and glucose
metabolism-related quantitative traits. We studied effects of LD-block variants
on KLF11 function and in particular, the effect of -1659G>C on transcriptional
regulation of KLF11 using EMSA, chromatin immunoprecipitation, gene reporter
assays, and small interfering RNA transfection.
RESULTS: We could not confirm T2D association of the KLF11 LD block, however, in 
glucose-tolerant subjects; it was significantly associated with higher fasting
serum insulin and C-peptide levels and increased homeostasis model assessment
insulin resistance indexes (P = 0.00004, P = 0.006, and P = 0.00002,
respectively). In addition, binding of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)-3 to the wild-type (-1659G>C) allele stimulated gene
transcription, whereas STAT3 did not bind onto the mutant allele.
CONCLUSIONS: We showed that KLF11 may interfere with glucose homeostasis in a
Danish general population and that STAT3-mediated up-regulation of KLF11
transcription was impaired by the -1659G>C variant. Overall, KLF11 variants may
have a deleterious effect on insulin sensitivity, although that may not be
sufficient to lead to T2D.

PMID: 18505768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Jun;1783(6):1229-36. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2008.03.007. Epub 2008 Mar 25.

Differential regulation of Krüppel-like factor family transcription factor
expression in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes: effects of endothelin-1, oxidative
stress and cytokines.

Cullingford TE(1), Butler MJ, Marshall AK, Tham el L, Sugden PH, Clerk A.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute (NHLI) Division, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, Flowers Building (4th Floor), Armstrong Road, London SW7
2AZ, UK.

Krüppel-like transcription factors (Klfs) modulate fundamental cell processes.
Cardiac myocytes are terminally-differentiated, but hypertrophy in response to
stimuli such as endothelin-1. H2O2 or cytokines promote myocyte apoptosis.
Microarray studies of neonatal rat myocytes identified several Klfs as
endothelin-1-responsive genes. We used quantitative PCR for further analysis of
Klf expression in neonatal rat myocytes. In response to endothelin-1, Klf2 mRNA
expression was rapidly increased ( approximately 9-fold; 15-30 min) with later
increases in expression of Klf4 and Klf6 ( approximately 5-fold; 30-60 min). All 
were regulated as immediate early genes (cycloheximide did not inhibit the
increases in expression). Klf5 expression was increased at 1-2 h ( approximately 
13-fold) as a second phase response (cycloheximide inhibited the increase). These
increases were transient and attenuated by U0126. H2O2 increased expression of
Klf2, Klf4 and Klf6, but interleukin-1beta or tumor necrosis factor alpha
downregulated Klf2 expression with no effect on Klf4 or Klf6. Of the Klfs which
repress transcription, endothelin-1 rapidly downregulated expression of Klf3,
Klf11 and Klf15. The dynamic regulation of expression of multiple Klf family
members in cardiac myocytes suggests that, as a family, they are actively
involved in regulating phenotypic responses (hypertrophy and apoptosis) to
extracellular stimuli.

PMCID: PMC2396231
PMID: 18406357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Diabet Med. 2008 Jan;25(1):19-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2007.02315.x.

The association of genetic variants in Krüppel-like factor 11 and Type 2 diabetes
in the Japanese population.

Tanahashi T(1), Shinohara K, Keshavarz P, Yamaguchi Y, Miyawaki K, Kunika K,
Moritani M, Nakamura N, Yoshikawa T, Shiota H, Inoue H, Itakura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Information, Institute for Genome Research, University of 
Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan. tana@genome.tokushima-u.ac.jp

AIMS: Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11) is a transcriptional factor of the zinc
finger domain family that regulates the expression of insulin. In North European 
populations, its common functional variant Q62R (rs35927125) is a strong genetic 
factor for Type 2 diabetes (P = 0.00033, odds ratio for G allele = 1.29, 95% CI
1.12-1.49). We examined the contribution of KLF11 variants to the susceptibility 
to Type 2 diabetes in a Japanese population.
METHODS: By re-sequencing Japanese individuals (n = 24, partly 96), we screened
all four exons, exon/intron boundaries and flanking regions of KLF11. Verified
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 731 initial samples (369
control and 362 case subjects). Subsequently, we tested for association in 1087
samples (524 control and 563 case subjects), which were collected in different
districts of Japan from the initial samples.
RESULTS: We identified eight variants, including a novel A/C variant on intron 3,
but no mis-sense mutations. In an association study, we failed to find any
significant result of SNPs (minor allele frequency 8.2-46.2%) after correcting
for multiple testing. Similarly, no haplotypes were associated with Type 2
diabetes. It is notable that the G allele in rs35927125 was completely absent in 
1818 Japanese individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants in KLF11 are unlikely to have a major effect of
Type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population, although they were significantly
associated in North European populations. These observations might help to
determine the role of KLF11 variants in Type 2 diabetes in different populations.

PMCID: PMC3228237
PMID: 18199129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Jun 1;104(3):850-61. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21669.

Tieg3/Klf11 induces apoptosis in OLI-neu cells and enhances the TGF-beta
signaling pathway by transcriptional repression of Smad7.

Gohla G(1), Krieglstein K, Spittau B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy, Center of Anatomy, Georg-August-University of
Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany.

TGF-beta signaling is indispensible for development of the nervous system since
it regulates ontogenetic cell death. The recently identified TGF-beta-inducible
zinc finger protein Tieg3/Klf11 belongs to the family of Sp1/Klf-like
transcription factors and shares all structural and functional features with
other Tieg proteins. Using the established TGF-beta-responsive oligodendroglial
cell line OLI-neu, we analyzed the role of Tieg3/Klf11 in TGF-beta signaling. In 
this report, we show that Tieg3/Klf 11 mimics TGF-beta effects by inducing
apoptotic cell death accompanied by activation of caspase-3. Moreover, we
demonstrate that Tieg3/Klf11 enhances TGF-beta signaling by transcriptional
repression of the inhibitory Smad7 and, thereby, disrupts the negative feedback
loop of the TGF-beta signaling pathway. Loss of the N-terminal repression domains
of Tieg3/Klf11 abrogates the pro-apoptotic nature of this transcription factor
and abolishes the enhancement of Smad-mediated TGF-beta responses. In conclusion,
we provide evidence that the recently identified transcription factor Tieg3/Klf11
is a downstream mediator of TGF-beta-induced apoptosis in the oligodendroglial
cell line OLI-neu. Since other signaling molecules are able to initiate
transcription of members of the Tieg family, the ability of Tieg3/Klf11 to
modulate TGF-beta signaling by transcriptional inhibition of Smad7 might be an
important clue for the understanding of the crosstalk between different signaling
pathways.

PMID: 18189266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Diabetes Metab. 2007 Nov;33(5):372-8. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Minor contribution of SMAD7 and KLF10 variants to genetic susceptibility of type 
2 diabetes.

Gutierrez-Aguilar R(1), Benmezroua Y, Balkau B, Marre M, Helbecque N, Charpentier
G, Polychronakos C, Sladek R, Froguel P, Neve B.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR8090, Institute of Biologie, Institut Pasteur de Lille and Université
de Lille 2, Lille, France.

BACKGROUND: Transgenic mice over-expressing SMAD7 in pancreatic beta-cells
develop type 2 diabetes (T2D). The expression of SMAD7 is affected by KLF11,
which contains gene variants that have previously been shown to be involved in
genetic susceptibility to T2D, and by the highly homologous KLF10. This study
aims to assess the genetic contribution of SMAD7 and KLF10 gene variants to T2D
susceptibility in the French population.
METHODS: We screened both genes to identify rare and frequent variants by direct 
sequencing and then genotyped these variants. Six frequent variants of SMAD7 and 
six of KLF10 were analyzed in 349 T2D patients and 349 normoglycaemic adult
subjects. Variants with statistically significant differences in allele and/or
genotype distribution were further analyzed in a population sample of 1.712 T2D
patients and 1.072 normoglycaemic subjects.
RESULTS: Two variants showed a significant association under a recessive model:
The intronic SMAD7 IVS2 -21 had an odds ratio of 0.62 (P=0.007, 95% CI=0.44-0.88;
P=0.034 when adjusting for age, sex and BMI by logistic regression), and the
KLF10 3'UTR +1002 variant had an Odds Ratio of 0.81 (P=0.009, 95% CI=0.69-0.95;
P=0.042 when adjusting for age, sex and BMI).
CONCLUSION: Although the observed association of SMAD7 and KLF10 gene variants
with T2D is modest, they may weakly contribute to a particular genetic background
that increases the susceptibility to development of T2D.

PMID: 17931948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Oct 15;102(3):539-48.

Role of TIEG1 in biological processes and disease states.

Subramaniam M(1), Hawse JR, Johnsen SA, Spelsberg TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

A novel TGFbeta Inducible Early Gene-1 (TIEG1) was discovered in human osteoblast
(OB) cells by our laboratory. Over the past decade, a handful of laboratories
have revealed a multitude of organismic, cellular, and molecular functions of
this gene. TIEG1 is now classified as a member of the 3 zinc finger family of
Krüppel-like transcription factors (KLF10). Other closely related factors [TIEG2 
(KLF11) and TIEG3/TIEG2b] have been reported and are briefly compared. As
described in this review, TIEG1 is shown to play a role in regulating estrogen
and TGFbeta actions, the latter through the Smad signaling pathway. In both
cases, TIEG1 acts as an inducer or repressor of gene transcription to enhance the
TGFbeta/Smad pathway, as well at other signaling pathways, to regulate cell
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. This review outlines TIEG1's
molecular functions and roles in skeletal disease (osteopenia/osteoporosis),
heart disease (hypertrophic cardiomyopathy), and cancer (breast and prostate).

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17729309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Diabetologia. 2007 Jul;50(7):1433-41. Epub 2007 May 4.

Human Krüppel-like factor 11 inhibits human proinsulin promoter activity in
pancreatic beta cells.

Niu X(1), Perakakis N, Laubner K, Limbert C, Stahl T, Brendel MD, Bretzel RG,
Seufert J, Päth G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory B9, Division of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Department of
Internal Medicine II, University Hospital of Freiburg, 79106, Freiburg, Germany.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2007 Sep;50(9):2031.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11; TIEG2), a pancreas-enriched
Sp1-like transcription factor, is a known negative regulator of pancreatic
exocrine cell growth. A recent study indicated KLF11-induced activation of the
human proinsulin promoter (hInsP).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We investigated the functional role of KLF11 in pancreatic
beta cells.
RESULTS: Endogenous KLF11 mRNA expression was found in whole rat pancreas, human 
pancreatic islets and INS-1E beta cells and was profoundly reduced by high
glucose in INS-1E. Cotransfections of INS-1E and beta-TC3 beta cells with a human
(h)KLF11 expression plasmid and an hInsP-driven reporter plasmid resulted in a
substantial dose-dependent and glucose-independent inhibition of proinsulin
promoter activity. 5'-deletion of hInsP demonstrated that hKLF11 acts via DNA
sequences upstream of -173 and requires the beta cell-specific transcription
machinery, since hKLF11-mediated inhibition of promoter activity was abolished in
HEK293 cells. Besides a previously described GC box, we further identified a
CACCC box within the hInsP, both putative KLF11-binding motifs. Electrophoretic
mobility shift analysis (EMSA) verified binding of in vitro translated hKLF11 to 
the GC box, but neither hKLF11-induced inhibition nor basal hInsP activity was
altered by mutation or 5'-deletion of the GC box. In contrast, CACCC box mutation
substantially reduced basal promoter activity and partially diminished hKLF11
inhibition, although binding of in vitro translated hKLF11 to the CACCC box could
not be verified by EMSA.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In rodent beta cell lines, we demonstrate
hKLF11overexpression-mediated inhibition [corrected] of human proinsulin gene
expression and characterise a prominent role for the CACCC box in maintaining
basal proinsulin promoter activity.

PMID: 17479246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2007 Jul;114(7):867-75. Epub 2007 Feb 19.

Human TIEG2/KLF11 induces oligodendroglial cell death by downregulation of Bcl-XL
expression.

Wang Z(1), Spittau B, Behrendt M, Peters B, Krieglstein K.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Anatomy, Department of Neuroanatomy, University of Goettingen,
Goettingen, Germany.

TGF-beta-induced apoptosis is essential for embryonic development and
mainteanance of adult tissues. Impairment of the apoptotic pathway, regulated by 
TGF-beta, plays a center role in tumorigenesis and manifestations of different
diseases. TIEG2/KLF11 is a recently identified human TGF-beta-inducible zinc
finger protein belonging to the family of Sp1/KLF-like transcription factors. In 
human and murine tissues it has been shown that TIEG1 and TIEG2 induce apoptosis 
and inhibit cell growth. Since TGF-beta and Tieg1 are able to induce apoptosis in
the oligodendroglial cell line OLI-neu, we analysed the ability of TIEG2 to mimic
the effects observed after treatment with TGF-beta and overexpression of Tieg1.
Herein we report that TIEG2 induces Caspase3-dependent apoptosis in murine
OLI-neu cells. Furthermore, we could demonstrate that TIEG2 decreases the levels 
of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-X(L) and inhibits transcription driven by the
Bcl-X(L) promoter. These data suggest that TIEG2 serves as a downstream mediator 
of TGF-beta, bridging TGF-beta-dependent signaling to the intracellular pathway
of apoptosis.

PMID: 17308981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Jun 1;101(3):712-22.

Functional domains of the TGF-beta-inducible transcription factor Tieg3 and
detection of two putative nuclear localization signals within the zinc finger
DNA-binding domain.

Spittau B(1), Wang Z, Boinska D, Krieglstein K.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Anatomy, Department of Neuroanatomy, University of Göttingen,
Kreuzbergring, Germany. bspitta@gwdg.de

The recently identified TGF-beta-inducible early gene 3 (Tieg3) belongs to the
gene family of Sp1/Klf-like transcription factors and is upregulated immediately 
after TGF-beta treatment. To explore the molecular mechanisms of Tieg3-mediated
transcriptional control, GAL4-based luciferase assays were performed in order to 
determine regulatory domains within the Tieg3 protein. Using EGFP-fusion
proteins, we monitored the intracellular localization and mapped putative nuclear
localization signals (NLS). We provide evidence that the amino-terminus of Tieg3 
is essential to repress the transcription and that the loss of the mSin3A
interacting domain (SID) disrupts the repressive effects of Tieg3 in the
oligodendroglial cell line OLI-neu. Herein we also demonstrate that the zinc
finger containing DNA-binding domain (DBD) alone is able to activate the
transcription of a reporter gene. Sequence analysis of the zinc finger region
revealed no similarities to known activation domains. Analysis of the subcellular
localization disclosed Tieg3 as a nuclear protein. Further, we identified the DBD
as being essential for the nuclear localization of Tieg3. We detected two closely
located putative bipartite NLS within the second and third zinc finger, which are
conserved among the members of the Tieg family of proteins. Together these
results may help to increase the understanding of Tieg3-mediated transcriptional 
control and to characterize this TGF-beta-induced Sp1/Klf-like transcription
factor.

PMID: 17252542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Mar 1;100(4):1045-55.

The transcription factor KLF11 can induce gamma-globin gene expression in the
setting of in vivo adult erythropoiesis.

Emery DW(1), Gavriilidis G, Asano H, Stamatoyannopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics,
Seattle, WA 98195-7720, USA. demery@u.washington.edu

Previous studies in a fetal erythroid cell line demonstrated that the
transcription factor, Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11), could specifically induce
transcription from a gamma-globin gene promoter, and that this induction was
mediated through a specific canonical CACCC cis-DNA binding motif. We report here
that ectopic expression of KLF11 can also induce fetal gamma-globin gene
expression in the setting of adult erythropoiesis both in vitro and in vivo.
Studies in an adult-stage murine erythroleukemia (MEL) cell line demonstrated
that retrovirus vector-mediated transduction of KLF11 could increase both the
amount of expression from a basally active, but not from a overtly silenced,
recombinant gamma-globin transgene, as well as the frequency of cells expressing 
this transgene. A similar pattern of gamma-globin gene induction was also
observed both in vitro and in vivo following KLF11 transduction of bone marrow
from mice containing a basally active gamma-globin transgene. These studies
provide the first evidence that ectopic expression of a transcription factor can 
induce gamma-globin gene expression in vivo during adult erythropoiesis.

PMID: 17131378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Diabetes. 2006 Dec;55(12):3620-4.

The Krüppel-like factor 11 (KLF11) Q62R polymorphism is not associated with type 
2 diabetes in 8,676 people.

Florez JC(1), Saxena R, Winckler W, Burtt NP, Almgren P, Bengtsson Boström K,
Tuomi T, Gaudet D, Ardlie KG, Daly MJ, Altshuler D, Hirschhorn JN, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Simches Research Building, CPZN 6820, Diabetes Unit/Center for Human Genetic
Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
jcflorez@partners.org

Krüppel-like factor 11 is a pancreatic transcription factor whose activity
induces the insulin gene. A common glutamine-to-arginine change at codon 62
(Q62R) in its gene KLF11 has been recently associated with type 2 diabetes in two
independent samples. Q62R and two other rare missense variants (A347S and T220M) 
were also shown to affect the function of KLF11 in vitro, and insulin levels were
lower in carriers of the minor allele at Q62R. We therefore examined their impact
on common type 2 diabetes in several family-based and case-control samples of
northern-European ancestry, totaling 8,676 individuals. We did not detect the
rare A347S and T220M variants in our samples. With respect to Q62R, despite >99% 
power to detect an association of the previously published magnitude, Q62R was
not associated with type 2 diabetes (pooled odds ratio 0.97 [95% CI 0.88-1.08], P
= 0.63). In a subset of normoglycemic individuals, we did not observe significant
differences in various insulin traits according to genotype at KLF11 Q62R. We
conclude that the KLF11 A347S and T220M mutations do not contribute to increased 
risk of diabetes in European-derived populations and that the Q62R polymorphism
has, at best, a minor effect on diabetes risk.

PMID: 17130512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Cancer Res. 2006 Nov;4(11):861-72.

The tumor suppressor KLF11 mediates a novel mechanism in transforming growth
factor beta-induced growth inhibition that is inactivated in pancreatic cancer.

Buck A(1), Buchholz M, Wagner M, Adler G, Gress T, Ellenrieder V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Ulm, Germany.

c-myc promoter silencing is a key step in epithelial cell growth inhibition by
transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta). During carcinogenesis, however,
epithelial cells escape from c-myc repression and consequently become refractory 
to TGFbeta-mediated antiproliferation. Here, we assessed the role of the
repressor, KLF11, in TGFbeta-induced growth inhibition in normal epithelial as
well as pancreatic carcinoma cells. Endogenous KLF11 was stably down-regulated by
RNA interference technology, and the functional consequences were studied by
proliferation assays, reporter assays, DNA binding studies, and expression
analyses. Coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pulldown assays
were conducted to define KLF11-Smad3 interaction and U0126 was administered to
examine the effects of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK)-mitogen-activated protein kinase on complex formation and c-myc promoter
binding of KLF11 and Smad3 in pancreatic cancer cells. In TGFbeta-stimulated
normal epithelial cells, nuclear KLF11, in concert with Smad3, binds to and
represses transcription from the core region of the TGFbeta-inhibitory element
(TIE) of the c-myc promoter. Disruption of KLF11-Smad3 interaction or small
interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous KLF11 strongly diminishes
Smad3-TIE promoter binding and repression, and consequently impairs
TGFbeta-mediated growth inhibition. In pancreatic cancer cells with oncogenic Ras
mutations, hyperactive ERK counteracts TGFbeta-induced c-myc repression and
growth inhibition through at least two mechanisms, i.e., via disruption of
KLF11-Smad3 complex formation and through inhibition of KLF11-Smad3 binding to
the TIE element. Together, these results suggest a central role for KLF11 in
TGFbeta-induced c-myc repression and antiproliferation and identifies a novel
mechanism through which ERK signaling antagonizes the tumor suppressor activities
of TGFbeta in pancreatic cancer cells with oncogenic Ras mutations.

PMID: 17114344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2005 Sep-Oct;35(2):227-35.

A functional screen for Krüppel-like factors that regulate the human gamma-globin
gene through the CACCC promoter element.

Zhang P(1), Basu P, Redmond LC, Morris PE, Rupon JW, Ginder GD, Lloyd JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, PO Box 980033,
1101 E. Marshall Street, Richmond, VA 23298-0033, USA.

Krüppel-like factors (KLFs) have been systematically screened as potential
candidates to regulate human gamma-globin gene expression through its CACCC
element. Initially, 21 human proteins that have close sequence similarity to
EKLF/KLF1, a known regulator of the human beta-globin gene, were identified. The 
phylogenetic relationship of these 22 KLF/Sp1 proteins was determined. KLF2/LKLF,
KLF3/BKLF, KLF4/GKLF, KLF5/IKLF, KLF8/BKLF3, KLF11/FKLF, KLF12/AP-2rep and
KLF13/FKLF2 were chosen for functional screening. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR
demonstrated that all eight of these candidates are present in human erythroid
cell lines, and that the expression of the KLF2, 4, 5 and 12 mRNAs changed
significantly upon erythroid differentiation. Each of the eight KLF mRNAs is
expressed in mouse erythroid tissues, throughout development. UV cross-linking
assays suggest that multiple erythroid proteins from human cell lines and chicken
primary cells interact with the gamma-globin CACCC element. In co-transfection
assays in K562 cells, it was demonstrated that KLF2, 5 and 13 positively
regulate, and KLF8 negatively regulates, the gamma-globin gene through the CACCC 
promoter element. The data collectively suggest that multiple KLFs may
participate in the regulation of gamma-globin gene expression and that KLF2, 5, 8
and 13 are prime candidates for further study.

PMID: 16023392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ. 2005 Mar 23;2005(12):nf22.

Beta blocker.

Davenport RJ.

PMID: 15788791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Mar 29;102(13):4807-12. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Role of transcription factor KLF11 and its diabetes-associated gene variants in
pancreatic beta cell function.

Neve B(1), Fernandez-Zapico ME, Ashkenazi-Katalan V, Dina C, Hamid YH, Joly E,
Vaillant E, Benmezroua Y, Durand E, Bakaher N, Delannoy V, Vaxillaire M, Cook T, 
Dallinga-Thie GM, Jansen H, Charles MA, Clément K, Galan P, Hercberg S, Helbecque
N, Charpentier G, Prentki M, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Urrutia R, Melloul D, Froguel 
P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 8090,
Institute Pasteur de Lille, F-59019 Lille, France.

KLF11 (TIEG2) is a pancreas-enriched transcription factor that has elicited
significant attention because of its role as negative regulator of exocrine cell 
growth in vitro and in vivo. However, its functional role in the endocrine
pancreas remains to be established. Here, we report, for the first time, to our
knowledge, the characterization of KLF11 as a glucose-inducible regulator of the 
insulin gene. A combination of random oligonucleotide binding, EMSA, luciferase
reporter, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays shows that KLF11 binds to the 
insulin promoter and regulates its activity in beta cells. Genetic analysis of
the KLF11 gene revealed two rare variants (Ala347Ser and Thr220Met) that
segregate with diabetes in families with early-onset type 2 diabetes, and
significantly impair its transcriptional activity. In addition, analysis of 1,696
type 2 diabetes mellitus and 1,776 normoglycemic subjects show a frequent
polymorphic Gln62Arg variant that significantly associates with type 2 diabetes
mellitus in North European populations (OR = 1.29, P = 0.00033). Moreover, this
variant alters the corepressor mSin3A-binding activity of KLF11, impairs the
activation of the insulin promoter and shows lower levels of insulin expression
in pancreatic beta cells. In addition, subjects carrying the Gln62Arg allele show
decreased plasma insulin after an oral glucose challenge. Interestingly, all
three nonsynonymous KLF11 variants show increased repression of the catalase 1
promoter, suggesting a role in free radical clearance that may render beta cells 
more sensitive to oxidative stress. Thus, both functional and genetic analyses
reveal that KLF11 plays a role in the regulation of pancreatic beta cell
physiology, and its variants may contribute to the development of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC554843
PMID: 15774581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2005 Jan-Feb;34(1):53-9.

Functional study of transcription factor KLF11 by targeted gene inactivation.

Song CZ(1), Gavriilidis G, Asano H, Stamatoyannopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Medical Genetics, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. czsong@u.washington.edu

Sp1/Krüppel-like factor (KLF) family of transcription factors regulates diverse
biological processes including cell growth, differentiation, and development
through modulation of gene expression. This family of factors regulates
transcription positively and negatively by binding to the GC and GT/CACCC boxes
in the promoter through their highly conserved three zinc finger domains.
Although the molecular mechanism of gene regulation by this family of proteins
has been well studied, their exact role in growth and development in vivo remains
largely unknown. KLF11 has been implicated in the regulation of cell growth and
gene expression. To determine the physiological function of KLF11, we generated
KLF11-null mice by gene-targeting technology. Homologous KLF11(-/-) mice were
bred normally and were fertile. Hematopoiesis at all stages of development was
normal in the KLF11(-/-) mice. There was no effect on globin gene expression.
These mice lived as long as the wild-type mice without evident pathological
defects. Thus, despite its cell growth inhibition and transcriptional regulation 
functions observed when transiently or stably expressed in cultured cells in
vitro, the results from genetic knockout suggest that KLF11 is not absolutely
required for hematopoiesis, growth, and development.

PMCID: PMC2808415
PMID: 15607700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mol Vis. 2004 Nov 23;10:901-9.

Cell and tissue specific expression of human Krüppel-like transcription factors
in human ocular surface.

Chiambaretta F(1), De Graeve F, Turet G, Marceau G, Gain P, Dastugue B, Rigal D, 
Sapin V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Hospital, CHU, Clermont-Ferrand,
France.

PURPOSE: The ocular surface, composed of the conjunctiva and the cornea, is
essential for vision. Its integrity depends on numerous molecular and cellular
processes such as proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, adhesion, and
extracellular matrix homeostasis, whose deregulation can induce ophthalmological 
pathologies. The Krüppel-like transcription factors (KLFs) family is made up of
15 C2H2 zinc-finger proteins involved in vertebrate development and able to
control cell proliferation, growth, and differentiation. In order to better
define their respective roles in the human ocular surface, we decided to
determine their pattern of expression in ocular tissues. We then focused on the
expression of KLF4 and some of its target genes to establish KLF4's biological
activities in human ocular surface.
METHODS: Firstly, total mRNA was extracted from human total cornea, conjunctiva, 
corneal epithelial cells (primary culture and established cell line), corneal
keratocytes (primary culture), corneal endothelial cells (established cell line),
and conjunctival epithelial cells (established cell line) and submitted to RT-PCR
experiments in order to determine the expression patterns of the different KLFs. 
Secondly, KLF4 protein localization was visualized by immunofluorescence assays
at tissue and cell levels. Finally, KLF4 target genes (endoglin, ornithine
decarboxylase) mRNA expression levels were determined by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR, after KLF4 transient transfection in human corneal epithelium (HCE)
cells.
RESULTS: We detected the presence of twelve transcripts of KLFs in the cornea
(KLF2, KLF3, KLF4, KLF5, KLF6, KLF7, KLF8, KLF10, KLF11, KLF12, KLF13, and KLF16)
and eight in the conjunctiva (KLF2, KLF3, KLF4, KLF6, KLF7, KLF10, KLF11, and
KLF12). Under our conditions, the transcripts encoding KLF1 and KLF9 were never
detected. Specific expression patterns of each KLF were also determined for the
major cellular components of the human cornea and conjunctiva. KLF4
immunolocalization assays indicated its presence in both the cytoplasmic and
nuclear compartments of conjunctival and corneal cells. KLF4 transient
overexpression in HCE cells down regulated both endoglin and ODC mRNA levels.
CONCLUSIONS: For the first time, we established the presence of a KLF network in 
the human ocular surface and illustrated the conservation of KLF4's biological
properties in a corneal derived epithelial cell line.

PMID: 15570219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 21;280(3):1901-10. Epub 2004 Nov 5.

KLF11-mediated repression antagonizes Sp1/sterol-responsive element-binding
protein-induced transcriptional activation of caveolin-1 in response to
cholesterol signaling.

Cao S(1), Fernandez-Zapico ME, Jin D, Puri V, Cook TA, Lerman LO, Zhu XY, Urrutia
R, Shah V.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Research Unit and Tumor Biology Program, Mayo Clinic College 
of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. cao.sheng@mayo.edu

Cholesterol is a potent regulator of gene expression via a canonical pathway
co-regulated by SREBP and Sp1. Here we establish the caveolin-1 gene promoter as 
a cell type-specific model for SREBP/Sp1 regulation whereby lipoprotein
cholesterol depletion activates caveolin-1 transcription in endothelial type
cells, but not in fibroblasts, both in vitro and in vivo. By extending this
model, we describe a novel pathway distinct from the prototypical SREBP/Sp1
regulatory loop involving the Sp1-like protein, KLF11. Through a combination of
RNA interference, chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, electrophoretic mobility 
shift assays, and reporter assays, we demonstrate that in the presence of
cholesterol, KLF11 acts as a dominant repressor of the caveolin-1 gene.
Mechanistically, cholesterol depletion results in displacement of KLF11 from an
Sp1 site flanking an SRE, indicating that activation by SREBP/Sp1 requires
antagonism of KLF11 repression. The displacement of KLF11 results from both a
down-regulation of its expression and competition by Sp1 for DNA binding.
Therefore, these studies identify a novel pathway whereby KLF11 repression is
coordinated with Sp1/SREBP activation of cholesterol-dependent gene expression in
a cell type-specific manner and outline the mechanisms by which these functions
are achieved.

PMID: 15531587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Gastroenterology. 2004 Aug;127(2):607-20.

KLF11 mediates a critical mechanism in TGF-beta signaling that is inactivated by 
Erk-MAPK in pancreatic cancer cells.

Ellenrieder V(1), Buck A, Harth A, Jungert K, Buchholz M, Adler G, Urrutia R,
Gress TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Ulm, Germany.
volker.ellenrieder@medizin.uni-ulm.de

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Smad-regulated transcription plays a central role in
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta-induced cell growth inhibition and tumor
suppression. Like the Smads, KLF11 is an early response transcription factor that
mediates TGF-beta-induced growth inhibition in untransformed epithelial cells.
Here, we investigated the functional implications of KLF11 in TGF-beta signaling 
and transcription in normal epithelial as well as pancreatic cancer cells.
METHODS: The effects of KLF11 on TGF-beta signaling and transcription were
examined on the levels of reporter transactivation, Smad2 phosphorylation, and
expression of endogenous TGF-beta-regulated genes. Promoter analysis, real-time
polymerase chain reaction, and coimmunoprecipitation studies were performed to
study KLF11-induced and mSin3A corepressor-mediated repression of Smad7.
Erk-induced KLF11 phosphorylation was examined in vitro and in vivo, and its
impact on KLF11-mSin3A-mediated Smad7 repression was verified in pancreatic
cancer cells using site-directed mutagenesis.
RESULTS: KLF11 potentiates TGF-beta signaling by terminating the inhibitory Smad7
loop. Mechanistically, KLF11 represses TGF-beta-induced transcription from the
Smad7 promoter by recruiting mSin3a via GC-rich sites. This function is inhibited
in pancreatic cancer cells with oncogenic Ras mutations, in which
Erk/mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphorylates KLF11, leading to disruption 
of KLF11-mSin3a interaction. Expression of an Erk-insensitive KLF11 mutant
restores both mSin3a binding and Smad7 repression and results in enhanced
TGF-beta signaling in pancreatic cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results define a novel mechanism in TGF-beta-regulated gene
expression. KLF11 potentiates Smad-signaling activity in normal epithelial cells 
through termination of the negative feedback loop imposed by Smad7. The fact that
this function of KLF11 is inhibited by oncogenic Erk/mitogen-activated protein
kinase in pancreatic cancer cells emphasizes the importance of this mechanism for
oncogenesis.

PMID: 15300592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 14;279(20):21021-8. Epub 2004 Mar 15.

Dual functions of transcription factors, transforming growth
factor-beta-inducible early gene (TIEG)2 and Sp3, are mediated by CACCC element
and Sp1 sites of human monoamine oxidase (MAO) B gene.

Ou XM(1), Chen K, Shih JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Southern California, 1985 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Monoamine oxidases (MAO) A and B catalyze the oxidative deamination of many
biogenic and dietary amines. Abnormal expression of MAO has been implicated in
several psychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders. Human MAO B core promoter
(-246 to -99 region) consists of CACCC element flanked by two clusters of
overlapping Sp1 sites. Here, we show that cotransfection with transforming growth
factor (TGF)-beta-inducible early gene (TIEG)2 increased MAO B gene expression at
promoter, mRNA, protein, and catalytic activity levels in both SH-SY5Y and HepG2 
cells. Mutation of the CACCC element increased the MAO B promoter activity, and
cotransfection with TIEG2 further increased the promoter activity, suggesting
that CACCC was a repressor element. This increase was reduced when the proximal
Sp1 overlapping sites was mutated. Similar interactions were found with Sp3.
These results showed that TIEG2 and Sp3 were repressors at the CACCC element but 
were activators at proximal Sp1 overlapping sites of MAO B. Gel-shift and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that TIEG2 and Sp3 bound directly to 
CACCC element and the proximal Sp1 sites in both synthetic oligonucleotides and
natural MAO B core promoter. TIEG2 had a higher affinity to Sp1 sites than CACCC 
element, whereas Sp3 had an equal affinity to both elements. Thus, TIEG2 was an
activator, but Sp3 had no effect on MAO B gene expression. This study provides
new insights into MAO B gene expression and illustrates the complexity of gene
regulation.

PMID: 15024015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Gene. 2004 Jan 21;325:25-34.

Gene structure and evolution of Tieg3, a new member of the Tieg family of
proteins.

Wang Z(1), Peters B, Klussmann S, Bender H, Herb A, Krieglstein K.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Anatomy, Department of Neuroanatomy, University of Goettingen,
Kreuzbergring 36, 37075 Goettingen, Germany.

TGF beta-inducible immediate early gene, Tieg, belongs to the superfamily of
Sp1-like transcription factors containing three C(2)H(2)-zinc finger DNA binding 
motifs close to the C-terminus. So far, Tieg1 and Tieg2 have been identified in
human and mouse. We identified Tieg3, a new member of the Tieg protein family by 
screening a mouse cDNA library. Tieg3 has almost all the known features of the
Tieg protein family: it shares a highly conserved C(2)H(2) zinc finger DNA
binding domain and is 96% identical to Tieg2 and 86% to Tieg1, respectively. In
addition, the three repression domains at the N-terminus, R1, R2 and R3 are
conserved in all the Tiegs. Similar to Tieg1 and Tieg2, Tieg3 mRNA is
up-regulated in response to TGF beta 1 treatment and can perform the Sp1 sites
mediated repression of transcription. A 4 kilobase (kb) long transcript of mouse 
Tieg3 can be detected using Northern-blot analysis. The gene of mouse Tieg3
contains four exons. Due to the amino acid sequence similarity, mouse Tieg2 is
regarded as an orthologue of human Tieg2. However, the mouse Tieg3 gene is
localized in a conserved segment on mouse chromosome 12 corresponding to human
Tieg2 on chromosome 2 with the same gene order. An interesting explanation for
this apparent contradiction might be a homologous recombination leading to loci
exchange between the mouse Tieg3 and Tieg2.

PMID: 14697507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. EMBO J. 2003 Sep 15;22(18):4748-58.

An mSin3A interaction domain links the transcriptional activity of KLF11 with its
role in growth regulation.

Fernandez-Zapico ME(1), Mladek A, Ellenrieder V, Folch-Puy E, Miller L, Urrutia
R.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Research Unit, Saint Mary's Hospital, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
MN 55905, USA.

KLF11 is a biochemical paradigm for a subset of proteins that repress
transcription via a Mad1-like mSin3A interacting domain (SID). The biological
role of these proteins and the significance of their biochemical activity,
however, remain to be established. We report that KLF11 is downregulated in human
cancers, inhibits cell growth in vitro and in vivo, and suppresses neoplastic
transformation. Transgenic mice for KLF11 display a downregulation of genes
encoding the oxidative stress scavengers SOD2 and Catalase1. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirm that, indeed, these genes are bonafide targets
of KLF11. KLF11 expression renders cells more sensitive to oxidative drugs, an
effect that is rescued by infection with recombinant adenoviruses expressing SOD2
and Catalase1. KLF11-regulated functions require the Mad1-like SID, indicating
that these target genes involved in these phenomena are regulated via this
corepressor system. These results demonstrate that SID-containing KLF repressor
proteins can inhibit cell growth and neoplastic transformation, and outline for
the first time cellular and molecular mechanisms by which these functions may be 
achieved.

PMCID: PMC212736
PMID: 12970187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. FEBS Lett. 2003 Jul 31;548(1-3):108-12.

Differential binding of Sin3 interacting repressor domains to the PAH2 domain of 
Sin3A.

Pang YP(1), Kumar GA, Zhang JS, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo
Foundation for Medical Education and Research, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN
55905, USA. pang@mayo.edu

The Sin3 interacting domain (SID), originally described in the Mad family of
repressors, is a novel transcriptional repressor domain that binds the PAH2
domain of corepressors Sin3A and Sin3B with high affinities. The conserved
SID-like domains are reportedly present in five KLF proteins. However, the KLF
SIDs and the Mad SIDs can be classified into two subtypes according to sequence
similarity. Here, we report the finding from computational and experimental
studies that the two subtypes of SID domains bind differentially to Sin3A. This
finding offers insights into a mechanism of cell growth regulation by
interactions of different subtypes of SID-containing repressor proteins with
Sin3. It also provides the structural basis for developing selective modulators
of Sin3.

PMID: 12885416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Aug;21(15):5041-9.

A conserved alpha-helical motif mediates the interaction of Sp1-like
transcriptional repressors with the corepressor mSin3A.

Zhang JS(1), Moncrieffe MC, Kaczynski J, Ellenrieder V, Prendergast FG, Urrutia
R.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Research Unit, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55901, USA.

Sp1-like proteins are defined by three highly homologous C(2)H(2) zinc finger
motifs that bind GC-rich sequences found in the promoters of a large number of
genes essential for mammalian cell homeostasis. Here we report that TIEG2, a
transforming growth factor beta-inducible Sp1-like protein with antiproliferative
functions, represses transcription through recruitment of the mSin3A-histone
deacetylase complex. The interaction of TIEG2 with mSin3A is mediated by an
alpha-helical repression motif (alpha-HRM) located within the repression domain
(R1) of TIEG2. This alpha-HRM specifically associates with the second paired
amphipathic helix (PAH2) domain of mSin3A. Mutations in the TIEG2 alpha-HRM
domain that disrupt its helical structure abolish its ability to both bind mSin3A
and repress transcription. Interestingly, the alpha-HRM is conserved in both the 
TIEG (TIEG1 and TIEG2) and BTEB (BTEB1, BTEB3, and BTEB4) subfamilies of Sp1-like
proteins. The alpha-HRM from these proteins also mediates direct interaction with
mSin3A and represses transcription. Surprisingly, we found that the alpha-HRM of 
the Sp1-like proteins characterized here exhibits structural and functional
resemblance to the Sin3A-interacting domain previously described for the basic
helix-loop-helix protein Mad1. Thus, our study defines a mechanism of
transcriptional repression via the interactions of the alpha-HRM with the
Sin3-histone deacetylase complex that is utilized by at least five Sp1-like
transcriptional factors. More importantly, we demonstrate that a helical
repression motif which mediates Sin3 interaction is not an exclusive structural
and functional characteristic of the Mad1 subfamily but rather has a wider
functional impact on transcriptional repression than previously demonstrated.

PMCID: PMC87230
PMID: 11438660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Genomics. 2000 Nov 15;70(1):93-101.

Identification of KLF13 and KLF14 (SP6), novel members of the SP/XKLF
transcription factor family.

Scohy S(1), Gabant P, Van Reeth T, Hertveldt V, Drèze PL, Van Vooren P, Rivière
M, Szpirer J, Szpirer C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Libre de Bruxelles, IBMM, Rue Professeurs Jeener & Brachet, 12,
Gosselies, B-6041, Belgium.

Using the sequence of the SP1 zinc-finger DNA-binding domain as a probe to screen
a mouse EST database, we identified two novel members of the SP/XKLF
transcription factor family, KLF13 and KLF14. The mouse Klf13 cDNA (1310 bp in
length) contains a single open reading frame of 288 amino acids with a
DNA-binding domain closely related to that of the human RFLAT-1 protein and a
putative transactivator N-terminal domain rich in proline and alanine residues.
The mouse Klf13 gene seems to be the homologue of the human RFLAT1 gene. The
mouse Klf14 sequence is homologous to a human genomic sequence from chromosome 17
that is believed to code for a protein with three zinc fingers at the end of its 
C-terminal domain. Using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, we
showed ubiquitous expression of Klf13 and Klf14 in adult mice. A third member of 
this family was also identified in a human EST database; this sequence was found 
to be identical to KLF11 (TIEG2), recently identified by Cook et al. (1998, J.
Biol. Chem. 273: 25929-25936). The corresponding mouse cDNA was isolated and
sequenced. The three genes were localized in the human and the rat: chromosomes
15 (human KLF13), 17q21.3-q22 (human KLF14; HGMW-approved symbol SP6), and 2p25
(human KLF11) and chromosomes 1q31-q32 (rat Klf13), 10q31-q32.1 (rat Klf14)
(SP6), and 6q16-q21 (rat Klf11).

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11087666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 May;19(5):3571-9.

FKLF, a novel Krüppel-like factor that activates human embryonic and fetal
beta-like globin genes.

Asano H(1), Li XS, Stamatoyannopoulos G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

A cDNA encoding a novel Krüppel-type zinc finger protein, FKLF, was cloned from
fetal globin-expressing human fetal erythroid cells. The deduced polypeptide
sequence composed of 512 amino acids revealed that, like Sp1 and EKLF, FKLF has
three contiguous zinc fingers at the near carboxyl-terminal end. A long
amino-terminal domain is characterized by the presence of two acidic and two
proline-rich regions. Reverse transcription (RT)-PCR assays using various cell
lines demonstrated that the FKLF mRNA is expressed predominantly in erythroid
cells. FKLF message is detectable by RT-PCR in fetal liver but not in adult bone 
marrow cells. As predicted from its structural features, FKLF is a
transcriptional activator. In luciferase assays FKLF activated the gamma- and
epsilon-globin gene promoters, and, to a much lower degree, the beta-globin
promoter. Studies of HS2-gamma gene reporter constructs carrying CACCC box
deletions revealed that the CACCC box sequence of the gamma gene promoter
mediates the activation of the gamma gene by FKLF. Other erythroid promoters
(GATA-1, glycophorin B, ferrochelatase, porphobilinogen deaminase, and
5-aminolevulinate synthase) containing CACCC elements or GC-rich potential
Sp1-binding sites were activated minimally, if at all, by FKLF, indicating that
FKLF is not a general activator of genes carrying the CACCC motifs. Transfection 
of K562 cells with FKLF cDNA enhanced the expression of the endogenous epsilon-
and gamma-globin genes, suggesting an in vivo role of FKLF in fetal and embryonic
globin gene expression. Our results indicate that the protein potentially encoded
by the FKLF cDNA acts as a transcriptional activator of embryonic and fetal
beta-like globin genes.

PMCID: PMC84149
PMID: 10207080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 2;273(40):25929-36.

Molecular cloning and characterization of TIEG2 reveals a new subfamily of
transforming growth factor-beta-inducible Sp1-like zinc finger-encoding genes
involved in the regulation of cell growth.

Cook T(1), Gebelein B, Mesa K, Mladek A, Urrutia R.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Research Unit, Saint Marys Hospital, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Sp1-like zinc finger transcription factors are involved in the regulation of cell
growth and differentiation. Recent evidence demonstrating that mammalian cells
express novel, yet uncharacterized, Sp1-like proteins has stimulated a search for
new members of this family. We and others have recently reported that the
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta-regulated gene TIEG encodes a new Sp1-like 
protein that inhibits cell growth in cultured cells. Here we report the
identification, nuclear localization, DNA binding activity, transcriptional
repression activity, and growth inhibitory effects of TIEG2, a novel
TGF-beta-inducible gene related to TIEG. TIEG2 is ubiquitously expressed in human
tissues, with an enrichment in pancreas and muscle. TIEG2 shares 91% homology
with TIEG1 within the zinc finger region and 44% homology within the N terminus. 
Biochemical characterization reveals that TIEG2 is a nuclear protein, which, as
predicted from the primary structure, specifically binds to an Sp1-like DNA
sequence in vitro and can repress a promoter containing Sp1-like binding sites in
transfected Chinese hamster ovary epithelial cells. Furthermore, functional
studies using [3H]thymidine uptake and MTS (3-(4,
3-dimethyltiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-su lfophenyl)-2
H-tetrazolium) assays demonstrate that the overexpression of TIEG2 in Chinese
hamster ovary cells inhibits cell proliferation. Thus, TIEG2, together with
TIEG1, defines a new subfamily of TGF-beta-inducible Sp1-like proteins involved
in the regulation of cell growth.

PMID: 9748269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


