
1. Oncol Lett. 2016 Jan;11(1):624-632. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Nine susceptibility loci for hepatitis B virus-related hepatocellular carcinoma
identified by a pilot two-stage genome-wide association study.

Qu LS(1), Jin F(2), Guo YM(3), Liu TT(3), Xue RY(3), Huang XW(4), Xu M(4), Chen
TY(5), Ni ZP(5), Shen XZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai 
Xuhui Central Hospital, Shanghai 200032, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, P.R.
China. (4)Department of Liver Surgery, Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, P.R. China. (5)Department of Liver
Surgery, Qidong Liver Cancer Institute, Qidong, Jiangsu 226200, P.R. China.

Previous studies have indicated that complex interactions among viral,
environmental and genetic factors lead to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To
identify susceptibility alleles for hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related HCC, the
present study conducted a pilot two-phase genome-wide association study (GWAS) in
660 Han Chinese individuals. In phase 1, a total of 500,447 single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped in 50 HCC cases and 50 controls using
Affymetrix GeneChip 500k Array Set. In phase 2, 1,152 SNPs were selected from
phase 1 and genotyped in 282 cases and 278 controls using the Illumina GoldenGate
platform. The prior probability of HCC in control subjects was assigned at 0.01, 
and false-positive report probability (FPRP) was utilized to evaluate the
statistical significance. In phase 1, one SNP (rs2212522) showed a significant
association with HCC (Pallele=5.23×10(-8); ORallele=4.96; 95% CI, 2.72-9.03). In 
phase 2, among 27 SNPs with unadjusted Pallele<0.05, 9 SNPs were associated with 
HCC based on FPRP criteria (FPRP <0.20). The strongest statistical evidence for
an association signal was with rs2120243 (combined ORallele=1.76; 95% CI,
1.39-2.22; P=2.00×10(-6)), which maps within the fourth intron of VEPH1. The
second strongest statistical evidence for an association was identified for
rs1350171 (combined ORallele=1.66; 95% CI, 1.33-2.07; P=6.48×10(-6)), which maps 
to the region downstream of the FZD4 gene. The other potential susceptibility
genes included PCDH9, PRMT6, LHX1, KIF2B and L3MBTL4. In conclusion, this pilot
two-phase GWAS provides the evidence for the existence of common susceptibility
loci for HCC. These genes involved various signaling pathways, including those
associated with transforming growth factor ß, insulin/phosphoinositide 3 kinase, 
Wnt and epidermal growth factor receptor. These associations must be replicated
and validated in larger studies.

PMCID: PMC4727098
PMID: 26870257  [PubMed]


2. Cancer Genet. 2011 Sep;204(9):516-21. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.09.002.

Genomic profiling in high hyperdiploid acute myeloid leukemia: a retrospective
study of 19 cases.

Veigaard C(1), Nørgaard JM, Kjeldsen E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Aarhus University Hospital, Denmark.

Among patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), the rare group of complex
aberrant karyotypes characterized by high hyperdiploidy (HH) is a subset with
poor prognosis. Because of their rarity, few conventional cytogenetic studies
have specifically addressed these patients. To identify DNA copy number
aberrations at the submicroscopic level, we applied array-based comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH) to samples from 19 AML patients with complex
karyotypes characterized by HH (=49 chromosomes). We found a total of 155
imbalances (average: 8.2 per patient), and a high proportion of these imbalances 
involved whole chromosomes (n = 75). The chromosomes most commonly gained were
chromosomes 8 (58%), 21 (42%), and 19 (32%). We identified 80 segmental genomic
aberrations, and losses (n = 47) were more frequent than gains (n = 33). We
identified common deleted regions at 5q, 15q, 18p, and 19p. The tumor suppressor 
gene L3MBTL4 and zinc finger proteins reside within 18p and 19p, respectively.
The aCGH analysis added new information to the karyotypic interpretations in 16
of the 19 HH AML cases (84%), leading to a significantly higher detection rate of
abnormalities.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22018275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Protein Sci. 2011 Oct;20(10):1697-706. doi: 10.1002/pro.703. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

A human sterile alpha motif domain polymerizome.

Knight MJ(1), Leettola C, Gingery M, Li H, Bowie JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, UCLA-DOE Institute of Genomics and
Proteomics, Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

The sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain is one of the most common protein modules
found in eukaryotic genomes. Many SAM domains have been shown to form helical
polymer structures suggesting that SAM modules can be used to create large
protein complexes in the cell. Because many polymeric SAM domains form
heterogenous and insoluble aggregates that are experimentally intractable when
isolated, it is likely that many polymeric SAM domains have gone uncharacterized.
We, therefore, developed a method to maintain polymeric SAM domains in a soluble 
form that allowed rapid screening for potential SAM polymers. SAM domains were
expressed as fusions to a super-negatively charged green fluorescent protein
(negGFP). The negGFP imparts three useful properties to the SAM domains: (1) the 
charge helps to maintain solubility; (2) the charge leads to reliable migration
toward the cathode on native gels; and (3) the fluorescence emission allows
visualization in crude extracts. Using the negGFP-SAM fusions, we screened a
large library of human SAM domains for polymerization using a native gel screen. 
A selected set of hSAM domains were then purified and examined for true polymer
formation by electron microscopy. In this manner, we identified a set of new
potential SAM polymers: ANKS3, Atherin, BicaudalC1, Caskin1, Caskin2, Kazrin,
L3MBTL3, L3MBTL4, LBP, LiprinB1, LiprinB2, SAMD8, SAMD9, and STIM2. While further
characterization will be necessary to verify that the SAM domains identified here
truly form polymers, our results provide a much stronger working hypothesis for a
large number of proteins that was possible from sequence analysis alone.

Copyright © 2011 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3218363
PMID: 21805519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Cancer. 2010 Aug 10;9:213. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-213.

Loss, mutation and deregulation of L3MBTL4 in breast cancers.

Addou-Klouche L(1), Adélaïde J, Finetti P, Cervera N, Ferrari A, Bekhouche I,
Sircoulomb F, Sotiriou C, Viens P, Moulessehoul S, Bertucci F, Birnbaum D,
Chaffanet M.

Author information: 
(1)Marseille Cancer Research Center, Department of Molecular Oncology, UMR891
Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

BACKGROUND: Many alterations are involved in mammary oncogenesis, including
amplifications of oncogenes and losses of tumor suppressor genes (TSG). Losses
may affect almost all chromosome arms and many TSGs remain to be identified.
RESULTS: We studied 307 primary breast tumors and 47 breast cancer cell lines by 
high resolution array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH). We identified a
region on 18p11.31 lost in about 20% of the tumors and 40% of the cell lines. The
minimal common region of loss (Chr18:6,366,938-6,375,929 bp) targeted the L3MBTL4
gene. This gene was also targeted by breakage in one tumor and in two cell lines.
We studied the exon sequence of L3MBTL4 in 180 primary tumor samples and 47 cell 
lines and found six missense and one nonsense heterozygous mutations. Compared
with normal breast tissue, L3MBTL4 mRNA expression was downregulated in 73% of
the tumors notably in luminal, ERBB2 and normal-like subtypes. Losses of the
18p11 region were associated with low L3MBTL4 expression level. Integrated
analysis combining genome and gene expression profiles of the same tumors pointed
to 14 other potential 18p TSG candidates. Downregulated expression of ZFP161,
PPP4R1 and YES1 was correlated with luminal B molecular subtype. Low ZFP161 gene 
expression was associated with adverse clinical outcome.
CONCLUSION: We have identified L3MBTL4 as a potential TSG of chromosome arm 18p. 
The gene is targeted by deletion, breakage and mutations and its mRNA is
downregulated in breast tumors. Additional 18p TSG candidates might explain the
aggressive phenotype associated with the loss of 18p in breast tumors.

PMCID: PMC2933619
PMID: 20698951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


