
1. Gene Expr Patterns. 2016 Mar 9. pii: S1567-133X(16)30005-9. doi:
10.1016/j.gep.2016.03.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Expression of forkhead box transcription factor genes Foxp1 and Foxp2 during jaw 
development.

Cesario JM(1), Almaidhan AA(2), Jeong J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science and Craniofacial Biology, New York University
College of Dentistry, 345 East 24th Street, New York, NY 10010 United States.
(2)Department of Orthodontics, New York University College of Dentistry, 345 East
24th Street, New York, NY 10010 United States. (3)Department of Basic Science and
Craniofacial Biology, New York University College of Dentistry, 345 East 24th
Street, New York, NY 10010 United States. Electronic address: jj78@nyu.edu.

Development of the face is regulated by a large number of genes that are
expressed in temporally and spatially specific patterns. While significant
progress has been made on characterizing the genes that operate in the oral
region of the face, those regulating development of the aboral (lateral) region
remain largely unknown. Recently, we discovered that transcription factors LIM
homeobox (LHX) 6 and LHX8, which are key regulators of oral development,
repressed the expression of the genes encoding forkhead box transcription
factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, in the oral region. To gain insights into the potential
role of the Foxp genes in region-specific development of the face, we examined
their expression patterns in the first pharyngeal arch (primordium for the jaw)
of mouse embryos at a high spatial and temporal resolution. Foxp1 and Foxp2 were 
preferentially expressed in the aboral and posterior parts of the first
pharyngeal arch, including the developing temporomandibular joint. Through double
immunofluorescence and double fluorescent RNA in situ hybridization, we found
that Foxp1 was expressed in the progenitor cells for the muscle, bone, and
connective tissue. Foxp2 was expressed in subsets of bone and connective tissue
progenitors but not in the myoblasts. Neither gene was expressed in the dental
mesenchyme nor in the oral half of the palatal shelf undergoing extensive growth 
and morphogenesis. Together, we demonstrated for the first time that Foxp1 and
Foxp2 are expressed during craniofacial development. Our data suggest that the
Foxp genes may regulate development of the aboral and posterior regions of the
jaw.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26969076  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Mar;101(3):1225-34. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-3993. Epub
2016 Jan 12.

Dysfunctional Subcutaneous Fat With Reduced Dicer and Brown Adipose Tissue Gene
Expression in HIV-Infected Patients.

Torriani M(1), Srinivasa S(1), Fitch KV(1), Thomou T(1), Wong K(1), Petrow E(1), 
Kahn CR(1), Cypess AM(1), Grinspoon SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Nutritional Metabolism (M.T., S.S., K.V.F., K.W., E.P., S.K.G.) and
Division of Musculoskeletal Imaging and Intervention (M.T.), Massachusetts
General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114; Section
on Integrative Physiology and Metabolism (T.T., C.R.K., A.M.C.), Joslin Diabetes 
Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215; and Translational
Physiology Section, Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Obesity Branch, National
Institutes of Health/National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases (A.M.C.), Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

CONTEXT: HIV patients are at an increased risk for cardiometabolic disease
secondary to depot-specific alterations in adipose function, but mechanisms
remain poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: The endoribonuclease Dicer has been linked to the modulation of brown 
and white adipocyte differentiation. We previously demonstrated that Dicer
knockout mice undergo transformation of brown adipose tissue to white adipose
tissue and develop a lipodystrophic phenotype. We hypothesized reduced Dicer and 
brown adipose tissue gene expression from nonlipomatous sc fat among HIV patients
with a lipodystrophic phenotype.
DESIGN: Eighteen HIV (nine with and without lipodystrophic changes in fat
distribution, characterized by excess dorsocervical adipose tissue [DCAT]) and
nine non-HIV subjects underwent punch biopsy of abdominal sc fat to determine
expression of Dicer and other adipose-related genes.
RESULTS: HIV subjects with long-duration antiretroviral use demonstrated excess
DCAT vs non-HIV subjects (9.8 ± 1.0 vs 6.6 ± 0.8 cm(2), P = .02) with similar
body mass index. Dicer expression was decreased in abdominal sc fat of HIV vs
non-HIV (4.88 [1.91, 11.93] vs 17.69 [10.72, 47.91], P = .01), as were PPARa,
ZIC1, PRDM16, DIO2, and HSP60 (all P = .03). Moreover, the expression of Dicer
(2.49 [0.02, 4.88] vs 11.20 [4.83, 21.45], P = .006), brown fat (PPARa [P =
.002], ZIC1 [P = .004], LHX8 [P = .03], PRDM16 [P = .0008], PAT2 [P = .008],
P2RX5 [P = .02]), beige fat (TMEM26 [P = .004], CD137 [P = .008]), and other
genes (DIO2 [P = .002], leptin [P = .003], HSP60 [P = .0004]) was further
decreased in abdominal sc fat comparing HIV subjects with vs without excess DCAT.
Down-regulation of Dicer in the abdominal sc fat correlated with the
down-regulation of all brown and beige fat genes (all P = .01).
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate dysfunctional sc adipose tissue marked by
reduced Dicer in relationship to the down-regulation of brown and beige
fat-related genes in lipodystrophic HIV patients and may provide a novel
mechanism for metabolic dysregulation. A strategy to increase browning of white
adipose tissue may improve cardiometabolic health in HIV.

PMID: 26756119  [PubMed - in process]


3. Int J Mol Sci. 2015 Oct 27;16(10):25759-72. doi: 10.3390/ijms161025759.

Identification and Analysis of Regulatory Elements in Porcine Bone Morphogenetic 
Protein 15 Gene Promoter.

Wan Q(1), Wang Y(2), Wang H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest 
A&F University, Xi'an 712100, Shaanxi, China. wanqianhui_casey@163.com.
(2)Department of Animal Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest 
A&F University, Xi'an 712100, Shaanxi, China. wangyaxianwyx@163.com.
(3)Department of Animal Biotechnology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Northwest 
A&F University, Xi'an 712100, Shaanxi, China. hhwang101@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

Bone morphogenetic protein 15 (BMP15) is secreted by the mammalian oocytes and is
indispensable for ovarian follicular development, ovulation, and fertility. To
determine the regulation mechanism of BMP15 gene, the regulatory sequence of
porcine BMP15 was investigated in this study. The cloned BMP15 promoter retains
the cell-type specificity, and is activated in cells derived from ovarian tissue.
The luciferase assays in combination with a series of deletion of BMP15 promoter 
sequence show that the -427 to -376 bp region of BMP15 promoter is the primary
regulatory element, in which there are a number of transcription factor binding
sites, including LIM homeobox 8 (LHX8), newborn ovary homeobox gene (NOBOX), and 
paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 1 (PITX1). Determination of
tissue-specific expression reveals that LHX8, but not PITX1 and NOBOX, is
exclusively expressed in pig ovary tissue and is translocated into the cell
nuclei. Overexpression of LHX8 in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells could
significantly promote BMP15 promoter activation. This study confirms a key
regulatory element that is located in the proximal region of BMP15 promoter and
is regulated by the LHX8 factor.

PMCID: PMC4632825
PMID: 26516845  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS Genet. 2015 Aug 25;11(8):e1005480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005480.
eCollection 2015.

The Evolutionarily Conserved LIM Homeodomain Protein LIM-4/LHX6 Specifies the
Terminal Identity of a Cholinergic and Peptidergic C. elegans Sensory/Inter/Motor
Neuron-Type.

Kim J(1), Yeon J(1), Choi SK(2), Huh YH(3), Fang Z(1), Park SJ(4), Kim MO(4),
Ryoo ZY(4), Kang K(5), Kweon HS(3), Jeon WB(2), Li C(6), Kim K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of
Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu, Korea. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry and
Cellular Engineering, Division of NanoBio Technology, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute
of Science and Technology (DGIST), Daegu, Korea. (3)Nano-Bio Electron Microscopy 
Research Group, Korea Basic Science Institute, Daejeon, Korea. (4)School of Life 
Sciences, KNU Creative BioResearch Group (BK21 plus program), School of Animal BT
Science, College of Natural Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu,
Korea. (5)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research
Institute, Sungkyunkwan School of Medicine, Gyeonggi-Do, Korea. (6)Department of 
Biology, City College of the City University of New York, New York, New York,
United States of America.

The expression of specific transcription factors determines the differentiated
features of postmitotic neurons. However, the mechanism by which specific
molecules determine neuronal cell fate and the extent to which the functions of
transcription factors are conserved in evolution are not fully understood. In C. 
elegans, the cholinergic and peptidergic SMB sensory/inter/motor neurons
innervate muscle quadrants in the head and control the amplitude of sinusoidal
movement. Here we show that the LIM homeobox protein LIM-4 determines neuronal
characteristics of the SMB neurons. In lim-4 mutant animals, expression of
terminal differentiation genes, such as the cholinergic gene battery and the
flp-12 neuropeptide gene, is completely abolished and thus the function of the
SMB neurons is compromised. LIM-4 activity promotes SMB identity by directly
regulating the expression of the SMB marker genes via a distinct cis-regulatory
motif. Two human LIM-4 orthologs, LHX6 and LHX8, functionally substitute for
LIM-4 in C. elegans. Furthermore, C. elegans LIM-4 or human LHX6 can induce
cholinergic and peptidergic characteristics in the human neuronal cell lines. Our
results indicate that the evolutionarily conserved LIM-4/LHX6 homeodomain
proteins function in generation of precise neuronal subtypes.

PMCID: PMC4549117
PMID: 26305787  [PubMed - in process]


5. FASEB J. 2015 Oct;29(10):4083-91. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-267500. Epub 2015 Jul 6.

Lhx6 and Lhx8: cell fate regulators and beyond.

Zhou C(1), Yang G(1), Chen M(1), He L(1), Xiang L(1), Ricupero C(1), Mao JJ(2),
Ling J(2).

Author information: 
(1)*Center for Craniofacial Regeneration, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, New York, USA; Guanghua School of Stomatology, Hospital of Stomatology, and
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China. (2)*Center for Craniofacial Regeneration, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, New York, USA; Guanghua School of Stomatology, Hospital
of Stomatology, and Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China jmao@columbia.edu lingjq@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

As transcription factors of the lines (LIN)-11/Islet (Isl)-1/mitosis entry
checkpoint (MEC)-3 (LIM)-homeobox subfamily, LIM homeobox (Lhx)6 and -8 are
remarkably conserved and involved in the morphogenesis of multiple organ systems.
Lhx6 and -8 play overlapping and distinctive roles, but in general act as cell
fate mediators and in turn are regulated by several transcriptional factors, such
as sonic hedgehog, fibroblast growth factors, and wingless-int (Wnt)/ß-catenin.
In this review, we first summarize Lhx6 and -8 distributions in development and
then explore how Lhx6 and -8 act as transcription factors and coregulators of
cell lineage specification. Known Lhx6 and -8 functions and targets are outlined 
in neurogenesis, craniofacial development, and germ cell differentiation. The
underlying mechanisms of Lhx6 and -8 in regulating cell fate remain elusive.
Whether Lhx6 and -8 affect functions in tissues and organs other than neural,
craniofacial, oocytes, and germ cells is largely unexplored. Taken together, Lhx6
and -8 are important regulators of cell lineage specification and may act as one 
of the pivotal mediators of stem cell fate. Undoubtedly, future investigations of
Lhx6 and -8 biology will continue to yield fascinating insights into tissue
development and homeostasis, in addition to their putative roles in tissue
regeneration and ageing.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4566936 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26148970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Cell Tissue Res. 2015 Dec;362(3):541-56. doi: 10.1007/s00441-015-2222-8. Epub
2015 Jun 28.

Mesenchymal signaling in dorsoventral differentiation of palatal epithelium.

Sohn WJ(1), Gwon GJ(1), Kim HS(2), Neupane S(1), Cho SJ(3), Lee JH(4), Yamamoto
H(5), Choi JY(6), An CH(7), Lee Y(1), Shin HI(8), Lee S(2), Kim JY(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, IHBR, Kyungpook National
University, 2177 Dalgubeol-daero, Joong-gu,, Daegu, 700-412, South Korea.
(2)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, South Korea. (3)Department of Biology, College of Natural Sciences,
Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Chungbuk, South Korea. (4)Department of
Maxillofacial Biomedical Engineering, School of Dentistry, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul, South Korea. (5)Department of Histology and Developmental Biology, Tokyo
Dental College, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
School of Medicine, Cell and Matrix Research Institute, Skeletal Diseases Genome 
Research Center, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, South Korea. (7)Department
of Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology, School of Dentistry, IHBR, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu, South Korea. (8)Department of Oral Pathology and
Regenerative Medicine, School of Dentistry, IHBR, Kyungpook National University, 
Daegu, South Korea. (9)Department of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry, IHBR,
Kyungpook National University, 2177 Dalgubeol-daero, Joong-gu,, Daegu, 700-412,
South Korea. jykim91@knu.ac.kr.

After palatal fusion, the dorsal and ventral epithelia of the palatal shelf
differentiate into the nasal and oral mucosa, respectively. The tissue-specific
differentiation of palatal epithelia along the dorsal-ventral axis is regulated
by the signaling molecules expressed in the underlying mesenchyme. Thus, as in
many other epithelial organs, differentiation relies on epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions. To screen for region-specific mesenchymal signaling molecules that 
determine the fate of the palatal epithelia, we employed a laser microdissection 
(LMD) method. LMD allowed us to collect region-specific mesenchymal tissues at
E13, prior to palatal fusion and the development of distinct dorsal and ventral
epithelial morphology. Genome-wide screening was performed on the tissues
collected using LMD to identify candidate mesenchymal signaling molecules. The
microarray results were validated using real-time quantitative (qPCR) and in situ
hybridization methods. The developmental role and interactions of the candidate
genes were evaluated in in vitro-cultivated E13 palates using an anti-sense
oligodeoxynucleotide (AS-ODN)-based loss-of-function approach. Apparent changes
in the expression patterns of Runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and LIM
homeobox 8 (Lhx8) were observed after knocking down each gene. Knock-down of
Runx2 and Lhx8 also altered the immunolocalization pattern of cytokeratin18
(CK18), an established marker for nasal epithelium. These results were confirmed 
using Runx2 heterozygote mice. The mesenchymal signaling molecules Runx2 and
Lhx8, which possess region-specific expression patterns along the dorsoventral
axis, functionally interact to regulate the cellular and molecular
characteristics of dorsal and ventral epithelia, suggesting that mesenchymal
signaling molecules determine the dorsoventral fate of epithelial structures in
the developing palate.

PMID: 26123167  [PubMed - in process]


7. Biomaterials. 2015 Sep;63:35-46. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.06.004. Epub
2015 Jun 3.

Lhx8 mediated Wnt and TGFß pathways in tooth development and regeneration.

Zhou C(1), Yang G(2), Chen M(2), Wang C(2), He L(1), Xiang L(1), Chen D(2), Ling 
J(3), Mao JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Guanghua School of Stomatology, Hospital of Stomatology, Guangdong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, 56 Lingyuanxi Road,
Guangzhou 510055, China; Center for Craniofacial Regeneration, Columbia
University Medical Center, 630 W. 168 St. - PH7E - CDM, New York, NY 10032, USA. 
(2)Guanghua School of Stomatology, Hospital of Stomatology, Guangdong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, 56 Lingyuanxi Road,
Guangzhou 510055, China. (3)Center for Craniofacial Regeneration, Columbia
University Medical Center, 630 W. 168 St. - PH7E - CDM, New York, NY 10032, USA. 
Electronic address: lingjq@mail.sysu.edu.cn. (4)Guanghua School of Stomatology,
Hospital of Stomatology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Stomatology, Sun 
Yat-sen University, 56 Lingyuanxi Road, Guangzhou 510055, China. Electronic
address: jmao@columbia.edu.

LIM homeobox 8 (Lhx8) is a highly conserved transcriptional factor with recently 
illustrated roles in cholinergic and GABAergic differentiation, and is expressed 
in neural crest derived craniofacial tissues during development. However, Lhx8
functions and signaling pathways are largely elusive. Here we showed that Lhx8
regulates dental mesenchyme differentiation and function via Wnt and TGFß
pathways. Lhx8 expression was restricted to dental mesenchyme from E11.5 to a
peak at E14.5, and absent in dental epithelium. By reconstituting dental
epithelium and mesenchyme in an E16.5 tooth organ, Lhx8 knockdown accelerated
dental mesenchyme differentiation; conversely, Lhx8 overexpression attenuated
dentin formation. Lhx8 overexpressed adult human dental pulp stem/progenitor
cells in ß-tricalcium phosphate cubes attenuated mineralized matrix production
in vivo. Gene profiling revealed that postnatal dental pulp stem/progenitor cells
upon Lhx8 overexpression modified matrix related gene expression including Dspp, 
Cola1 and osteocalcin. Lhx8 transcriptionally activated Wnt and TGFß pathways,
and its attenuation upregulated multiple dentinogenesis genes. Together, Lhx8
regulates dentin development and regeneration by fine-turning Wnt and TGFß
signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4583713 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26081866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. BMC Biol. 2015 Jun 16;13:39. doi: 10.1186/s12915-015-0151-3.

Lhx8 regulates primordial follicle activation and postnatal folliculogenesis.

Ren Y(1), Suzuki H(2,)(3), Jagarlamudi K(4,)(5), Golnoski K(6), McGuire M(7),
Lopes R(8), Pachnis V(9), Rajkovic A(10,)(11,)(12).

Author information: 
(1)Magee-Womens Research Institute, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA.
yur4@pitt.edu. (2)Magee-Womens Research Institute, Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
15213, USA. suzukih.arc@cmn.tmd.ac.jp. (3)Department of Experimental Animal Model
for Human Disease, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8510, Japan.
suzukih.arc@cmn.tmd.ac.jp. (4)Magee-Womens Research Institute, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. Jagarlamudikr@mwri.magee.edu. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA.
Jagarlamudikr@mwri.magee.edu. (6)Magee-Womens Research Institute, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. mcgeekj@mwri.magee.edu. (7)Magee-Womens Research
Institute, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. mmcguire887@gmail.com.
(8)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, MRC National Institute of Medical
Research, London, NW7 1AA, UK. rlopes@nimr.mrc.ac.uk. (9)Division of Molecular
Neurobiology, MRC National Institute of Medical Research, London, NW7 1AA, UK.
vpachni@nimr.mrc.ac.uk. (10)Magee-Womens Research Institute, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. rajkovic@upmc.edu. (11)Department of Pathology,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213, USA. rajkovic@upmc.edu.
(12)Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
15213, USA. rajkovic@upmc.edu.

BACKGROUND: The early stages of ovarian follicle formation-beginning with the
breakdown of germ cell cysts and continuing with the formation of primordial
follicles and transition to primary and secondary follicles-are critical in
determining reproductive life span and fertility. Previously, we discovered that 
global knockouts of germ cell-specific transcriptional co-regulators Sohlh1,
Sohlh2, Lhx8, and Nobox, cause rapid oocyte loss and ovarian failure. Also
factors such as Nobox and Sohlh1 are associated with human premature ovarian
failure. In this study, we developed a conditional knockout of Lhx8 to study
oocyte-specific pathways in postnatal folliculogenesis.
RESULTS: The conditional deficiency of Lhx8 in the oocytes of primordial
follicles leads to massive primordial oocyte activation, in part, by indirectly
interacting with the PI3K-AKT pathway, as shown by synergistic effects on FOXO3
nucleocytoplasmic translocation and rpS6 activation. However, LHX8 does not
directly regulate members of the PI3K-AKT pathway; instead, we show that LHX8
represses Lin28a expression, a known regulator of mammalian metabolism and of the
AKT/mTOR pathway. LHX8 can bind to the Lin28a promoter, and the depletion of
Lin28a in Lhx8-deficient oocytes partially suppresses primordial oocyte
activation. Moreover, unlike the PI3K-AKT pathway, LHX8 is critical beyond
primordial follicle activation, and blocks the primary to secondary follicle
transition.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the LHX8-LIN28A pathway is essential in
the earliest stages of primordial follicle activation, and LHX8 is an important
oocyte-specific transcription factor in the ovary for regulating postnatal
folliculogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4487509
PMID: 26076587  [PubMed - in process]


9. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Sep 1;24(17):5024-39. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv223. Epub 2015 Jun 
12.

Lhx6 and Lhx8 promote palate development through negative regulation of a cell
cycle inhibitor gene, p57Kip2.

Cesario JM(1), Landin Malt A(1), Deacon LJ(1), Sandberg M(2), Vogt D(2), Tang
Z(3), Zhao Y(4), Brown S(3), Rubenstein JL(2), Jeong J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science and Craniofacial Biology, New York University
College of Dentistry, New York, NY 10010, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry, Nina 
Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (3)Center for Health Informatics and Bioinformatics,
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA and. (4)Program
on Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. (5)Department of Basic Science and Craniofacial Biology, New York
University College of Dentistry, New York, NY 10010, USA, jj78@nyu.edu.

Cleft palate is a common birth defect in humans. Therefore, understanding the
molecular genetics of palate development is important from both scientific and
medical perspectives. Lhx6 and Lhx8 encode LIM homeodomain transcription factors,
and inactivation of both genes in mice resulted in profound craniofacial defects 
including cleft secondary palate. The initial outgrowth of the palate was
severely impaired in the mutant embryos, due to decreased cell proliferation.
Through genome-wide transcriptional profiling, we discovered that p57(Kip2)
(Cdkn1c), encoding a cell cycle inhibitor, was up-regulated in the prospective
palate of Lhx6(-/-);Lhx8(-/-) mutants. p57(Kip2) has been linked to
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome and IMAGe syndrome in humans, which are developmental
disorders with increased incidents of palate defects among the patients. To
determine the molecular mechanism underlying the regulation of p57(Kip2) by the
Lhx genes, we combined chromatin immunoprecipitation, in silico search for
transcription factor-binding motifs, and in vitro reporter assays with putative
cis-regulatory elements. The results of these experiments indicated that LHX6 and
LHX8 regulated p57(Kip2) via both direct and indirect mechanisms, with the latter
mediated by Forkhead box (FOX) family transcription factors. Together, our
findings uncovered a novel connection between the initiation of palate
development and a cell cycle inhibitor via LHX. We propose a model in which Lhx6 
and Lhx8 negatively regulate p57(Kip2) expression in the prospective palate area 
to allow adequate levels of cell proliferation and thereby promote normal palate 
development. This is the first report elucidating a molecular genetic pathway
downstream of Lhx in palate development.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4527495 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26071365  [PubMed - in process]


10. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jun 15;308(12):E1085-105. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00023.2015. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

A stringent validation of mouse adipose tissue identity markers.

de Jong JM(1), Larsson O(2), Cannon B(1), Nedergaard J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm
University, Stockholm, Sweden; and. (2)Department of Oncology-Pathology, Cancer
Center Karolinska, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Department of
Molecular Biosciences, The Wenner-Gren Institute, Stockholm University,
Stockholm, Sweden; and jan@metabol.su.se.

The nature of brown adipose tissue in humans is presently debated: whether it is 
classical brown or of brite/beige nature. The dissimilar developmental origins
and proposed distinct functions of the brown and brite/beige tissues make it
essential to ascertain the identity of human depots with the perspective of
recruiting and activating them for the treatment of obesity and type 2 diabetes. 
For identification of the tissues, a number of marker genes have been proposed,
but the validity of the markers has not been well documented. We used established
brown (interscapular), brite (inguinal), and white (epididymal) mouse adipose
tissues and corresponding primary cell cultures as validators and examined the
informative value of a series of suggested markers earlier used in the discussion
considering the nature of human brown adipose tissue. Most of these markers
unexpectedly turned out to be noninformative concerning tissue classification
(Car4, Cited1, Ebf3, Eva1, Fbxo31, Fgf21, Lhx8, Hoxc8, and Hoxc9). Only Zic1
(brown), Cd137, Epsti1, Tbx1, Tmem26 (brite), and Tcf21 (white) proved to be
informative in these three tissues. However, the expression of the brite markers 
was not maintained in cell culture. In a more extensive set of adipose depots,
these validated markers provide new information about depot identity. Principal
component analysis supported our single-gene conclusions. Furthermore, Zic1,
Hoxc8, Hoxc9, and Tcf21 displayed anteroposterior expression patterns, indicating
a relationship between anatomic localization and adipose tissue identity (and
possibly function). Together, the observed expression patterns of these validated
marker genes necessitates reconsideration of adipose depot identity in mice and
humans.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25898951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 23;10(2):e0117841. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117841.
eCollection 2015.

Direct evidence of brown adipocytes in different fat depots in children.

Rockstroh D(1), Landgraf K(1), Wagner IV(2), Gesing J(2), Tauscher R(2), Lakowa
N(3), Kiess W(2), Bühligen U(4), Wojan M(5), Till H(6), Blüher M(3), Körner A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Pediatric Research Leipzig, University Hospital for Children &
Adolescents, Department of Women's and Child Health, University of Leipzig,
Leipzig, Germany; Integrated Research and Treatment Center (IFB), University of
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (2)Center for Pediatric Research Leipzig, University
Hospital for Children & Adolescents, Department of Women's and Child Health,
University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (3)Integrated Research and Treatment
Center (IFB), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany; Department of Medicine,
Division of Endocrinology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (4)Department
of Pediatric Surgery, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (5)Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (6)Integrated
Research and Treatment Center (IFB), University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany;
Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Surgery, Medical University Graz, Graz,
Austria.

Recent studies suggested the persistence of brown adipocytes in adult humans, as 
opposed to being exclusively present in infancy. In this study, we investigated
the presence of brown-like adipocytes in adipose tissue (AT) samples of children 
and adolescents aged 0 to 18 years and evaluated the association with age,
location, and obesity. For this, we analysed AT samples from 131 children and 23 
adults by histological, immunohistochemical and expression analyses. We detected 
brown-like and UCP1 positive adipocytes in 10.3% of 87 lean children (aged 0.3 to
10.7 years) and in one overweight infant, whereas we did not find brown
adipocytes in obese children or adults. In our samples, the brown-like adipocytes
were interspersed within white AT of perirenal, visceral and also subcutaneous
depots. Samples with brown-like adipocytes showed an increased expression of UCP1
(>200fold), PRDM16 (2.8fold), PGC1a and CIDEA while other brown/beige selective
markers, such as PAT2, P2RX5, ZIC1, LHX8, TMEM26, HOXC9 and TBX1 were not
significantly different between UCP1 positive and negative samples. We identified
a positive correlation between UCP1 and PRDM16 within UCP1 positive samples, but 
not with any other brown/beige marker. In addition, we observed significantly
increased PRDM16 and PAT2 expression in subcutaneous and visceral AT samples with
high UCP1 expression in adults. Our data indicate that brown-like adipocytes are 
present well beyond infancy in subcutaneous depots of non-obese children. The
presence was not restricted to typical perirenal locations, but they were also
interspersed within WAT of visceral and subcutaneous depots.

PMCID: PMC4338084
PMID: 25706927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Feb 5;401:189-201. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.12.012. Epub
2014 Dec 17.

Transcriptional profiling of five isolated size-matched stages of human preantral
follicles.

Kristensen SG(1), Ebbesen P(2), Andersen CY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology - Copenhagen University Hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
stine.gry.kristensen@rh.regionh.dk. (2)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology -
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Little is known of the early stages of human follicular development and the
complex processes that regulate follicular growth. To identify genes of potential
importance, we analysed follicle-related transcripts in five populations of
isolated size-matched human preantral follicles by microarray analysis.
Oocyte-specific genes were found to be the most abundant and differentially
expressed transcripts and included germ cell transcription factors LHX8 and
SOHLH2 which were significantly down-regulated during preantral follicle
development. Differentially expressed genes also included transcription factors
of NOTCH signalling, IGF2, orphan nuclear receptor LRH-1, and homeobox gene
HOXA7, indicating potentially important regulatory roles for these genes during
early human folliculogenesis. We also found that FSHR mRNA and protein were
present in the earliest stages of preantral follicles, whereas LHR was absent. In
conclusion, our data identify specific oocyte and somatic genes in small human
follicles that impact early follicle growth, and provide foundation for further
analysis of the signalling pathways involved in early human folliculogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25528519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2015 Apr;51(4):329-35. doi:
10.1007/s11626-014-9838-y. Epub 2014 Dec 5.

Overexpression of Lhx8 inhibits cell proliferation and induces cell cycle arrest 
in PC12 cell line.

Li H(1), Qin J, Jin G, Zou L, Shi J, Han X, Cheng X, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, the Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, 
Medical School of Nantong University, 19 Qixiu Road, Nantong, 226001, Jiangsu,
China.

LIM-homeobox genes play a pivotal function in tissue patterning and
differentiation, Lhx8 is a member of LIM-homeobox gene family, and it is
selectively expressed in embryonic basal forebrain and is a key factor for the
determination of cholinergic cells fate. However, besides cholinergic
differentiation, little is known about the potential role of Lhx8 in cell
biology. In this study, we transfected Lhx8 complementary DNA (cDNA) into PC12
cell line using lentiviral vectors to acquire the cells which stably expressed
high level of Lhx8, and we provide the experimental evidence that overexpression 
of Lhx8 inhibits cell proliferation and induces cell cycle arrest but not
apoptosis in vitro. In conclusion, besides cholinergic differentiation, our
results suggest that Lhx8 also plays as a suppressor gene of proliferation in
cell biology.

PMID: 25475040  [PubMed - in process]


14. J Biosci Bioeng. 2015 Mar;119(3):260-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2014.08.010. Epub
2014 Sep 18.

Retinoic acid regulates Lhx8 expression via FGF-8b to the upper jaw development
of chick embryo.

Shimomura T(1), Kawakami M(2), Okuda H(3), Tatsumi K(4), Morita S(5), Nochioka
K(6), Kirita T(7), Wanaka A(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nara Medical University, 840
Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8522, Japan. Electronic address:
bashoudo@naramed-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nara
Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8522, Japan. Electronic
address: mkawaka@naramed-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences,
Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan. Electronic address: okuda@naramed-u.ac.jp. 
(4)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan.
Electronic address: radha815@naramed-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Anatomy and
Neurosciences, Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan. Electronic address:
morita@naramed-u.ac.jp. (6)Department of Ophthalmology, Nara Medical University, 
Nara, Japan. Electronic address: drive19830224@yahoo.co.jp. (7)Department of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara,
Nara 634-8522, Japan. Electronic address: tkirita@naramed-u.ac.jp. (8)Department 
of Anatomy and Neurosciences, Nara Medical University, Nara, Japan. Electronic
address: akiow@naramed-u.ac.jp.

Expression of the LIM homeodomain transcription factor Lhx8 is restricted to and 
up-regulated in the mesenchyme of the upper face prominence before lip fusion.
Msx1/2 acts in early development to control cell proliferation and
differentiation. Deficiency of these genes is associated with nonsyndromic cleft 
lip with/without cleft palate. Since retinoid is a potential patterning influence
on the developing face, we have examined whether retinoic acid (RA) signaling
regulated Lhx8, Msx1 and Msx2 transcription through fibroblast growth factor
(FGF) signals in the maxillary prominence. Application of exogenous RA caused
severe defects of the maxilla. Citral also induced a specific loss of derivatives
from the maxillary prominences by blocking RA synthesis. Real-time RT-PCR and
semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis of the maxillary mesenchyme revealed that the
expressions of Lhx8, Msx1 and Msx2 were significantly down-regulated by RA as
well as by citral. The downregulated Lhx8 was rescued by combined treatment with 
FGF-8b, which indicated a downstream of RA signaling. FGF-8b induced up-regulated
Lhx8 expression whereas SU5402, a pan-FGF family antagonist, down-regulated and
caused defective maxillary morphogenesis and cleft lip. Our data suggest that
Lhx8 is regulated by RA signaling through FGF signals and the level window of RA 
and FGF-8b could control the upper jaw morphogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25239070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 31;289(44):30289-301. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.592014. Epub
2014 Sep 4.

Identification of a face enhancer reveals direct regulation of LIM homeobox 8
(Lhx8) by wingless-int (WNT)/ß-catenin signaling.

Landin Malt A(1), Cesario JM(1), Tang Z(2), Brown S(2), Jeong J(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Basic Science and Craniofacial Biology, New York
University College of Dentistry, New York, New York 10010 and. (2)the Center for 
Health Informatics and Bioinformatics, New York University School of Medicine,
New York, New York 10016. (3)From the Department of Basic Science and
Craniofacial Biology, New York University College of Dentistry, New York, New
York 10010 and jj78@nyu.edu.

Development of the mammalian face requires a large number of genes that are
expressed with spatio-temporal specificity, and transcriptional regulation
mediated by enhancers plays a key role in the precise control of gene expression.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation for a histone marker of active enhancers, we 
generated a genome-wide map of candidate enhancers from the maxillary arch
(primordium for the upper jaw) of mouse embryos. Furthermore, we confirmed
multiple novel craniofacial enhancers near the genes implicated in human palate
defects through functional assays. We characterized in detail one of the
enhancers (Lhx8_enh1) located upstream of Lhx8, a key regulatory gene for
craniofacial development. Lhx8_enh1 contained an evolutionarily conserved binding
site for lymphoid enhancer factor/T-cell factor family proteins, which mediate
the transcriptional regulation by the WNT/ß-catenin signaling pathway. We
demonstrated in vitro that WNT/ß-catenin signaling was indeed essential for the
expression of Lhx8 in the maxillary arch cells and that Lhx8_enh1 was a direct
target of the WNT/ß-catenin pathway. Together, we uncovered a molecular mechanism
for the regulation of Lhx8, and we provided valuable resources for further
investigation into the gene regulatory network of craniofacial development.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4215213
PMID: 25190800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2014 May 30;9(5):e98749. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098749. eCollection
2014.

Skin-derived mesenchymal stem cells help restore function to ovaries in a
premature ovarian failure mouse model.

Lai D(1), Wang F(1), Dong Z(1), Zhang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Center of Research Laboratory, and Department of Gynecology, The
International Peace Maternity and Child Health Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China.

Skin-derived mesenchymal stem cells (SMSCs) can differentiate into the three
embryonic germ layers. For this reason, they are considered a powerful tool for
therapeutic cloning and offer new possibilities for tissue therapy. Recent
studies showed that skin-derived stem cells can differentiate into cells
expressing germ-cell specific markers in vitro and form oocytes in vivo. The idea
that SMSCs may be suitable for the treatment of intractable diseases or traumatic
tissue damage has attracted attention. To determine the ability of SMSCs to
reactivate injured ovaries, a mouse model with ovaries damaged by busulfan and
cyclophosphamide was developed and is described here. Female skin-derived
mesenchymal stem cells (F-SMSCs) and male skin-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(M-SMSCs) from red fluorescence protein (RFP) transgenic adult mice were used to 
investigate the restorative effects of SMSCs on ovarian function. Significant
increases in total body weight and the weight of reproductive organs were
observed in the treated animals. Both F-SMSCs and M-SMSCs were shown to be
capable of partially restoring fertility in chemotherapy-treated females.
Immunostaining with RFP and anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) antibodies demonstrated 
that the grafted SMSCs survived, migrated to the recipient ovaries. After SMSCs
were administered to the treated mice, real-time PCR showed that the expression
levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-a, TGF-ß, IL-8, IL-6, IL-1ß, and IFN<U+03B3>
were significantly lower in the ovaries than in the untreated controls.
Consistent with this observation, expression of oogenesis marker genes Nobox,
Nanos3, and Lhx8 increased in ovaries of SMSCs-treated mice. These findings
suggest that SMSCs may play a role within the ovarian follicle microenvironment
in restoring the function of damaged ovaries and could be useful in reproductive 
health.

PMCID: PMC4039525
PMID: 24879098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. PLoS Genet. 2014 Apr 24;10(4):e1004280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004280.
eCollection 2014.

Isl1 directly controls a cholinergic neuronal identity in the developing
forebrain and spinal cord by forming cell type-specific complexes.

Cho HH(1), Cargnin F(2), Kim Y(2), Lee B(2), Kwon RJ(2), Nam H(3), Shen R(4),
Barnes AP(5), Lee JW(5), Lee S(3), Lee SK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neuroscience Research Program, Papé Family Pediatric Research
Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Portland, Oregon, United States of America; 
Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Chonnam National University
Medical School, Gwangju, Korea. (2)Pediatric Neuroscience Research Program, Papé 
Family Pediatric Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Portland, Oregon, 
United States of America. (3)College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Pediatric
Neuroscience Research Program, Papé Family Pediatric Research Institute,
Department of Pediatrics, Portland, Oregon, United States of America; Vollum
Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, United States of
America. (5)Pediatric Neuroscience Research Program, Papé Family Pediatric
Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Portland, Oregon, United States of 
America; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America. (6)Pediatric Neuroscience
Research Program, Papé Family Pediatric Research Institute, Department of
Pediatrics, Portland, Oregon, United States of America; Vollum Institute, Oregon 
Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America;
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2014 Apr;10(4):e1004315.

The establishment of correct neurotransmitter characteristics is an essential
step of neuronal fate specification in CNS development. However, very little is
known about how a battery of genes involved in the determination of a specific
type of chemical-driven neurotransmission is coordinately regulated during
vertebrate development. Here, we investigated the gene regulatory networks that
specify the cholinergic neuronal fates in the spinal cord and forebrain,
specifically, spinal motor neurons (MNs) and forebrain cholinergic neurons
(FCNs). Conditional inactivation of Isl1, a LIM homeodomain factor expressed in
both differentiating MNs and FCNs, led to a drastic loss of cholinergic neurons
in the developing spinal cord and forebrain. We found that Isl1 forms two
related, but distinct types of complexes, the Isl1-Lhx3-hexamer in MNs and the
Isl1-Lhx8-hexamer in FCNs. Interestingly, our genome-wide ChIP-seq analysis
revealed that the Isl1-Lhx3-hexamer binds to a suite of cholinergic pathway genes
encoding the core constituents of the cholinergic neurotransmission system, such 
as acetylcholine synthesizing enzymes and transporters. Consistently, the
Isl1-Lhx3-hexamer directly coordinated upregulation of cholinergic pathways genes
in embryonic spinal cord. Similarly, in the developing forebrain, the
Isl1-Lhx8-hexamer was recruited to the cholinergic gene battery and promoted
cholinergic gene expression. Furthermore, the expression of the Isl1-Lhx8-complex
enabled the acquisition of cholinergic fate in embryonic stem cell-derived
neurons. Together, our studies show a shared molecular mechanism that determines 
the cholinergic neuronal fate in the spinal cord and forebrain, and uncover an
important gene regulatory mechanism that directs a specific neurotransmitter
identity in vertebrate CNS development.

PMCID: PMC3998908
PMID: 24763339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 18;9(3):e91997. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091997. eCollection
2014.

Reduced UCP-1 content in in vitro differentiated beige/brite adipocytes derived
from preadipocytes of human subcutaneous white adipose tissues in obesity.

Carey AL(1), Vorlander C(1), Reddy-Luthmoodoo M(1), Natoli AK(1), Formosa MF(1), 
Bertovic DA(1), Anderson MJ(1), Duffy SJ(2), Kingwell BA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic and Vascular Physiology Laboratory, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes
Institute, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (2)Metabolic and Vascular Physiology
Laboratory, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia; Department of Cardiology, The Alfred Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria,
Australia.

INTRODUCTION: Brown adipose tissue (BAT) is a potential therapeutic target to
reverse obesity. The purpose of this study was to determine whether primary
precursor cells isolated from human adult subcutaneous white adipose tissue (WAT)
can be induced to differentiate in-vitro into adipocytes that express key markers
of brown or beige adipose, and whether the expression level of such markers
differs between lean and obese young adult males.
METHODS: Adipogenic precursor cells were isolated from lean and obese individuals
from subcutaneous abdominal WAT biopsies. Cells were grown to confluence,
differentiated for 2.5 weeks then harvested for measurement of gene expression
and UCP1 protein.
RESULTS: There was no difference between groups with respect to differentiation
into adipocytes, as indicated by oil red-O staining, rates of lipolysis, and
expression of adipogenic genes (FABP4, PPARG). WAT genes (HOXC9, RB1) were
expressed equally in the two groups. Post differentiation, the beige adipose
specific genes CITED1 and CD137 were significantly increased in both groups, but 
classic BAT markers ZIC1 and LHX8 decreased significantly. Cell lines from both
groups also equally increased post-differentiation expression of the
thermogenic-responsive gene PPARGC1A (PGC-1a). UCP1 gene expression was
undetectable prior to differentiation, however after differentiation both gene
expression and protein content were increased in both groups and were
significantly greater in cultures from lean compared with obese individuals
(p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Human subcutaneous WAT cells can be induced to attain BAT
characteristics, but this capacity is reduced in WAT cells from obese
individuals.

PMCID: PMC3958417
PMID: 24642703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Adipocyte. 2014 Jan 1;3(1):54-7. doi: 10.4161/adip.26520. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Novel nuances of human brown fat.

Scheele C(1), Larsen TJ(1), Nielsen S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Inflammation and Metabolism; Department of Infectious Diseases;
Rigshospitalet; Copenhagen, Denmark.

There is a current debate in the literature on whether human fat derived from the
supraclavicular region should be classified as brown, or as the white fat-derived
less potent, brite/beige. This commentary addresses whether the existing
classification defined in mice is sufficient to describe the types of thermogenic
adipocytes in humans. We recently published a contradictory mRNA expression
signature of human supraclavicular fat defined by an upregulation of the brite
marker TBX1 along with the classical brown markers ZIC1 and LHX8, as well as
genes indicating brown fat activity including UCP1, PGC-1a, and PRDM16; and,
finally, a downregulation of the white/brite markers HOXC8 and HOXC9.
Subcutaneous fat was used as reference material. Another recent study presents a 
higher expression of ZIC1 and a lower expression of TBX1 in interscapular
compared with supraclavicular fat. Here, however, there was no difference in
UCP1, PGC-1a, PRDM16, suggesting both depots had equal brown fat potency. Taken
together, supraclavicular brown fat derived from adult humans seems to represent 
a type of brown fat with distinct features from both subcutaneous white/brite and
interscapular brown fat. Therefore, the classification of adipocyte subtypes
defined in mice may need reconsideration when applying to humans.

PMCID: PMC3917934
PMID: 24575370  [PubMed]


20. Environ Mol Mutagen. 2014 May;55(4):343-53. doi: 10.1002/em.21847. Epub 2014 Jan 
24.

Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phthalate and bisphenol A exposure impairs mouse primordial
follicle assembly in vitro.

Zhang T(1), Li L, Qin XS, Zhou Y, Zhang XF, Wang LQ, De Felici M, Chen H, Qin GQ,
Shen W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Germ Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Animal Reproduction and
Germplasm Enhancement in Universities of Shandong, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, China.

Bisphenol-A (BPA) and diethylhexyl phthalate (DEHP) are estrogenic compounds
widely used in commercial plastic products. Previous studies have shown that
exposure to such compounds have adverse effects on various aspects of mammalian
reproduction including folliculogenesis. The objective of this study was to
examine the effects of BPA and DEHP exposure on primordial follicle formation. We
found that germ cell nest breakdown and primordial follicle assembly were
significantly reduced when newborn mouse ovaries were exposed to 10 or 100 µM BPA
and DEHP in vitro. Moreover, BPA and DEHP exposure increased the number of TUNEL 
positive oocytes and the mRNA level of the pro-apoptotic gene Bax in oocytes.
These effects were associated with decreased expression of oocyte specific genes 
such as LIM homeobox 8 (Lhx8), factor in the germline alpha (Figla),
spermatogenesis and oogenesis helix-loop-helix (Sohlh2), and newborn ovary
homeobox (Nobox). Interestingly, BPA and DEHP exposure also prevented DNA
demethylation of CpG sites of the Lhx8 gene in oocytes, a process normally
associated with folliculogenesis. Finally, folliculogenesis was severely impaired
in BPA and DEHP exposed ovaries after transplantation into the kidney capsules of
immunodeficient mice. In conclusion, BPA and DEHP exposures impair mouse
primordial follicle assembly in vitro.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24458533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Mar;41(3):1891-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3038-4. Epub 2014
Jan 16.

Primordial follicle assembly was regulated by Notch signaling pathway in the
mice.

Chen CL(1), Fu XF, Wang LQ, Wang JJ, Ma HG, Cheng SF, Hou ZM, Ma JM, Quan GB,
Shen W, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Germ Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Animal Reproduction and
Germplasm Enhancement in Universities of Shandong, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, 266109, China,
chenchunlei2659798@126.com.

Notch signaling pathway, a highly conserved cell signaling system, exists in most
multicellular organisms. The objective of this study was to examine Notch
signaling pathway in germ cell cyst breakdown and primordial follicle formation. 
The receptor and ligand genes of Notch pathway (Notch1, Notch2, Jagged1, Jagged2 
and Hes1) were extremely down-regulated after newborn mouse ovaries were cultured
then exposed to DAPT or L-685,458 in vitro (P < 0.01). Since DAPT or L-685,548
inhibits Notch signaling pathway, the expression of protein LHX8 and NOBOX was
significantly reduced during the formation of the primordial follicles.
Down-regulated mRNA expression of specific genes including Lhx8, Figla, Sohlh2
and Nobox, were also observed. The percentages of female germ cells in germ cell 
cysts and primordial follicles were counted after culture of newborn ovaries for 
3 days in vitro. The result showed female germ cells in cysts was remarkably
up-regulated while as the oocytes in primordial follicles was significantly
down-regulated (P < 0.05). In conclusion, Notch signaling pathway may regulate
the formation of primordial follicle in mice.

PMID: 24430295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Biosci Bioeng. 2014 Jun;117(6):664-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2013.11.015. Epub
2013 Dec 28.

Inhibition of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway by Dikkopf-1 affects midfacial morphogenesis 
in chick embryo.

Kawakami M(1), Okuda H(2), Tatsumi K(3), Kirita T(4), Wanaka A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nara Medical University, 840
Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8522, Japan. Electronic address:
mkawaka@naramed-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, Nara Medical
University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8522, Japan. Electronic address:
okuda@naramed-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, Nara Medical
University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8522, Japan. Electronic address:
radha815@naramed-u.ac.jp. (4)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nara
Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8522, Japan. Electronic
address: tkirita@naramed-u.ac.jp. (5)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences,
Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8522, Japan.
Electronic address: akiow@naramed-u.ac.jp.

The development of the vertebrate face is regulated by complex interactions among
several signaling pathways. Dickkopf-1 (Dkk-1), an inhibitor of the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway, can affect midfacial morphogenesis. The downstream target
genes of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway in morphogenesis of the developing
upper jaw and lip remain unknown. To investigate the functional roles of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in facial development, we performed a loss-of-function
experiment using local implantation of beads soaked with Dkk-1 during lip fusion 
at the maxillary prominence of chick embryos at stage 22(HH22). Antagonism of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by Dkk-1 induced deformities of the premaxilla and jugal 
bone, which are derived from the maxillary mesenchyme. Real-time and
semi-quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed the significant reduction of Lhx8, Msx1 
and Msx2 expression levels around the beads in the maxillary mesenchyme at 6 and 
24 h after bead implantation. Time course experiments in the HH 22 embryos showed
the effect of Dkk-1 on Lhx8, Msx1 and Msx2 expression was not significant after
48 h of the treatment. At HH 26 when the fusion of facial primordial started,
Dkk-1 application did not exhibit any significant reduction of those genes. Our
findings suggested that Dkk-1 regulates maxillary morphogenesis in chick embryos 
through Lhx8, Msx1 and Msx2 signals. Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is responsible for
intrinsic upper jaw development before the lip fusion.

Copyright © 2013 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 24378667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Jan 24;559:184-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.11.047. Epub
2013 Dec 4.

Upregulation of Lhx8 increase VAChT expression and ACh release in neuronal cell
line SHSY5Y.

Li H(1), Jin G(2), Zhu P(3), Zou L(4), Shi J(4), Yi X(4), Zhang X(1), Tian M(1), 
Qin J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, the Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, 
Medical College of Nantong University, Nantong 226001, China. (2)Department of
Human Anatomy, the Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Medical College
of Nantong University, Nantong 226001, China; Department of Human Anatomy and
Histoembryology, Medical School of Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China.
Electronic address: jguohua@ntu.edu.cn. (3)Department of Pathology, Shanghai
Changzheng Hospital, Shanghai 200003, China. (4)Department of Human Anatomy, the 
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Medical College of Nantong
University, Nantong 226001, China; Department of Human Anatomy and
Histoembryology, Medical School of Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China.

Lhx8 is a transcription factor for cholinergic differentiation. Our previous
experiments found upregulation of Lhx8 promoted cholinergic neuronal
differentiation of hippocampal neural stem/progenitor cells or hippocampal
newborn neurons in vitro. However, the role of Lhx8 in VAChT expression and ACh
release is still less understood. In this report, we transfected Lhx8 cDNA into
neuronal cell line SHSY5Y by lentiviral vectors to acquire the cells which stably
expressed high level of Lhx8. Using this cell model, we provided experimental
evidence that increasing Lhx8 upregulated the expression of ChAT and VAChT, and
also increased the ACh release in culture medium. We suggested that Lhx8
overexpression is a useful strategy to increase the release of ACh and maybe of
therapeutic value to neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24316404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jan 10;289(2):1000-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.494385. Epub 2013 
Nov 21.

LIM homeobox 8 (Lhx8) is a key regulator of the cholinergic neuronal function via
a tropomyosin receptor kinase A (TrkA)-mediated positive feedback loop.

Tomioka T(1), Shimazaki T, Yamauchi T, Oki T, Ohgoh M, Okano H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582 and.

Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons play an important role in cognitive functions
such as learning and memory, and they are affected in several neurodegenerative
diseases, including Alzheimer disease and Down syndrome. Despite their functional
importance, the molecular mechanisms of functional maturation and maintenance of 
these cholinergic neurons after the differentiation stage have not been fully
elucidated. This study demonstrates that the LIM homeobox 8 (Lhx8) transcription 
factor regulates cholinergic function in rat septal cholinergic neurons in
primary cultures from E18.5 embryos and in the adult brain. Lhx8 expression
modulated tropomyosin receptor kinase A (TrkA) expression in septal cholinergic
neurons in vitro and in vivo, resulting in regulated acetylcholine release as an 
index of cholinergic function. In addition, Lhx8 expression and function were
regulated by nerve growth factor (NGF), and the effect of NGF was potentiated by 
Lhx8-induced TrkA expression. Together, our findings suggest that positive
feedback regulation between Lhx8, TrkA, and NGF is an important regulatory
mechanism for cholinergic functions of the septum.

PMCID: PMC3887170
PMID: 24265310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;198(2):99-110. doi: 10.1159/000353116. Epub 2013 Jul
30.

Inductive ability of human developing and differentiated dental mesenchyme.

Zheng L(1), Warotayanont R, Stahl J, Kunimatsu R, Klein O, DenBesten PK, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orofacial Sciences, University of California, San Francisco,
Calif., USA.

The development of cell-based therapeutic strategies to bioengineer tooth tissue 
is a promising approach for the treatment of lost or damaged tooth tissue. The
lack of a readily available cell source for human dental epithelial cells (ECs)
severely constrains the progress of tooth bioengineering. Previous studies in
model organisms have demonstrated that developing dental mesenchyme can instruct 
nondental epithelium to differentiate into enamel-forming epithelium. In this
study, we characterized the ability of fetal and adult human dental mesenchyme to
promote differentiation of human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived ECs (ES-ECs) 
into ameloblast-lineage cells. ES-ECs were co-cultured either with human fetal
dental mesenchymal cells (FDMCs) or with adult dental mesenchymal cells (ADMCs)
in either a three-dimensional culture system, or in the renal capsules of SCID
mice. When co-cultured with FDMCs in vitro, ES-ECs polarized and expressed
amelogenin. Tooth organ-like structures assembled with epithelium and encased
mesenchyme and developing enamel-like structures could be detected in the
complexes resulting from in vitro and ex vivo co-culture of ES-ECs and FDMCs. In 
contrast, co-cultured ES-ECs and ADMCs formed amorphous spherical structures and 
occasionally formed hair. Transcription factors were significantly upregulated in
FDMCs compared to ADMCs including MSX1, GLI1, LHX6, LHX8,LEF1 and TBX1. In
summary, FDMCs but not ADMCs had the capacity to induce differentiation of ES-ECs
into ameloblast lineage cells. Further characterization of the functional
differences between these two types of dental mesenchyme could enable
reprogramming of ADMCs to enhance their odontogenic inductive competence.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 24192998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Dev Biol. 2014 Jan 1;385(1):94-106. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.10.010. Epub 2013
Oct 21.

Ldb1 is essential for development of Nkx2.1 lineage derived GABAergic and
cholinergic neurons in the telencephalon.

Zhao Y(1), Flandin P, Vogt D, Blood A, Hermesz E, Westphal H, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Program on Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
Electronic address: zhaoyang@mail.nih.gov.

The progenitor zones of the embryonic mouse ventral telencephalon give rise to
GABAergic and cholinergic neurons. We have shown previously that two
LIM-homeodomain (LIM-HD) transcription factors, Lhx6 and Lhx8, that are
downstream of Nkx2.1, are critical for the development of telencephalic GABAergic
and cholinergic neurons. Here we investigate the role of Ldb1, a nuclear protein 
that binds directly to all LIM-HD factors, in the development of these ventral
telencephalon derived neurons. We show that Ldb1 is expressed in the Nkx2.1 cell 
lineage during embryonic development and in mature neurons. Conditional deletion 
of Ldb1 causes defects in the expression of a series of genes in the ventral
telencephalon and severe impairment in the tangential migration of cortical
interneurons from the ventral telencephalon. Similar to the phenotypes observed
in Lhx6 or Lhx8 mutant mice, the Ldb1 conditional mutants show a reduction in the
number of both GABAergic and cholinergic neurons in the telencephalon.
Furthermore, our analysis reveals defects in the development of the
parvalbumin-positive neurons in the globus pallidus and striatum of the Ldb1
mutants. These results provide evidence that Ldb1 plays an essential role as a
transcription co-regulator of Lhx6 and Lhx8 in the control of mammalian
telencephalon development.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3882892
PMID: 24157949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Nov;11(3):1206-21. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.08.002. Epub 2013 
Aug 9.

Stepwise, non-adherent differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells to
generate basal forebrain cholinergic neurons via hedgehog signaling.

Crompton LA(1), Byrne ML, Taylor H, Kerrigan TL, Bru-Mercier G, Badger JL,
Barbuti PA, Jo J, Tyler SJ, Allen SJ, Kunath T, Cho K, Caldwell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratory for Integrative Neuroscience and Endocrinology,
School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Dorothy Hodgkin Building,
Whitson Street, Bristol BS1 3NY, UK.

Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (bfCNs) which provide innervation to the
hippocampus and cortex, are required for memory and learning, and are primarily
affected in Alzheimer's Disease (AD), resulting in related cognitive decline.
Therefore generation of a source of bfCNs from human pluripotent stem cells
(hPSCs) is crucial for in vitro disease modeling and development of novel AD
therapies. In addition, for the advancement of regenerative approaches there is a
requirement for an accurate developmental model to study the neurogenesis and
survival of this population. Here we demonstrate the efficient production of
bfCNs, using a novel embryoid body (EB) based non-adherent differentiation (NAdD)
protocol. We establish a specific basal forebrain neural stem cell (NSC)
phenotype via expression of the basal forebrain transcription factors NKX2.1 and 
LHX8, as well as the general forebrain marker FOXG1. We present evidence that
this lineage is achieved via recapitulation of embryonic events, with induction
of intrinsic hedgehog signaling, through the use of a 3D non-adherent
differentiation system. This is the first example of hPSC-derived basal
forebrain-like NSCs, which are scalable via self-renewal in prolonged culture.
Furthermore upon terminal differentiation these basal forebrain-like NSCs
generate high numbers of cholinergic neurons expressing the specific markers
ChAT, VACht and ISL1. These hPSC-derived bfCNs possess characteristics that are
crucial in a model to study AD related cholinergic neuronal loss in the basal
forebrain. Examples are expression of the therapeutic target p75(NTR), the
release of acetylcholine, and demonstration of a mature, and functional
electrophysiological profile. In conclusion, this work provides a renewable
source of human functional bfCNs applicable for studying AD specifically in the
cholinergic system, and also provides a model of the key embryonic events in
human bfCN development.

© 2013.

PMID: 24013066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Mar;22(3):333-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.138. Epub 2013 Jul 
17.

A homozygous 237-kb deletion at 1p31 identified as the locus for midline cleft of
the upper and lower lip in a consanguineous family.

Yildirim Y(1), Kerem M(2), Köroglu Ç(1), Tolun A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Bogaziçi University, Istanbul,
Turkey. (2)350;irnak State Hospital, Sirnak, Turkey.

Orofacial clefts are congenital defects that vary widely in type and severity,
and can occur in isolation or in association with a variety of other defects.
Herein, we describe a consanguineous family afflicted with a unique form of
orofacial clefting manifesting as a facial midline defect that also involves
mandibular and maxillary structures. All four affected sibs had median clefts of 
the upper and lower lips, tooth misalignment, and poor oral hygiene. Linkage
analysis of 17 family members identified a 15.3-Mb pair recessive locus at 1p31
with a LOD score of 3.63. To the best of our knowledge, this is, to date, the
first locus reported for facial midline clefting and the first recessive locus
for an isolated orofacial defect. The locus harboured a novel intergenic deletion
of 273<U+2009>164<U+2009>bp, for which all fully affected sibs were homozygous. We did not note
any potentially pathogenic gene variant at the 1p31 locus via exome-sequencing
analysis. The identified deletion could be harbouring a regulatory element for
the gene associated with the orofacial defect. The best candidate for the
putative target gene is LHX8, located 49<U+2009>149<U+2009>bp upstream of the deletion. The
gene is known to be associated with facial development in several animals. Four
other family members had a subclinical phenotype--a simple notch in the lower lip
or an increase in the interdental distance between the lower incisors--indicative
of very low-level expression of the trait.

PMCID: PMC3925266
PMID: 23860042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3099-112. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00524-13. Epub 2013 Jun
10.

A network of transcription factors operates during early tooth morphogenesis.

Zhao M(1), Gupta V, Raj L, Roussel M, Bei M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Developmental Biology, The Forsyth Institute,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Improving the knowledge of disease-causing genes is a unique challenge in human
health. Although it is known that genes causing similar diseases tend to lie
close to one another in a network of protein-protein or functional interactions, 
the identification of these protein-protein networks is difficult to unravel.
Here, we show that Msx1, Snail, Lhx6, Lhx8, Sp3, and Lef1 interact in vitro and
in vivo, revealing the existence of a novel context-specific protein network.
These proteins are all expressed in the neural crest-derived dental mesenchyme
and cause tooth agenesis disorder when mutated in mouse and/or human. We also
identified an in vivo direct target for Msx1 function, the cyclin D-dependent
kinase (CDK) inhibitor p19(ink4d), whose transcription is differentially
modulated by the protein network. Considering the important role of p19(ink4d) as
a cell cycle regulator, these results provide evidence for the first time of the 
unique plasticity of the Msx1-dependent network of proteins in conferring
differential transcriptional output and in controlling the cell cycle through the
regulation of a cyclin D-dependent kinase inhibitor. Collectively, these data
reveal a novel protein network operating in the neural crest-derived dental
mesenchyme that is relevant for many other areas of developmental and
evolutionary biology.

PMCID: PMC3753897
PMID: 23754753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Aug 26;548:44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.05.020. Epub 2013
May 16.

Cell type-selective expression of the zinc finger-containing gene Nolz-1/Zfp503
in the developing mouse striatum.

Ko HA(1), Chen SY, Chen HY, Hao HJ, Liu FC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 11221,
Taiwan, ROC.

The zinc finger-containing gene Nolz-1/Zfp503 is a developmentally regulated
striatum-enriched gene. In the present study, we characterized the cell
type-selective expression pattern of Nolz-1 protein in the developing mouse
striatum. Nolz-1 immunoreactivity was present in Isl-1-positive ventral LGE
(vLGE, striatal primordia), but absent in Pax6-positive dorsal LGE (dLGE,
non-striatal primordia). In the vLGE, Nolz-1 immunoreactivity was detected in
early differentiating TuJ1-positive neurons, but not in Ki67-positive
proliferating progenitor cells. Moreover, many Nolz-1-immunoreactive cells
co-expressed Foxp1 or Foxp2, markers for striatal projection neurons. To further 
characterize Nolz-1 expression with respect to D1R-containing striatonigral and
D2R-containing striatopallidal projection neurons, we used the Drd1-EGFP and
Drd2-EGFP transgenic mice. Nolz-1 and EGFP double labeled neurons were found in
the developing striatum of Drd1-EGFP and Drd2-EGFP mice, indicating Nolz-1
expression in both populations of striatal projection neurons. Notably, Nolz-1
protein was not expressed in Nkx2.1-positive interneuron progenitors,
Lhx8-positive cholinergic interneuron progenitors, nNOS and calretinin-positive
interneurons in E18.5 striatum. In the developing nucleus accumbens and olfactory
tubercles of ventral striatum, many Nolz-1-positive cells co-expressed Sox1, an
important transcriptional regulator for ventral striatum, suggesting a role of
Nolz-1 in regulating development of the ventral striatum. Finally, in contrast to
postnatal down-regulation of Nolz-1 in the dorsal striatum, Nolz-1 protein was
persistently expressed in the olfactory tubercle from E15.5 to adulthood. Taken
together, our study suggests that Nolz-1 serves as a marker for early
differentiating striatal projection neurons and that Nolz-1 may regulate
development of striatal projection neurons.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Cell Metab. 2013 May 7;17(5):798-805. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.04.011.

A classical brown adipose tissue mRNA signature partly overlaps with brite in the
supraclavicular region of adult humans.

Jespersen NZ(1), Larsen TJ, Peijs L, Daugaard S, Homøe P, Loft A, de Jong J,
Mathur N, Cannon B, Nedergaard J, Pedersen BK, Møller K, Scheele C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Inflammation and Metabolism, Department of Infectious Diseases,
Rigshospitalet, DK-2100 Copenhagen, Denmark.

Human brown adipose tissue (BAT) has been detected in adults but was recently
suggested to be of brite/beige origin. We collected BAT from the supraclavicular 
region in 21 patients undergoing surgery for suspected cancer in the neck area
and assessed the gene expression of established murine markers for brown,
brite/beige, and white adipocytes. We demonstrate that a classical brown
expression signature, including upregulation of miR-206, miR-133b, LHX8, and ZIC1
and downregulation of HOXC8 and HOXC9, coexists with an upregulation of two newly
established brite/beige markers, TBX1 and TMEM26. A similar mRNA expression
profile was observed when comparing isolated human adipocytes from BAT and white 
adipose tissue (WAT) depots, differentiated in vitro. In conclusion, our data
suggest that human BAT might consist of both classical brown and recruitable
brite adipocytes, an observation important for future considerations on how to
induce human BAT.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23663743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Ovarian Res. 2013 Apr 1;6(1):20. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-6-20.

Stimulation of ovarian stem cells by follicle stimulating hormone and basic
fibroblast growth factor during cortical tissue culture.

Parte S(1), Bhartiya D, Manjramkar DD, Chauhan A, Joshi A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health (NIRRH), JM Street, Parel, Mumbai, 400 012, India. bhartiyad@nirrh.res.in.

BACKGROUND: Cryopreserved ovarian cortical tissue acts as a source of primordial 
follicles (PF) which can either be auto-transplanted or cultured in vitro to
obtain mature oocytes. This offers a good opportunity to attain biological
parenthood to individuals with gonadal insufficiency including cancer survivors. 
However, role of various intra- and extra-ovarian factors during PF growth
initiation still remain poorly understood. Ovarian biology has assumed a
different dimension due to emerging data on presence of pluripotent very small
embryonic-like stem cells (VSELs) and ovarian germ stem cells (OGSCs) in ovary
surface epithelium (OSE) and the concept of postnatal oogenesis. The present
study was undertaken to decipher effect of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) and
basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) on the growth initiation of PF during organ
culture with a focus on ovarian stem cells.
METHODS: Serum-free cultures of marmoset (n=3) and human (young and
peri-menopausal) ovarian cortical tissue pieces were established. Cortical tissue
pieces stimulated with FSH (0.5 IU/ml) or bFGF (100 ng/ml) were collected on Day 
3 for histological and molecular studies. Gene transcripts specific for
pluripotency (Oct-4A, Nanog), early germ cells (Oct-4, c-Kit, Vasa) and to
reflect PF growth initiation (oocyte-specific Gdf-9 and Lhx8, and granulosa cells
specific Amh) were studied by q-RTPCR.
RESULTS: A prominent proliferation of OSE (which harbors stem cells) and
transition of PF to primary follicles was observed after FSH and bFGF treatment. 
Ovarian stem cells were found to be released on the culture inserts and retained 
the potential to spontaneously differentiate into oocyte-like structures in
extended cultures. q-RTPCR analysis revealed an increased expression of gene
transcripts specific for VSELs, OGSCs and early germ cells suggestive of
follicular transition.
CONCLUSION: The present study shows that both FSH and bFGF stimulate stem cells
present in OSE and also lead to PF growth initiation. Thus besides being a source
of PF, cryopreserved ovarian cortical tissue could also be a source of stem cells
which retain the ability to spontaneously differentiate into oocyte-like
structures in vitro. Results provide a paradigm shift in the basic understanding 
of FSH action and also offer a new perspective to the field of oncofertility
research.

PMCID: PMC3635909
PMID: 23547966  [PubMed]


33. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1384. doi: 10.1038/srep01384.

Intraovarian transplantation of primordial follicles fails to rescue chemotherapy
injured ovaries.

Park MR(1), Choi YJ, Kwon DN, Park C, Bui HT, Gurunathan S, Cho SG, Song H, Seo
HG, Min G, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, College of Animal Bioscience & Technology,
KonKuk University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

Busulfan and cyclophosphamide (B/C)-treated mice exhibited a marked increase in
apoptosis and a concomitant decrease in the ovarian weight. Histological and
RT-PCR analysis indicate that the period of germ cell depletion in the
B/C-treated ovaries coincides with decreased expression of genes Figla, Lhx8,
Nobox, c-kit, and Sox3. However, depletion of the ovarian germ cells is mediated 
by autophagy-independent pathways that involve Fas/FasL-, TNF-, and/or
p53-signalings. Treatment with B/C resulted in the cease of the reproductive
function to produce their offspring during the 15(th) week post-treatment period 
in female mice. Furthermore, injection of the 3 × 10(6) GFP positive primordial
follicles into the ovaries of the B/C treated mouse did not show apparent
colonization of the transplanted follicles within the recipient ovaries. The
present results suggest that B/C treatment is closely associated with an
increased risk of premature ovarian failure.

PMCID: PMC3589785
PMID: 23463338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. BMC Genomics. 2013 Feb 20;14:113. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-113.

Systematic analysis of palatal transcriptome to identify cleft palate genes
within TGFß3-knockout mice alleles: RNA-Seq analysis of TGFß3 Mice.

Ozturk F(1), Li Y, Zhu X, Guda C, Nawshad A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, College of Dentistry, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, 40th and Holdrege St, Lincoln, NE 68583, USA.

BACKGROUND: In humans, cleft palate (CP) accounts for one of the largest number
of birth defects with a complex genetic and environmental etiology. TGFß3 has
been established as an important regulator of palatal fusion in mice and it has
been shown that TGFß3-null mice exhibit CP without any other major deformities.
However, the genes that regulate cellular decisions and molecular mechanisms
maintained by the TGFß3 pathway throughout palatogenesis are predominantly
unexplored. Our objective in this study was to analyze global transcriptome
changes within the palate during different gestational ages within TGFß3 knockout
mice to identify TGFß3-associated genes previously unknown to be associated with 
the development of cleft palate. We used deep sequencing technology, RNA-Seq, to 
analyze the transcriptome of TGFß3 knockout mice at crucial stages of
palatogenesis, including palatal growth (E14.5), adhesion (E15.5), and fusion
(E16.5).
RESULTS: The overall transcriptome analysis of TGFß3 wildtype mice (C57BL/6)
reveals that almost 6000 genes were upregulated during the transition from E14.5 
to E15.5 and more than 2000 were downregulated from E15.5 to E16.5. Using
bioinformatics tools and databases, we identified the most comprehensive list of 
CP genes (n = 322) in which mutations cause CP either in humans or mice, and
analyzed their expression patterns. The expression motifs of CP genes between
TGFß3+/- and TGFß3-/- were not significantly different from each other, and the
expression of the majority of CP genes remained unchanged from E14.5 to E16.5.
Using these patterns, we identified 8 unique genes within TGFß3-/- mice (Chrng,
Foxc2, H19, Kcnj13, Lhx8, Meox2, Shh, and Six3), which may function as the
primary contributors to the development of cleft palate in TGFß3-/- mice. When
the significantly altered CP genes were overlaid with TGFß signaling, all of
these genes followed the Smad-dependent pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study represents the first analysis of the palatal transcriptome
of the mouse, as well as TGFß3 knockout mice, using deep sequencing methods. In
this study, we characterized the critical regulation of palatal transcripts that 
may play key regulatory roles through crucial stages of palatal development. We
identified potential causative CP genes in a TGFß3 knockout model, which may lead
to a better understanding of the genetic mechanisms of palatogenesis and provide 
novel potential targets for gene therapy approaches to treat cleft palate.

PMCID: PMC3618314
PMID: 23421592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2013 Feb;49(2):103-7. doi:
10.1007/s11626-013-9582-8. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

LIM-homeobox gene Lhx8 promote the differentiation of hippocampal newborn neurons
into cholinergic neurons in vitro.

Zhu P(1), Li H, Jin G, Tian M, Tan X, Shi J, Zou L, Qin J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Medical School of Nantong University, Nantong,
China.

PMID: 23385486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55301. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055301. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

WNK signaling is involved in neural development via Lhx8/Awh expression.

Sato A(1), Shibuya H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Medical Research Institute, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

WNK kinase family is conserved among many species and regulates SPAK/OSR1 and ion
co-transporters. Some mutations in human WNK1 or WNK4 are associated with
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II, a form of hypertension. WNK is also involved in 
developmental and cellular processes, but the molecular mechanisms underlying its
regulation in these processes remain unknown. Here, we identify a new target gene
in WNK signaling, Arrowhead and Lhx8, which is a mammalian homologue of
Drosophila Arrowhead. In Drosophila, WNK was shown to genetically interact with
Arrowhead. In Wnk1 knockout mice, levels of Lhx8 expression were reduced. Ectopic
expression of WNK1, WNK4 or Osr1 in mammalian cells induced the expression of the
Lhx8. Moreover, neural specification was inhibited by the knockdown of both Wnk1 
and Wnk4 or Lhx8. Drosophila WNK mutant caused defects in axon guidance during
embryogenesis. These results suggest that WNK signaling is involved in the
morphological and neural development via Lhx8/Arrowhead.

PMCID: PMC3559379
PMID: 23383144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Clin Exp Reprod Med. 2012 Dec;39(4):127-31. doi: 10.5653/cerm.2012.39.4.127. Epub
2012 Dec 31.

Transcription factors in the maintenance and survival of primordial follicles.

Lim EJ(1), Choi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, CHA University, Seoul, Korea.

Primordial follicles are formed prenatally in mammalian ovaries, and at birth
they are fated to be activated to primary follicles, to be dormant, or to die.
During the early stage of folliclulogenesis, the oocyte undergoes dynamic
alterations in expression of numerous genes, which are regulated by transcription
factors. Several germ-cell specific transcriptional regulators are critical for
formation and maintenance of follicles. These transcriptional regulators include:
Figla, Lhx8, Nobox, Sohlh1, and Sohlh2. A subset of these transcriptional
regulators is mutated in women with ovarian insufficiency and infertility.
Establishment of this oocyte pool is essential for fertility. This review focuses
on these transcriptional regulators of female primordial follicles.

PMCID: PMC3548069
PMID: 23346521  [PubMed]


38. Regen Med. 2013 Mar;8(2):125-44. doi: 10.2217/rme.12.117. Epub 2012 Dec 18.

Seven diverse human embryonic stem cell-derived chondrogenic clonal embryonic
progenitor cell lines display site-specific cell fates.

Sternberg H(1), Kidd J, Murai JT, Jiang J, Rinon A, Erickson IE, Funk WD, Wang Q,
Chapman KB, Vangsness CT Jr, West MD.

Author information: 
(1)BioTime, Inc., 1301 Harbor Bay Parkway, Alameda, CA 94502, USA.

AIM: The transcriptomes of seven diverse clonal human embryonic progenitor cell
lines with chondrogenic potential were compared with that of bone marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
MATERIALS & METHODS: The cell lines 4D20.8, 7PEND24, 7SMOO32, E15, MEL2, SK11 and
SM30 were compared with MSCs using immunohistochemical methods, gene expression
microarrays and quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS: In the undifferentiated progenitor state, each line displayed unique
combinations of site-specific markers, including AJAP1, ALDH1A2, BMP5, BARX1,
HAND2, HOXB2, LHX1, LHX8, PITX1, TBX15 and ZIC2, but none of the lines expressed 
the MSC marker CD74. The lines showed diverse responses when differentiated in
the presence of combinations of TGF-ß3, BMP2, 4, 6 and 7 and GDF5, with the lines
4D20.8, SK11, SM30 and MEL2 showing osteogenic markers in some differentiation
conditions. The line 7PEND24 showed evidence of regenerating articular cartilage 
and, in some conditions, markers of tendon differentiation.
CONCLUSION: The scalability of site-specific clonal human embryonic stem
cell-derived embryonic progenitor cell lines may provide novel models for the
study of differentiation and methods for preparing purified and identified cells 
types for use in therapy.

PMID: 23249126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Reprod. 2012 Dec;16(4):379-84. doi: 10.12717/DR.2012.16.4.379.

Identification and Characterization of LHX8 DNA Binding Elements.

Park M(1), Jeon S(1), Jeong JH(1), Park M(2), Lee DR(1), Yoon TK(2), Choi DH(3), 
Choi Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biomedical Science, CHA University, Seoul 135-081, Korea.
(2)Fertility Center of CHA Gangnam Medical Center, CHA University, Seoul 135-081,
Korea. (3)Dept. of Obstetrics and Gynecology, CHA Bundang Medical Center, School 
of Medicine, CHA University, Seongnam 463-7121, Korea. (4)Dept. of Biomedical
Science, CHA University, Seoul 135-081, Korea ; Fertility Center of CHA Gangnam
Medical Center, CHA University, Seoul 135-081, Korea.

Lhx8 (LIM homeobox 8) gene encodes a LIM homeodomain transcriptional regulator
that is preferentially expressed in germ cells and critical for mammalian
folliculogenesis. However, Lhx8 DNA binding sequences are not characterized yet. 
We aimed to identify and characterize a cis-acting sequence of germ-cell specific
transcriptional factor, Lhx8. To identify Lhx8 DNA binding element, Cyclic
Amplification of Sequence Target (CAST) Analysis was performed. Electrophoretic
Mobility Shift Assay (EMSA) was processed for the binding specificity of Lhx8.
Luciferase assay was for the transcriptional activity of Lhx8 through identified 
DNA binding site. We identified a putative cis-acting sequence, TGATTG as Lhx8
DNA binding element (LBE). In addition, Lhx8 binds to the LBE with high affinity 
and augments transcriptional activity of luciferase reporter driven by artificial
promoter containing the Lhx8 binding element. These findings indicate that Lhx8
directly regulates the transcription of genes containing Lhx8 binding element in 
oocytes during early folliculogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4282238
PMID: 25949113  [PubMed]


40. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2012 Dec;48(10):603-9. doi:
10.1007/s11626-012-9562-4. Epub 2012 Nov 13.

Lhx8 promote differentiation of hippocampal neural stem/progenitor cells into
cholinergic neurons in vitro.

Shi J(1), Li H, Jin G, Zhu P, Tian M, Qin J, Tan X, Zhao S, Wang F, Hua Y, Xiao
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cytoneurobiology, Medical College of Soochow
University, Suzhou, 215123, China.

Lhx8, also named L3, is a recently identified member of the LIM homeobox gene
family. Previously, we found acetylcholinesterase (AChE)-positive cells in
fimbria-fornix (FF) transected rat hippocampal subgranular zone (SGZ). In the
present study, we detected choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)-positive cholinergic 
cells in hippocampal SGZ after FF transaction, and these ChAT-positive cells were
double labeled by Lhx8. Then we overexpressed Lhx8 during neural differentiation 
of hippocampal neural stem/progenitor cells on adherent conditions using
lentivirus Lenti6.3-Lhx8. The result indicated that overexpression of Lhx8 did
not affect the proportion of MAP2-positive neurons, but increased the proportion 
of ChAT-positive cells in vitro. These results suggested that FF-transected
hippocampal niche promoted the ChAT/Lhx8-positive cholinergic neurons generation 
in rodent hippocampus, and Lhx8 was not associated with the MAP2-positive neurons
differentiation on adherent conditions, but played a role in the specification of
cholinergic neurons derived from hippocampal neural stem/progenitor cells in
vitro.

PMID: 23150137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Gene. 2012 Sep 10;506(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.06.093. Epub 2012 Jul 10.

Expression and epigenetic dynamics of transcription regulator Lhx8 during mouse
oogenesis.

Zhang LJ(1), Pan B, Chen B, Zhang XF, Liang GJ, Feng YN, Wang LQ, Ma JM, Li L,
Shen W.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Reproduction and Germplasm Enhancement in
Universities of Shandong, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, 266109,
China.

The spatial and temporal specific activation and inhibition of numerous genes are
required for successful oogenesis which is precisely regulated by germ
cell-related transcription factors, and appropriate epigenetic modifications,
including DNA methylation, histone modification and other mechanisms that closely
regulate the functional exertion of these transcription factors. In this study,
we characterized the correlation between the expression and epigenetic dynamics
of Lhx8, a germ cell specific transcription factor during mouse oogenesis.
Immunohistochemistry, quantitative PCR and western blots were performed to
localize and quantify the expressional characteristics of Lhx8 in oocytes of 13.5
dpc (day post coitum), 17.5 dpc, 0 dpp (day post partum), 3 dpp, 7 dpp and 14
dpp. The results showed that LHX8 protein was located in the nucleus of oocytes, 
and increasingly expressed during primordial follicle activation. Sequencing of
bisulfite-converted genomic DNAs revealed that the methylation dynamics of
Lhx8-3' was highly changeable but almost no change occurred in Lhx8-5'. ChIP-QPCR
analysis showed that histone H3 acetylation of Lhx8 was also increased during
primordial follicle assembly and activation. In conclusion, Lhx8 expression is
related with the activation of primordial follicles, which is highly correlated
with the demethylation of Lhx8-3' untranslated region and the high acetylation of
histone H3.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22796561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Regen Med. 2012 Jul;7(4):481-501. doi: 10.2217/rme.12.29. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

A human embryonic stem cell-derived clonal progenitor cell line with chondrogenic
potential and markers of craniofacial mesenchyme.

Sternberg H(1), Murai JT, Erickson IE, Funk WD, Das S, Wang Q, Snyder E, Chapman 
KB, Vangsness CT Jr, West MD.

Author information: 
(1)BioTime, Inc., Alameda, CA 94502, USA.

AIMS: We screened 100 diverse human embryonic stem-derived progenitor cell lines 
to identify novel lines with chondrogenic potential.
MATERIALS & METHODS: The 4D20.8 cell line was compared with mesenchymal stem
cells and dental pulp stem cells by assessing osteochondral markers using
immunohistochemical methods, gene expression microarrays, quantitative real-time 
PCR and in vivo repair of rat articular condyles.
RESULTS: 4D20.8 expressed the site-specific gene markers LHX8 and BARX1 and
robustly upregulated chondrocyte markers upon differentiation. Differentiated
4D20.8 cells expressed relatively low levels of COL10A1 and lacked IHH and CD74
expression. Transplantation of 4D20.8 cells into experimentally induced defects
in the femoral condyle of athymic rats resulted in cartilage and bone
differentiation approximating that of the original tissue architecture.
Relatively high COL2A1 and minimal COL10A1 expression occurred during
differentiation in HyStem-C hydrogel with TGF-ß3 and GDF-5.
CONCLUSION: Human embryonic stem cell-derived embryonic progenitor cell lines may
provide a novel means of generating purified site-specific osteochondral
progenitor cell lines that are useful in research and therapy.

PMID: 22519755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Front Physiol. 2012 Apr 10;3:85. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00085. eCollection 2012.

Implications of TGFß on Transcriptome and Cellular Biofunctions of Palatal
Mesenchyme.

Zhu X(1), Ozturk F, Pandey S, Guda CB, Nawshad A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Nebraska Medical Center Lincoln, NE,
USA.

Development of the palate comprises sequential stages of growth, elevation, and
fusion of the palatal shelves. The mesenchymal component of palates plays a major
role in early phases of palatogenesis, such as growth and elevation. Failure in
these steps may result in cleft palate, the second most common birth defect in
the world. These early stages of palatogenesis require precise and chronological 
orchestration of key physiological processes, such as growth, proliferation,
differentiation, migration, and apoptosis. There is compelling evidence for the
vital role of TGFß-mediated regulation of palate development. We hypothesized
that the isoforms of TGFß regulate different cellular biofunctions of the palatal
mesenchyme to various extents. Human embryonic palatal mesenchyme (HEPM) cells
were treated with TGFß1, ß2, and ß3 for microarray-based gene expression studies 
in order to identify the roles of TGFß in the transcriptome of the palatal
mesenchyme. Following normalization and modeling of 28,869 human genes, 566
transcripts were detected as differentially expressed in TGFß-treated HEPM cells.
Out of these altered transcripts, 234 of them were clustered in cellular
biofunctions, including growth and proliferation, development, morphology,
movement, cell cycle, and apoptosis. Biological interpretation and network
analysis of the genes active in cellular biofunctions were performed using IPA.
Among the differentially expressed genes, 11 of them are known to be crucial for 
palatogenesis (EDN1, INHBA, LHX8, PDGFC, PIGA, RUNX1, SNAI1, SMAD3, TGFß1, TGFß2,
and TGFßR1). These genes were used for a merged interaction network with cellular
behaviors. Overall, we have determined that more than 2% of human transcripts
were differentially expressed in response to TGFß treatment in HEPM cells. Our
results suggest that both TGFß1 and TGFß2 orchestrate major cellular biofunctions
within the palatal mesenchyme in vitro by regulating expression of 234 genes.

PMCID: PMC3322527
PMID: 22514539  [PubMed]


44. Genes Brain Behav. 2012 Jun;11(4):444-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2012.00778.x. 
Epub 2012 Apr 11.

Evaluation of the LIM homeobox genes LHX6 and LHX8 as candidates for Tourette
syndrome.

Paschou P(1), Stylianopoulou E, Karagiannidis I, Rizzo R, Tarnok Z, Wolanczyk T, 
Hebebrand J, Nöthen MM, Lehmkuhl G, Farkas L, Nagy P, Szymanska U, Lykidis D,
Androutsos C, Tsironi V, Koumoula A, Barta C, Klidonas S, Ypsilantis P,
Simopoulos C; TSGeneSEE Consortium, Skavdis G, Grigoriou M.

Collaborators: Kapisyzi M, Basha E, Paschou P, Karagiannidis I, Koumoula A,
Androutsos C, Tsironi V, Tarnok Z, Farkas L, Nagy P, Barta C, Rizzo R, Wolanczyk 
T, Szymanska U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Democritus University of Thrace,
Panepistimioupoli, Dragana, Greece. ppaschou@mbg.duth.gr

The etiology and pathophysiology of Tourette Syndrome (TS) remain poorly
understood. Multiple lines of evidence suggest that a complex genetic background 
and the cortico-striato-thalamo-cortical circuit are involved. The role of Lhx6
and Lhx8 in the development of the striatal interneurons, prompted us to
investigate them as novel candidate genes for TS. We performed a comparative
study of the expression of Lhx6 and Lhx8 and investigated genetic association
with TS using two samples of trios (TSGeneSEE and German sample - 222 families). 
We show that Lhx6 and Lhx8 expression in the forebrain is evolutionarily
conserved, underlining their possible importance in TS-related pathophysiological
pathways. Our tagging-single nucleotide polymorphism (tSNP)-based association
analysis was negative for association with LHX8. However, we found positive
association with LHX6 in the TSGeneSEE sample (corrected P-value = 0.006 for
three-site haplotype around SNP rs3808901) but no association in the sample of
German families. Interestingly, the SNP allele that was identified to be
significantly associated in the TSGeneSEE dataset, showed an opposite trend of
transmission in the German dataset. Our analysis of the correlation of the LHX6
region with individual ancestry within Europe, revealed the fact that this
particular SNP demonstrates a high degree of population differentiation and is
correlated with the North to South axis of European genetic variation. Our
results indicate that further study of the LHX6 gene in relation to the TS
phenotype is warranted and suggest the intriguing hypothesis that different
genetic factors may contribute to the etiology of TS in different populations,
even within Europe.

© 2012 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and
International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

PMID: 22435649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Biol. 2012 May 1;365(1):229-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.02.033. Epub 2012
Mar 3.

Median facial clefts in Xenopus laevis: roles of retinoic acid signaling and
homeobox genes.

Kennedy AE(1), Dickinson AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Virginia Commonwealth University, 1000 West Cary St., Department of Biology,
Richmond, VA 23284, USA.

The upper lip and primary palate form an essential separation between the brain, 
nasal structures and the oral cavity. Surprisingly little is known about the
development of these structures, despite the fact that abnormalities can result
in various forms of orofacial clefts. We have uncovered that retinoic acid is a
critical regulator of upper lip and primary palate development in Xenopus laevis.
Retinoic acid synthesis enzyme, RALDH2, and retinoic acid receptor gamma (RAR<U+03B3>)
are expressed in complementary and partially overlapping regions of the orofacial
prominences that fate mapping revealed contribute to the upper lip and primary
palate. Decreased RALDH2 and RAR<U+03B3> result in a median cleft in the upper lip and
primary palate. To further understand how retinoic acid regulates upper lip and
palate morphogenesis we searched for genes downregulated in response to RAR<U+03B3>
inhibition in orofacial tissue, and uncovered homeobox genes lhx8 and msx2. These
genes are both expressed in overlapping domains with RAR<U+03B3>, and together their
loss of function also results in a median cleft in the upper lip and primary
palate. Inhibition of RAR<U+03B3> and decreased Lhx8/Msx2 function result in decreased
cell proliferation and failure of dorsal anterior cartilages to form. These
results suggest a model whereby retinoic acid signaling regulates Lhx8 and Msx2, 
which together direct the tissue growth and differentiation necessary for the
upper lip and primary palate morphogenesis. This work has the potential to better
understand the complex nature of the upper lip and primary palate development
which will lead to important insights into the etiology of human orofacial
clefts.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22405964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 1;21(7):1016-46. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0271. Epub 2012
Feb 8.

Pharmacological modulation of the Hedgehog pathway differentially affects
dorsal/ventral patterning in mouse and human embryonic stem cell models of
telencephalic development.

Nat R(1), Salti A, Suciu L, Ström S, Dechant G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Neuroscience, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria. 
irina-roxana.nat@i-med.ac.at

A complex set of extrinsic and intrinsic signals acts in specific temporal and
spatial orders to enable neural differentiation during development. These
processes have been extensively studied in animal models, but human neural
development remains much less understood. This lack of detailed information about
human early neurogenesis is a hindrance for the differentiation of pluripotent
stem cell lines into specific neuronal phenotypes. Therefore, it is important to 
strengthen the interspecies comparative approaches. We describe a novel model
system in which in vitro differentiation of human and mouse embryonic stem (ES)
cells are temporally aligned to each other and compared with mouse telencephalic 
neurogenesis in vivo. In this comparative model system, we tested the in vitro
role of Hedgehog (Hh) signaling for ES cell-derived telencephalic
differentiation. In vivo, Hh signaling mediates dorsal/ventral patterning during 
early stages of telencephalic development. We monitored the effect of
pharmacological modulators of the Hh signaling pathway, purmorphamine-an agonist 
and cyclopamine-an antagonist of the Smoothened receptor (Smo), on the expression
of region-specific transcription factors and signaling molecules relevant for
telencephalic development in vivo. Purmorphamine strongly upregulated the
expression of telencephalic ventral markers Nkx2.1, Nkx6.2, Lhx6, and Lhx8 in
mouse and human cells, thus reflecting the in vivo process of the medial
ganglionic eminence patterning and specification. Cyclopamine upregulated the
expression of telencephalic dorsal markers, but at lower levels in human compared
with mouse cells. Modulation of Smo in vitro differentially affected, in mouse
and human cells, the expression of molecules of the Hh pathway, especially the
Gli1 and Gli3 effectors, Sonic Hh ligand and Ptch receptors. These results
provide evidence for the different default differentiation of mouse and human ES 
cells and prove the utility of the comparative system for optimizing the directed
differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells.

PMID: 22204396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jun 5;356(1-2):31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.07.049.
Epub 2011 Aug 12.

Oogenesis: transcriptional regulators and mouse models.

Jagarlamudi K(1), Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Magee-Womens
Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Oocyte differentiation into a totipotent cell requires initial germ cell cyst
breakdown to form primordial follicles, recruitment of primordial follicles for
development into primary follicles and remarkable growth of the ovarian follicle 
which culminates in ovulation. During oogenesis, the oocyte undergoes dynamic
alterations in gene expression which are regulated by a set of well-coordinated
transcription factors active in the germ line and soma. A number of germ cell
specific as well as somatic expressed transcriptional regulators are critical in 
ovarian formation and folliculogenesis. These transcriptional regulators include:
Foxo3, Foxl2, Figla, Lhx8, Nobox, Sohlh1 and Sohlh2. A subset of these
transcriptional regulators is mutated in women with ovarian insufficiency and
infertility. Studies on transcriptional regulators preferentially expressed in
the ovary are important to develop a better understanding of the mechanisms of
activation and survival of ovarian follicles, as well as an understanding of
ovary specific pathways that can be modulated in the future to regulate fertility
and protect against external insults such as chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21856374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Neuron. 2011 Jun 9;70(5):939-50. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.04.020.

Lhx6 and Lhx8 coordinately induce neuronal expression of Shh that controls the
generation of interneuron progenitors.

Flandin P(1), Zhao Y, Vogt D, Jeong J, Long J, Potter G, Westphal H, Rubenstein
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and the Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94158-2324, USA.

Lhx6 and Lhx8 transcription factor coexpression in early-born MGE neurons is
required to induce neuronal Shh expression. We provide evidence that these
transcription factors regulate expression of a Shh enhancer in MGE neurons. Lhx6 
and Lhx8 are also required to prevent Nkx2-1 expression in a subset of pallial
interneurons. Shh function in early-born MGE neurons was determined by
genetically eliminating Shh expression in the MGE mantle zone (MZ). This mutant
had reduced SHH signaling in the overlying progenitor zone, which led to reduced 
Lhx6, Lhx8, and Nkx2-1 expression in the rostrodorsal MGE and a preferential
reduction of late-born somatostatin(+) and parvalbumin(+) cortical interneurons. 
Thus, Lhx6 and Lhx8 regulate MGE development through autonomous and nonautonomous
mechanisms, the latter by promoting Shh expression in MGE neurons, which in turn 
feeds forward to promote the developmental program of the rostrodorsal MGE.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3153409
PMID: 21658586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 26;6(4):e19239. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019239.

Sim1 is a novel regulator in the differentiation of mouse dorsal raphe
serotonergic neurons.

Osterberg N(1), Wiehle M, Oehlke O, Heidrich S, Xu C, Fan CM, Krieglstein K,
Roussa E.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Neuroanatomy, Georg-August-University Goettingen, Goettingen,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons (mDA) and serotonergic (5-HT)
neurons are clinically important ventral neuronal populations. Degeneration of
mDA is associated with Parkinson's disease; defects in the serotonergic system
are related to depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, and schizophrenia.
Although these neuronal subpopulations reveal positional and developmental
relationships, the developmental cascades that govern specification and
differentiation of mDA or 5-HT neurons reveal missing determinants and are not
yet understood.
METHODOLOGY: We investigated the impact of the transcription factor Sim1 in the
differentiation of mDA and rostral 5-HT neurons in vivo using Sim1-/- mouse
embryos and newborn pups, and in vitro by gain- and loss-of-function approaches.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We show a selective significant reduction in the number of
dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) 5-HT neurons in Sim1-/- newborn mice. In contrast,
5-HT neurons of other raphe nuclei as well as dopaminergic neurons were not
affected. Analysis of the underlying molecular mechanism revealed that tryptophan
hydroxylase 2 (Tph2) and the transcription factor Pet1 are regulated by Sim1.
Moreover, the transcription factor Lhx8 and the modulator of 5-HT(1A)-mediated
neurotransmitter release, Rgs4, exhibit significant higher expression in ventral 
hindbrain, compared to midbrain and are target genes of Sim1.
CONCLUSIONS: The results demonstrate for the first time a selective transcription
factor dependence of the 5-HT cell groups, and introduce Sim1 as a regulator of
DRN specification acting upstream of Pet1 and Tph2. Moreover, Sim1 may act to
modulate serotonin release via regulating RGS4. Our study underscores that
subpopulations of a common neurotransmitter phenotype use distinct combinations
of transcription factors to control the expression of shared properties.

PMCID: PMC3082558
PMID: 21541283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2011 Apr;91(4):218-25. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20791. Epub 2011 Apr 1.

Variation in FGF1, FOXE1, and TIMP2 genes is associated with nonsyndromic cleft
lip with or without cleft palate.

Nikopensius T(1), Kempa I, Ambrozaityte L, Jagomägi T, Saag M, Matuleviciene A,
Utkus A, Krjutkov K, Tammekivi V, Piekuse L, Akota I, Barkane B, Krumina A,
Klovins J, Lace B, Kucinskas V, Metspalu A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu, Estonia.
tiitn@ebc.ee

BACKGROUND: Nonsyndromic cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P) is a
common complex birth defect caused by the interaction between multiple genes and 
environmental factors.
METHODS: Five hundred and eighty-seven single nucleotide polymorphisms in 40
candidate genes related to orofacial clefting were tested for association with
CL/P in a clefting sample composed of 300 patients and 606 controls from
Estonian, Latvian, and Lithuanian populations.
RESULTS: In case-control comparisons, the minor alleles of FGF1 rs34010 (p = 4.56
× 10(-4) ), WNT9B rs4968282 (p = 0.0013), and FOXE1 rs7860144 (p = 0.0021) were
associated with a decreased risk of CL/P. Multiple haplotypes in FGF1, FOXE1, and
TIMP2 and haplotypes in WNT9B, PVRL2, and LHX8 were associated with CL/P. The
strongest association was found for protective haplotype rs250092/rs34010 GT in
the FGF1 gene (p = 5.01 × 10(-4) ). The strongest epistatic interaction was
observed between the COL2A1 and WNT3 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide for the first time evidence implicating FGF1 in 
the occurrence of CL/P, and support TIMP2 and WNT9B as novel loci predisposing to
CL/P. We have also replicated recently reported significant associations between 
variants in or near FOXE1 and CL/P. It is likely that variation in FOXE1, TIMP2, 
and the FGF and Wnt signaling pathway genes confers susceptibility to
nonsyndromic CL/P in Northeastern European populations.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21462296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Oral Pathol Med. 2011 Mar;40(3):250-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2010.00970.x.
Epub 2010 Dec 10.

Comparative study of LHX8 expression between odontoma and dental tissue-derived
stem cells.

Kim JY(1), Jeon SH, Park JY, Suh JD, Choung PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Dental Research Institute,
Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: LHX8 (LIM-homeobox gene 8) is known as an important regulating factor
in tooth morphogenesis. Odontoma is a mixed odontogenic tumor where epithelium
and mesenchyme differentiated together, resulting in anomalous tooth structures. 
In this study, gene and protein expressions of LHX8 were analyzed in human
odontoma-derived mesenchymal cells (HODC) compared to adult dental mesenchymal
stem cells (aDSC), as well as morphological and histological characteristics of
odontoma were analyzed.
METHODS: aDSCs were isolated from normal teeth, and HODCs were isolated from
surgically removed odontoma mass. Morphological and histological evaluations were
performed to compare between compound odontomas and normal premolars. RT-PCR and 
real-time PCR were performed to identify LHX8 mRNA expression in the HODCs and
aDSCs. LHX8 protein expression levels were observed by immunoblotting and
immunofluorescent staining.
RESULTS: The compound odontoma was composed of multiple tooth-like structures,
which contained disorganized but recognizable enamel matrix, dentin, pulp, and
cementum. LHX8 mRNA and LHX8 protein expressions were all higher in HODCs
compared to those in aDSCs examined by RT-PCR, immunoblot, and immunofluorescent 
staining. Especially, real-time PCR showed 2.77-fold higher LHX8 expression in
HODCs than in normal periodontal ligament stem cells (PDLSCs), while alveolar
bone marrow stem cells (ABMSCs) expressed 0.12-fold LHX8 than PDLSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on these observations, LHX8 might play an important role in
odontoma formation. This is the first report regarding the comparison of LHX8
expression between HODC and normal aDSCs and its overexpression in human samples.
The specific mechanism of LHX8 in odontoma morphogenesis awaits further study.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21143530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biol Reprod. 2011 Apr;84(4):654-63. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.087213. Epub 2010
Dec 1.

Yin-yang1 is required in the mammalian oocyte for follicle expansion.

Griffith GJ(1), Trask MC, Hiller J, Walentuk M, Pawlak JB, Tremblay KD, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Science, University of Massachusetts,
Amherst, MA, USA.

The multifaceted polycomb group gene Yin-Yang1 (Yy1) has been implicated in a
variety of transcriptional regulatory roles both as an activator and silencer of 
gene expression. Here we examine the role of Yy1 during oocyte growth by
conditional deletion of the locus in the growing oocyte. Our results indicate
that YY1 is required for oocyte maturation and granulosa cell expansion. In
mutant oocytes, we observe severely reduced expression of both Gdf9 and Bmp15,
suggesting a mechanism underlying the failure of granulosa cell expansion.
Consequently, we observe infertility, failure of estrus cycling, and altered
reproductive hormone levels in mutant females. Additionally, we find that
YY1-deficient oocytes exhibit altered levels of several oocyte-specific factors, 
including Pou5f1, Figla, Lhx8, Oosp1, and Sohlh2. These results document YY1's
involvement in folliculogenesis and ovarian function in the mouse and indicate
that YY1 is required specifically in the oocyte for oocyte-granulosa cell
communication.

PMID: 21123818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;650:101-9. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-769-3_8.

Regulation and/or repression of cholinergic differentiation of murine embryonic
stem cells using RNAi directed against transcription factor L3/Lhx8.

Manabe T(1), Wanaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of 2nd Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Nara Medical University, Nara,
Japan.

Techniques for controlling the expression of a specific gene in embryonic stem
cells are effective and important for clarifying the functions of the gene.
Regarding differentiation of cells into nervous system components, these
techniques would play key roles in elucidating, not only the differentiation
mechanisms of neuronal and glial cells, but also how neuronal phenotypes are
determined. In this chapter, we describe an RNA interference method for
suppressing cholinergic differentiation in murine embryonic stem cells by
knockdown of expression of the transcription factor L3/Lhx8, a Lim homeobox gene 
family protein. This method will greatly facilitate functional analyses of the
factors involved in neuronal differentiation and regeneration and contribute to
cell transplantation studies.

PMID: 20686946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jun 25;397(2):146-51. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.053. Epub 2010 May 23.

PPARalpha does not suppress muscle-associated gene expression in brown adipocytes
but does influence expression of factors that fingerprint the brown adipocyte.

Waldén TB(1), Petrovic N, Nedergaard J.

Author information: 
(1)The Wenner-Gren Institute, The Arrhenius Laboratories F3, Stockholm
University, SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden.

Brown adipocytes and myocytes develop from a common adipomyocyte precursor.
PPARalpha is a nuclear receptor important for lipid and glucose metabolism. It
has been suggested that in brown adipose tissue, PPARalpha represses the
expression of muscle-associated genes, in this way potentially acting to
determine cell fate in brown adipocytes. To further understand the possible role 
of PPARalpha in these processes, we measured expression of muscle-associated
genes in brown adipose tissue and brown adipocytes from PPARalpha-ablated mice,
including structural genes (Mylpf, Tpm2, Myl3 and MyHC), regulatory genes
(myogenin, Myf5 and MyoD) and a myomir (miR-206). However, in our hands, the
expression of these genes was not influenced by the presence or absence of
PPARalpha, nor by the PPARalpha activator Wy-14,643. Similarly, the expression of
genes common for mature brown adipocyte and myocytes (Tbx15, Meox2) were not
affected. However, the brown adipocyte-specific regulatory genes Zic1, Lhx8 and
Prdm16 were affected by PPARalpha. Thus, it would not seem that PPARalpha
represses muscle-associated genes, but PPARalpha may still play a role in the
regulation of the bifurcation of the adipomyocyte precursor into a brown
adipocyte or myocyte phenotype.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20471959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2010 Mar 5;285(10):7153-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.053942. Epub 2009 
Dec 22.

Chronic peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) activation
of epididymally derived white adipocyte cultures reveals a population of
thermogenically competent, UCP1-containing adipocytes molecularly distinct from
classic brown adipocytes.

Petrovic N(1), Walden TB, Shabalina IG, Timmons JA, Cannon B, Nedergaard J.

Author information: 
(1)Wenner-Gren Institute, The Arrhenius Laboratories, Stockholm University,
SE-106 91 Stockholm, Sweden. natasa.petrovic@wgi.su.se

The recent insight that brown adipocytes and muscle cells share a common origin
and in this respect are distinct from white adipocytes has spurred questions
concerning the origin and molecular characteristics of the UCP1-expressing cells 
observed in classic white adipose tissue depots under certain physiological or
pharmacological conditions. Examining precursors from the purest white adipose
tissue depot (epididymal), we report here that chronic treatment with the
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma agonist rosiglitazone promotes
not only the expression of PGC-1alpha and mitochondriogenesis in these cells but 
also a norepinephrine-augmentable UCP1 gene expression in a significant subset of
the cells, providing these cells with a genuine thermogenic capacity. However,
although functional thermogenic genes are expressed, the cells are devoid of
transcripts for the novel transcription factors now associated with classic brown
adipocytes (Zic1, Lhx8, Meox2, and characteristically PRDM16) or for
myocyte-associated genes (myogenin and myomirs (muscle-specific microRNAs)) and
retain white fat characteristics such as Hoxc9 expression. Co-culture experiments
verify that the UCP1-expressing cells are not proliferating classic brown
adipocytes (adipomyocytes), and these cells therefore constitute a subset of
adipocytes ("brite" adipocytes) with a developmental origin and molecular
characteristics distinguishing them as a separate class of cells.

PMCID: PMC2844165
PMID: 20028987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Development. 2009 Nov;136(22):3841-51. doi: 10.1242/dev.038083.

LIM homeodomain transcription factor-dependent specification of bipotential MGE
progenitors into cholinergic and GABAergic striatal interneurons.

Fragkouli A(1), van Wijk NV, Lopes R, Kessaris N, Pachnis V.

Author information: 
(1)MRC National Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Coordination of voluntary motor activity depends on the generation of the
appropriate neuronal subtypes in the basal ganglia and their integration into
functional neuronal circuits. The largest nucleus of the basal ganglia, the
striatum, contains two classes of neurons: the principal population of
medium-sized dense spiny neurons (MSNs; 97-98% of all striatal neurons in
rodents), which project to the globus pallidus and the substantia nigra, and the 
locally projecting striatal interneurons (SINs; 2-3% in rodents). SINs are
further subdivided into two non-overlapping groups: those producing acetylcholine
(cholinergic) and those producing gamma-amino butyric acid (GABAergic). Despite
the pivotal role of SINs in integrating the output of striatal circuits and the
function of neuronal networks in the ventral forebrain, the lineage relationship 
of SIN subtypes and the molecular mechanisms that control their differentiation
are currently unclear. Using genetic fate mapping, we demonstrate here that the
majority of cholinergic and GABAergic SINs are derived from common precursors
generated in the medial ganglionic eminence during embryogenesis. These
precursors express the LIM homeodomain protein Lhx6 and have characteristics of
proto-GABAergic neurons. By combining gene expression analysis with
loss-of-function and misexpression experiments, we provide evidence that the
differentiation of the common precursor into mature SIN subtypes is regulated by 
the combinatorial activity of the LIM homeodomain proteins Lhx6, Lhx7 (Lhx8) and 
Isl1. These studies suggest that a LIM homeodomain transcriptional code confers
cell-fate specification and neurotransmitter identity in neuronal subpopulations 
of the ventral forebrain.

PMCID: PMC2766344
PMID: 19855026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Gynecol Obstet Fertil. 2008 Dec;36(12):1224-9. doi: 10.1016/j.gyobfe.2008.10.005.
Epub 2008 Nov 12.

[Knockout mice in the service of reproduction].

[Article in French]

Escalier D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'andrologie, CHU de Kremlin-Bicêtre, AP-HP, 78, avenue du
Général-Leclerc, 94275 Le Kremlin-Bicêtre cedex, France. denise.escalier@noos.fr

At least 600 infertile knockout mice have been produced and this review is
limited to recent models involving unexpected genes in reproduction or genes
involved in recently identified molecular biology pathways. They concern the
female meiosis (Brca1), primordial follicles (Lhx8), granulosa cells (Lrh1), and,
for both sexes, mitochondria (Immp2l) and meiosis (Ubb). Germ cells can be
altered differently following the sex, as it is the case for Dicer, known to be
involved in the formation of miRNA. Knockout mice can support data obtained in
human, such as for HNRNPGT, whose role in the human spermatogenesis remained
questionable. However, due to numerous factors involved, positive results
obtained by the "candidate gene approach" remain limited (for example, SCP3 and
CREM). Nevertheless, knockout mouse models bring considerable knowledge on genes 
possibly involved in men and women infertilities.

PMID: 19008143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2008;1135:146-54. doi: 10.1196/annals.1429.019.

Genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity in ovarian failure: overview of selected
candidate genes.

Simpson JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Florida International University, College of Medicine, Miami, FL 33199, USA.
simpsonj@fiu.edu

Ovarian failure is heterogeneous, both in cause and in phenotype. Women whose
menses cease prior to age 40 years and have menopausal FSH levels are
traditionally considered by clinicians to have the diagnosis of "premature
ovarian failure" (POF). In fact, however, the ovarian function in this disorder
is in reality a continuum of impairment in ovarian responsiveness. For this
reason the term "primary ovarian insufficiency" (POI) has been suggested to be
more accurate. It would be yet more desirable to classify this disorder on the
basis of aberrant embryonic differentiation rather than the state of ovarian
function. Genes that exert known hormonal effects (FSH, FSHR, LH, LHR, CYP17,
CYP19) primarily affect follicle function, as do BMP15, GDF9, and GPR3. These
genes mutations have occasionally been found in humans, but none are common.
Still other genes expressed during oogenesis appear more likely to be
characterized by lack of germ cell formation. These include DNA binding proteins 
and transcription factors like NOBOX and LHX8, and RNA binding proteins like
NANOS. Plausible causative mutations have been identified in a few women (NOBOX, 
GDF9, LDX8), but even then only 1-2% of cases show a perturbation. Thus,
considerable heterogeneity-phenotypic as well as etiologic-exists in ovarian
failure, irrespective of whether follicles do or do not develop. Analysis of
other genes is necessary, including many likely to show novel mechanisms of
action.

PMID: 18574220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Biol Reprod. 2008 Sep;79(3):442-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.069393. Epub 2008 
May 28.

Lim homeobox gene, lhx8, is essential for mouse oocyte differentiation and
survival.

Choi Y(1), Ballow DJ, Xin Y, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA.

Lhx8 is a member of the LIM-homeobox transcription factor family and
preferentially expressed in oocytes and germ cells within the mouse ovary. We
discovered that Lhx8 knockout females lose oocytes within 7 days after birth. At 
the time of birth, histological examination shows that Lhx8-deficient (Lhx8-/-)
ovaries are grossly similar to the newborn wild-type ovaries. Lhx8-/- ovaries
fail to maintain the primordial follicles, and the transition from primordial to 
growing follicles does not occur. Lhx8-/- ovaries misexpress oocyte-specific
genes, such as Gdf9, Pou5f1, and Nobox. Very rapid loss of oocytes may partly be 
due to the drastic downregulation of Kit and Kitl in Lhx8-/- ovaries. We compared
Lhx8-/- and wild-type ovaries using an Affymetrix 430 2.0 microarray platform. A 
total of 80 (44%) of 180 of the genes downregulated more than 5-fold in Lhx8-/-
ovaries were preferentially expressed in oocytes, whereas only 3 (2%) of 146
genes upregulated more than 5-fold in the absence of Lhx8 were preferentially
expressed in oocytes. In addition, the comparison of genes regulated in Lhx8-/-
and Nobox-/- newborn ovaries discovered a common set of 34 genes whose expression
level was affected in both Lhx8- and Nobox-deficient mice. Our findings show that
Lhx8 is a critical factor for maintenance and differentiation of the oocyte
during early oogenesis, and it acts in part by downregulating the Nobox pathway.

PMCID: PMC2710541
PMID: 18509161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2008 Jun;48(2):68-73. doi:
10.1111/j.1741-4520.2008.00181.x.

Morphological and immunohistochemical studies on cleft palates induced by
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin in mice.

Fujiwara K(1), Yamada T, Mishima K, Imura H, Sugahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Cleft Lip and Palate Center, Aichi Gakuin University, Nagoya, Japan.

Morphological and immunohistological examinations were performed to reveal the
mechanisms of cleft palate induction by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin
(TCDD). ICR strain mice 8-10 weeks of age were used in the study. TCDD was
administered in olive oil on gestation day (GD) 12.5 with gastric tubes at 40
microg/kg. From GD 13.5 to 16.5, palates were examined by scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), hematoxyline-eosin (HE) staining, and immunohistochemical
staining of FGFR1/2, TGF-beta3, MSX1 and LHX8. In the control group, both of the 
palatal shelves began elevating on GD 14.0 and finished within 6 h. After the
elevation, all of the shelves had completely fused with each other on GD 14.5. In
the TCDD-treated group, palatal shelves elevated 1 day later than in the control 
group. However, all palates had elevated by GD 15.0. After the elevation, the
shelves contacted each other and fused; however, they were separated on GD16.0.
HE staining showed that medial edge epithelium (MEE) was thinner in the TCDD
group than in the control group. MEE observed under a high magnification (x2500) 
exhibited filopodia-like filaments and the cells were bulged in the control
group. In contrast, in the TCDD group, no filaments were observed and the cells
were flat with unclear boundaries. Immunohistologically, there were no
characteristic findings except for FGFR1. FGFR1 was not expressed in the TCDD
group after the fusion phase (GD 14.5). TCDD induces many morphological and
molecular changes to MEE cells and causes cleft palates.

PMID: 18452487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2008 Apr;26(2):249-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2007.11.004.
Epub 2007 Dec 4.

Knockdown of the L3/Lhx8 gene suppresses cholinergic differentiation of murine
embryonic stem cell-derived spheres.

Manabe T(1), Tatsumi K, Inoue M, Matsuyoshi H, Makinodan M, Yamauchi T, Makinodan
E, Yokoyama S, Sakumura R, Okuda H, Wanaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of 2nd Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Nara Medical University, 840
Shijyo-cho, Kasihara City, Nara 634-8521, Japan. manabe@cdb.riken.jp

L3/Lhx8, a member of the Lim-homeobox gene family, is selectively and
specifically expressed in the murine embryonic medial ganglionic eminence (MGE). 
Our previous study demonstrated that L3/Lhx8-deficient mice specifically lack
cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain. In this manuscript, we report the in 
vitro effects of reduced L3/Lhx8 gene expression on cholinergic differentiation
in murine embryonic stem (ES) cell-derived spheres without dissociation. The
knockdown of L3/Lhx8 gene expression dramatically decreased the cholinergic
phenotype of spheres without altering other known phenotypes (TuJ1, GABA and
GFAP). These results strongly suggest that L3/Lhx8 is a key factor for
cholinergic differentiation of murine ES cell-derived spheres and is involved in 
basal forebrain development.

PMID: 18248940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Jan;8(2):58-70. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Transcriptome analysis of differentiating spermatogonia stimulated with kit
ligand.

Rossi P(1), Lolicato F, Grimaldi P, Dolci S, Di Sauro A, Filipponi D, Geremia R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Sanita' Pubblica e Biologia Cellulare, Universita' degli Studi
di Roma Tor Vergata, via Montpellier 1, 00133 Rome, Italy.
pellegrino.rossi@med.uniroma2.it

Kit ligand (KL) is a survival factor and a mitogenic stimulus for differentiating
spermatogonia. However, it is not known whether KL also plays a role in the
differentiative events that lead to meiotic entry of these cells. We performed a 
wide genome analysis of difference in gene expression induced by treatment with
KL of spermatogonia from 7-day-old mice, using gene chips spanning the whole
mouse genome. The analysis revealed that the pattern of RNA expression induced by
KL is compatible with the qualitative changes of the cell cycle that occur during
the subsequent cell divisions in type A and B spermatogonia, i.e. the progressive
lengthening of the S phase and the shortening of the G2/M transition. Moreover,
KL up-regulates in differentiating spermatogonia the expression of early meiotic 
genes (for instance: Lhx8, Nek1, Rnf141, Xrcc3, Tpo1, Tbca, Xrcc2, Mesp1, Phf7,
Rtel1), whereas it down-regulates typical spermatogonial markers (for instance:
Pole, Ptgs2, Zfpm2, Egr2, Egr3, Gsk3b, Hnrpa1, Fst, Ptch2). Since KL modifies the
expression of several genes known to be up-regulated or down-regulated in
spermatogonia during the transition from the mitotic to the meiotic cell cycle,
these results are consistent with a role of the KL/kit interaction in the
induction of their meiotic differentiation.

PMID: 18036996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Fertil Steril. 2008 Apr;89(4):1012-4. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Analysis of LHX8 mutation in premature ovarian failure.

Qin Y(1), Zhao H, Kovanci E, Simpson JL, Chen ZJ, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Shandong Provincial Hospital of Shandong
University, Jinan, China.

The LHX8 (LIM homeobox 8) gene encodes a LIM homeodomain transcriptional
regulator that is preferentially expressed in germ cells and critical for
mammalian oogenesis. The authors investigated whether nucleotide changes were
present in the LHX8 gene of Caucasian women with premature ovarian failure (POF),
as compared with control women. When the authors sequenced 95 Caucasian women
with POF, they discovered two novel single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
intron 3 (c.769+10G>T) and 3' untranslated region (c.1787A>G) of the LHX8 gene.
These polymorphisms also were found in controls (n = 94), at frequencies that
were not statistically different from those in POF women. Mutations in the LHX8
exons are uncommon in Caucasian women with POF.

PMCID: PMC2680741
PMID: 17624344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell Death Differ. 2007 Jun;14(6):1080-5. Epub 2007 Feb 23.

L3/Lhx8 is a pivotal factor for cholinergic differentiation of murine embryonic
stem cells.

Manabe T(1), Tatsumi K, Inoue M, Makinodan M, Yamauchi T, Makinodan E, Yokoyama
S, Sakumura R, Wanaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of 2nd Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Nara Medical University, 840
Shijyo-cho, Kasihara City, Nara 634-8521, Japan. manabe@cdb.riken.jp

L3/Lhx8 is a member of the LIM-homeobox gene family. Previously, we demonstrated 
that L3/Lhx8-null mice specifically lacked cholinergic neurons in the basal
forebrain. In the present study, we conditionally suppressed L3/Lhx8 function
during retinoic acid-induced neural differentiation of a murine embryonic stem
(ES) cell line using an L3/Lhx8-targeted small interfering RNA (siRNA) produced
by an H1.2 promoter-driven vector. Our culture conditions induced efficient
differentiation of the ES cells into neurons and astrocytes, but far less
efficient differentiation into oligodendrocytes. Suppression of L3/Lhx8
expression by siRNA led to a dramatic decrease in the number of cells positive
for the cholinergic marker ChAT, and overexpression of L3/Lhx8 recovered this
effect. However, no significant changes were observed in the number of Tuj1+
neurons and GABA+ cells. These results strongly suggest that L3/Lhx8 is a key
factor in the cholinergic differentiation of murine ES cells and is involved in
basal forebrain development.

PMID: 17318222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(3):353-7.

Candidate genes for premature ovarian failure.

Suzumori N(1), Pangas SA, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medicine, 1 Kawasumi, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.
og.n.suz@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is defined as the cessation of ovarian function
under the age of 40 years and is characterized by amenorrhea, hypoestrogenism,
and elevated serum gonadotropin concentrations. POF affects 1% of all women and
occurs in approximately 0.1% before the age of 30 years. To date, mutations
associated with POF have been identified in a small number of genes, including
those encoding inhibin alpha (INHA), the FSH receptor and the LH/chorio
gonadotrophin receptor. Germ cell specific genes such as Gdf9, Bmp15, and Rfpl4
may also play important roles in human oogenesis. Transcription factors that
regulate oocyte gene expression in animal models and include Nobox, Taf4b, Figla,
Lhx8, Sohlh1 and Sohlh2 are likely to be key mediators of fertility in humans. In
this review, after summarizing the general background on human POF, we focus on
insights gained from the animal models with regards to mammalian
folliculogenesis. Studies in animal models provide new candidate genes for
ovarian failure in humans.

PMID: 17305537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 May 23;103(21):8090-5. Epub 2006 May 11.

Oogenesis requires germ cell-specific transcriptional regulators Sohlh1 and Lhx8.

Pangas SA(1), Choi Y, Ballow DJ, Zhao Y, Westphal H, Matzuk MM, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mammalian oogenesis requires oocyte-specific transcriptional regulators. The full
complement of oocyte-specific transcription factors is unknown. Here, we describe
the finding that Sohlh1, a spermatogenesis and oogenesis basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor in females, is preferentially expressed in oocytes and
required for oogenesis. Sohlh1 disruption perturbs follicular formation in part
by causing down-regulation of two genes that are known to disrupt
folliculogenesis: newborn ovary homeobox gene (Nobox) and factor in the germ-line
alpha (Figla). In addition, we show that Lhx8 is downstream of Sohlh1 and
critical in fertility. Thus, Sohlh1 and Lhx8 are two germ cell-specific, critical
regulators of oogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1472434
PMID: 16690745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Biol. 2006 Jun 1;294(1):161-7. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Sohlh1 is essential for spermatogonial differentiation.

Ballow D(1), Meistrich ML, Matzuk M, Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty Center, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of
Medicine, 1709 Dryden Street, Suite 1100, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Spermatogonia are adult germline stem cells that can both self-renew and
differentiate into spermatocytes. Little is known about factors necessary for
spermatogonial differentiation. We identified a novel germ-cell-specific
transcription factor that we named Sohlh1 (testis and ovary expressed basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor). In males, Sohlh1 is preferentially
expressed in prespermatogonia and Type A spermatogonia. Loss of Sohlh1 causes
infertility by disrupting spermatogonial differentiation into spermatocytes.
Seven-day-old testes without Sohlh1 still express the testis-specific
transcription factors Etv5, Taf4b, Zfp148, and Plzf, overexpress a novel Tohlh2
bHLH transcription factor, but lack LIM homeobox gene Lhx8 and show reduced
expression of Ngn3. Sohlh1 represents the first testis-specific bHLH
transcription factor that is essential for spermatogonial differentiation.

PMID: 16564520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Anat Embryol (Berl). 2006 Jun;211(3):247-53. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Expression and regulation of the LIM homeodomain gene L3/Lhx8 suggests a role in 
upper lip development of the chick embryo.

Inoue M(1), Kawakami M, Tatsumi K, Manabe T, Makinodan M, Matsuyoshi H, Kirita T,
Wanaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nara Medical University,
634-8522, Kashihara Nara, Japan.

LIM-homeodomain (Lhx) genes constitute a gene family that plays critical roles in
the control of pattern formation and cell type specification. We have identified 
a chicken L3/Lhx8 gene, which was widely expressed in the craniofacial region.
Whole-mount in situ hybridization showed that L3/Lhx8 mRNA was expressed from
stage 15--31 HH in overlapping domains of the maxillary process. Frozen sections 
revealed these signals in the mesenchyme underneath the epithelium. To determine 
whether the expression of L3/Lhx8 in the maxillary primordia required signals
from the overlying oral epithelium, maxillary processes of stage 23 HH chick
embryos were transplanted into the limb bud, in which the mesenchyme was grown in
the presence or absence of oral epithelium. The maxillary mesenchyme with
epithelium showed significant levels of L3/Lhx8 gene expression. In contrast, no 
expression of L3/Lhx8 was detected in the epithelium-free mesenchyme. To further 
explore signaling molecule(s) responsible for Lhx induction, a bead, soaked in
either Fgf-8b or TGF-beta3, was implanted into an epithelium-free mesenchymal
graft. Both TGF-beta3 and Fgf-8b beads induced expressions of L3/Lhx8 in
epithelium-free mesenchymal grafts. Our data suggest that the L3/Lhx8 gene
contributes to epithelial mesenchymal interaction in facial morphogenesis and
that Fgf-8b and TGF-beta3 were, at least in part, responsible for the Lhx
expression in the maxillary process.

PMID: 16456677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. PLoS Genet. 2005 Dec;1(6):e64. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Medical sequencing of candidate genes for nonsyndromic cleft lip and palate.

Vieira AR(1), Avila JR, Daack-Hirsch S, Dragan E, Félix TM, Rahimov F, Harrington
J, Schultz RR, Watanabe Y, Johnson M, Fang J, O'Brien SE, Orioli IM, Castilla EE,
Fitzpatrick DR, Jiang R, Marazita ML, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Nonsyndromic or isolated cleft lip with or without cleft palate (CL/P) occurs in 
wide geographic distribution with an average birth prevalence of 1/700. We used
direct sequencing as an approach to study candidate genes for CL/P. We report
here the results of sequencing on 20 candidate genes for clefts in 184 cases with
CL/P selected with an emphasis on severity and positive family history. Genes
were selected based on expression patterns, animal models, and/or role in known
human clefting syndromes. For seven genes with identified coding mutations that
are potentially etiologic, we performed linkage disequilibrium studies as well in
501 family triads (affected child/mother/father). The recently reported MSX1
P147Q mutation was also studied in an additional 1,098 cleft cases. Selected
missense mutations were screened in 1,064 controls from unrelated individuals on 
the Centre d'Etude du Polymorphisme Humain (CEPH) diversity cell line panel. Our 
aggregate data suggest that point mutations in these candidate genes are likely
to contribute to 6% of isolated clefts, particularly those with more severe
phenotypes (bilateral cleft of the lip with cleft palate). Additional cases,
possibly due to microdeletions or isodisomy, were also detected and may
contribute to clefts as well. Sequence analysis alone suggests that point
mutations in FOXE1, GLI2, JAG2, LHX8, MSX1, MSX2, SATB2, SKI, SPRY2, and TBX10
may be rare causes of isolated cleft lip with or without cleft palate, and the
linkage disequilibrium data support a larger, as yet unspecified, role for
variants in or near MSX2, JAG2, and SKI. This study also illustrates the need to 
test large numbers of controls to distinguish rare polymorphic variants and
prioritize functional studies for rare point mutations.

PMCID: PMC1298935
PMID: 16327884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Neurochem. 2005 Aug;94(3):723-30. Epub 2005 Jul 5.

L3/Lhx8 is involved in the determination of cholinergic or GABAergic cell fate.

Manabe T(1), Tatsumi K, Inoue M, Matsuyoshi H, Makinodan M, Yokoyama S, Wanaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of 2nd Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, Nara Medical University,
Kasihara City, Nara, Japan. manabe@naramed-u.ac.jp

The LIM homeobox family of transcription factors is involved in many processes
during the development of the mammalian central nerves system. L3, also called
Lhx8 (L3/Lhx8), is a recently identified member of the LIM homeobox gene family
and is selectively expressed in the medial ganglionic eminence (MGE). Our
previous study demonstrated that L3/Lhx8-null mice specifically lacked
cholinergic neurons in the basal forebrain. In this study, we reduced L3/Lhx8
function in the murine neuroblastoma cell line, Neuro2a (N2a), using
L3/Lhx8-targeted small interfering RNA (siRNA) produced by H1.2 promoter-driven
vector. The levels of cholinergic markers per cell were diminished without a
reduction in the number of marker-positive cells. Intriguingly, GABAergic marker 
expression and the number of GABAergic cells were dramatically increased in the
differentiating L3/Lhx8-knockdown N2a. These results suggest the possibility that
L3/Lhx8 is involved in the determination of transmitter phenotypes (GABAergic or 
cholinergic cell fate) in a population of neurons during basal forebrain
development.

PMID: 16000160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 Jun;19(12):3129-41.

The LIM homeobox gene, L3/Lhx8, is necessary for proper development of basal
forebrain cholinergic neurons.

Mori T(1), Yuxing Z, Takaki H, Takeuchi M, Iseki K, Hagino S, Kitanaka J,
Takemura M, Misawa H, Ikawa M, Okabe M, Wanaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Science, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Fukushima
Medical University, 1 Hikarigaoka, Fukushima City, Fukushima, 960-1295 Japan.

Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCNs) are involved in cognitive functions
such as learning and memory, and are affected in several neurodegenerative
diseases (e.g. Alzheimer's disease). Despite their importance, the molecular
mechanisms of their development are not fully elucidated. A recent report
demonstrated that some BFCNs in adult rat are positive for L3/Lhx8, a LIM
homeobox transcription factor. To examine the function of L3/Lhx8 in the
development of BFCNs, we generated L3/Lhx8 gene-disrupted mice. In these mice,
cells expressing cholinergic neuron markers, such as choline acetyltransferase,
vesicular acetylcholine transporter and p75 low-affinity NGF receptor, were
markedly reduced in the basal forebrain, whereas other cholinergic neurons
including brain stem and spinal motor neurons expressed the markers.
Neurotransmitter phenotypes other than cholinergic in the basal forebrain
appeared intact. From these results, we suggested that L3/Lhx8 has a pivotal and 
specific role in the development and/or maintenance of BFCNs.

PMID: 15217369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Jul 22;100(15):9005-10. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

The LIM-homeobox gene Lhx8 is required for the development of many cholinergic
neurons in the mouse forebrain.

Zhao Y(1), Marín O, Hermesz E, Powell A, Flames N, Palkovits M, Rubenstein JL,
Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892,USA.

Forebrain cholinergic neurons play important roles as striatal local circuit
neurons and basal telencephalic projection neurons. The genetic mechanisms that
control development of these neurons suggest that most of them are derived from
the basal telencephalon where Lhx8, a LIM-homeobox gene, is expressed. Here we
report that mice with a null mutation of Lhx8 are deficient in the development of
forebrain cholinergic neurons. Lhx8 mutants lack the nucleus basalis, a major
source of the cholinergic input to the cerebral cortex. In addition, the number
of cholinergic neurons is reduced in several other areas of the subcortical
forebrain in Lhx8 mutants, including the caudate-putamen, medial septal nucleus, 
nucleus of the diagonal band, and magnocellular preoptic nucleus. Although
cholinergic neurons are not formed, initial steps in their specification appear
to be preserved, as indicated by a presence of cells expressing a truncated Lhx8 
mRNA and mRNA of the homeobox gene Gbx1. These results provide genetic evidence
supporting an important role for Lhx8 in development of cholinergic neurons in
the forebrain.

PMCID: PMC166428
PMID: 12855770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Arch Histol Cytol. 2003 Mar;66(1):95-108.

Expression and role of Lhx8 in murine tooth development.

Shibaguchi T(1), Kato J, Abe M, Tamamura Y, Tabata MJ, Liu JG, Iwamoto M,
Wakisaka S, Wanaka A, Kurisu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

We examined the expression and possible functions of Lhx8, a member of the
LIM-homeobox gene family, during tooth morphogenesis of the mouse. Lhx8 was
expressed in the dental mesenchyme between the bud and early bell stage of the
molar tooth germ. Tooth germ explants from embryonic day 12.5 mice treated for 5 
to 7 days with antisense-oligodeoxynucleotides (AS-ODN) against Lhx8 showed a
marked decrease in the number of mesenchymal cells. The explants treated with
AS-ODN for 11 to 14 days were filled with a large number of undifferentiated
epithelial cells and a limited number of undifferentiated mesenchymal cells, but 
did not contain a tooth germ. Treatment of explants with AS-ODN for 7 days
suppressed the proliferation of dental mesenchymal cells and induced apoptosis;
the latter was confirmed by histochemical and ultrastructural examinations.
Moreover, the expression of Lhx6, Msx1, Msx2, Bmp4 and Gsc, which are also known 
to be involved in tooth morphogenesis, were suppressed after the application of
AS-ODN against Lhx8 for 7 days. The present results suggest that Lhx8 plays an
important role in the survival of mesenchymal cells of the tooth germ during
development.

PMID: 12703558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Orthod Craniofac Res. 2002 May;5(2):65-70.

Comparison of the expression patterns of two LIM-homeodomain genes, Lhx6 and
L3/Lhx8, in the developing palate.

Zhang Y(1), Mori T, Takaki H, Takeuch M, Iseki K, Hagino S, Murakawa M, Yokoya S,
Wanaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical
University, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: To compare and contrast the gene expression of two LIM-homeobox type 
transcription factors, Lhx6 and L3/Lhx8, in secondary palate formation.
METHODS: In situ hybridization histochemistry with digoxygenin (DIG) labelled
cRNA probes specific for Lhx6 and L3/Lhx8.
MATERIALS: Serial cryo-sections of embryonic day (E)13.5, 14.5, and 15.5 mice
(C57BL/6).
OUTCOME MEASURE: Comparison of the signal intensities of NBT/BCIP precipitate by 
alkaline phosphatase conjugated anti-DIG antibody.
RESULTS: From E13.5 to E15.5, Lhx6 and L3/Lhx8 signals are detected in palatal
mesenchyme, but the L3/Lhx8 signal is much more intense than the Lhx6 signal. In 
palatal epithelium, covering the mesenchyme, Lhx6 mRNA is transiently expressed
at E14.5, while L3/Lhx8 mRNA expression is never detected throughout the
development.
CONCLUSION: Lhx6 and L3/Lhx8 functions may be partially redundant in the
mesenchyme of the secondary palate, but not in the palatal epithelium.

PMID: 12086327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Dec 21;96(26):15002-6.

Isolated cleft palate in mice with a targeted mutation of the LIM homeobox gene
lhx8.

Zhao Y(1), Guo YJ, Tomac AC, Taylor NR, Grinberg A, Lee EJ, Huang S, Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Formation of the mammalian secondary palate is a highly regulated and complex
process whose impairment often results in cleft palate, a common birth defect in 
both humans and animals. Loss-of-function analysis has linked a growing number of
genes to this process. Here we report that Lhx8, a recently identified LIM
homeobox gene, is expressed in the mesenchyme of the mouse palatal structures
throughout their development. To test the function of Lhx8 in vivo, we generated 
a mutant mouse with a targeted deletion of the Lhx8 gene. Our analysis of the
mutant animals revealed a crucial role for Lhx8 in palatogenesis. In Lhx8
homozygous mutant embryos, the bilateral primordial palatal shelves formed and
elevated normally, but they often failed to make contact and to fuse properly,
resulting in a cleft secondary palate. Because development of other craniofacial 
structures appeared normal, the impaired palatal formation in Lhx8-mutant mice
was most likely caused by an intrinsic primary defect in the mesenchyme of the
palatal shelves. The cleft palate phenotype observed in Lhx8-mutant mice suggests
that Lhx8 is a candidate gene for the isolated nonsyndromic form of cleft palate 
in humans.

PMCID: PMC24762
PMID: 10611327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Genomics. 1998 Apr 15;49(2):307-9.

Structure and chromosomal localization of a murine LIM/homeobox gene, Lhx8.

Kitanaka J(1), Takemura M, Matsumoto K, Mori T, Wanaka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.

Lhx8 is a LIM-homeodomain protein, containing two tandemly repeated LIM motifs
and a hemeodomain. The expression of Lhx8 is limited spatially to the medical
ganglionic eminence and the mesenchyme surrounding the oral cavity and temporally
from middle embryonic to early postnatal development, suggesting a role for Lhx8 
in differentiation of certain neurons and mesenchymal cells, just as the other
LIM-homeodomain proteins are implicated in determining the fates of certain cell 
types. Here we report the structure and the chromosomal localization of the Lhx8 
gene. The gene is composed of nine exons and eight introns. The first LIM domain 
is coded by two exons, exons 2 and 3, and the second by a single exon, exon 4.
The homeodomain is encoded by three exons, exons 6, 7, and 8. In situ chromosomal
hybridization demonstrated that the Lhx8 gene was localized in the distal region 
of mouse chromosome 3.

PMID: 9598319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


