
1. Prog Neurobiol. 2016 Mar 28. pii: S0301-0082(15)30020-4. doi:
10.1016/j.pneurobio.2016.02.003. [Epub ahead of print]

Evolution of mammalian sound localization circuits: a developmental perspective.

Nothwang HG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neurogenetics group, Center of Excellence Hearing4All, School of Medicine and 
Health Sciences, Carl von Ossietzky University Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg,
Germany; Research Center for Neurosensory Science, Carl von Ossietzky University 
Oldenburg, 26111 Oldenburg, Germany. Electronic address:
hans.g.nothwang@uni-oldenburg.de.

Localization of sound sources is a central aspect of auditory processing. A
unique feature of mammals is the smooth, tonotopically organized extension of the
hearing range to high frequencies (HF) above 10kHz, which likely induced positive
selection for novel mechanisms of sound localization. How this change in the
auditory periphery is accompanied by changes in the central auditory system is
unresolved. I will argue that the major VGlut2(+) excitatory projection neurons
of sound localization circuits (dorsal cochlear nucleus (DCN), lateral and medial
superior olive (LSO and MSO)) represent serial homologs with modifications, thus 
being paramorphs. This assumption is based on common embryonic origin from an
Atoh1(+)/Wnt1(+) cell lineage in the rhombic lip of r5, same cell birth, a
fusiform cell morphology, shared genetic components such as Lhx2 and Lhx9
transcription factors, and similar projection patterns. Such a parsimonious
evolutionary mechanism likely accelerated the emergence of neurons for sound
localization in all three dimensions. Genetic analyses indicate that auditory
nuclei in fish, birds, and mammals receive contributions from the same progenitor
lineages. Anatomical and physiological differences and the independent evolution 
of tympanic ears in vertebrate groups, however, argue for convergent evolution of
sound localization circuits in tetrapods (amphibians, reptiles, birds, and
mammals). These disparate findings are discussed in the context of the genetic
architecture of the developing hindbrain, which facilitates convergent evolution.
Yet, it will be critical to decipher the gene regulatory networks underlying
development of auditory neurons across vertebrates to explore the possibility of 
homologous neuronal populations.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 27032475  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. BMC Genomics. 2016 Mar 15;17(1):235. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2535-3.

Genomic structure and marker-derived gene networks for growth and meat quality
traits of Brazilian Nelore beef cattle.

Mudadu MA(1,)(2), Porto-Neto LR(3), Mokry FB(4), Tizioto PC(4), Oliveira PS(4),
Tullio RR(5), Nassu RT(5), Niciura SC(5), Tholon P(5), Alencar MM(5), Higa RH(6),
Rosa AN(7), Feijó GL(7), Ferraz AL(8), Silva LO(7), Medeiros SR(7), Lanna DP(9), 
Nascimento ML(9), Chaves AS(9), Souza AR(10), Packer IU(9), Torres RA Jr(7),
Siqueira F(7), Mourão GB(9), Coutinho LL(9), Reverter A(3), Regitano LC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Embrapa Agricultural Informatics, Av. André Tosello, 209, Campinas, SP,
Brazil. mauricio.mudadu@embrapa.br. (2)Embrapa Southeast Livestock, Rodovia
Washington Luiz, Km 234, São Carlos, SP, Brazil. mauricio.mudadu@embrapa.br.
(3)Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization - Agriculture,
306 Carmody Road, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. (4)Department of Genetics and
Evolution, Federal University of São Carlos, Rodovia Washington Luiz, Km 235, São
Carlos, SP, Brazil. (5)Embrapa Southeast Livestock, Rodovia Washington Luiz, Km
234, São Carlos, SP, Brazil. (6)Embrapa Agricultural Informatics, Av. André
Tosello, 209, Campinas, SP, Brazil. (7)Embrapa Beef Cattle, Av. Rádio Maia, 830, 
Campo Grande, MS, Brazil. (8)State University of Mato Grosso do Sul, Rodovia
Uems-Aquidauana km 12, Aquidauana, MS, Brazil. (9)Department of Animal Science,
University of São Paulo, Av. Padua Dias, 11306, Piracicaba, SP, Brazil.
(10)Faculdade de Medicina Veterinaria e Zootecnia, Federal University of Mato
Grosso do Sul, Av. Senador Filinto Müller, 2443, Campo Grande, MS, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Nelore is the major beef cattle breed in Brazil with more than 130
million heads. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) are often used to associate
markers and genomic regions to growth and meat quality traits that can be used to
assist selection programs. An alternative methodology to traditional GWAS that
involves the construction of gene network interactions, derived from results of
several GWAS is the AWM (Association Weight Matrices)/PCIT (Partial Correlation
and Information Theory). With the aim of evaluating the genetic architecture of
Brazilian Nelore cattle, we used high-density SNP genotyping data (~770,000 SNP) 
from 780 Nelore animals comprising 34 half-sibling families derived from highly
disseminated and unrelated sires from across Brazil. The AWM/PCIT methodology was
employed to evaluate the genes that participate in a series of eight phenotypes
related to growth and meat quality obtained from this Nelore sample.
RESULTS: Our results indicate a lack of structuring between the individuals
studied since principal component analyses were not able to differentiate
families by its sires or by its ancestral lineages. The application of the
AWM/PCIT methodology revealed a trio of transcription factors (comprising VDR,
LHX9 and ZEB1) which in combination connected 66 genes through 359 edges and
whose biological functions were inspected, some revealing to participate in
biological growth processes in literature searches.
CONCLUSIONS: The diversity of the Nelore sample studied is not high enough to
differentiate among families neither by sires nor by using the available
ancestral lineage information. The gene networks constructed from the AWM/PCIT
methodology were a useful alternative in characterizing genes and gene networks
that were allegedly influential in growth and meat quality traits in Nelore
cattle.

PMCID: PMC4791965
PMID: 26979536  [PubMed - in process]


3. Development. 2016 Mar 1;143(5):831-40. doi: 10.1242/dev.129551. Epub 2016 Jan 25.

The Lhx9-integrin pathway is essential for positioning of the proepicardial
organ.

Tandon P(1), Wilczewski CM(2), Williams CE(3), Conlon FL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, UNC at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280, USA
Department of Genetics, UNC at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280, USA
Integrative Program for Biological and Genome Sciences, UNC at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280, USA ptandon@email.unc.edu. (2)Department of Genetics,
UNC at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280, USA Integrative Program for
Biological and Genome Sciences, UNC at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280,
USA. (3)Integrative Program for Biological and Genome Sciences, UNC at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280, USA. (4)Department of Biology, UNC at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280, USA Department of Genetics, UNC at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280, USA Integrative Program for Biological and Genome
Sciences, UNC at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3280, USA University of North
Carolina McAllister Heart Institute, UNC at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-3280, USA.

The development of the vertebrate embryonic heart occurs by hyperplastic growth
as well as the incorporation of cells from tissues outside of the initial heart
field. Amongst these tissues is the epicardium, a cell structure that develops
from the precursor proepicardial organ on the right side of the septum
transversum caudal to the developing heart. During embryogenesis, cells of the
proepicardial organ migrate, adhere and envelop the maturing heart, forming the
epicardium. The cells of the epicardium then delaminate and incorporate into the 
heart giving rise to cardiac derivatives, including smooth muscle cells and
cardiac fibroblasts. Here, we demonstrate that the LIM homeodomain protein Lhx9
is transiently expressed in Xenopus proepicardial cells and is essential for the 
position of the proepicardial organ on the septum transversum. Utilizing a
small-molecule screen, we found that Lhx9 acts upstream of integrin-paxillin
signaling and consistently demonstrate that either loss of Lhx9 or disruption of 
the integrin-paxillin pathway results in mis-positioning of the proepicardial
organ and aberrant deposition of extracellular matrix proteins. This leads to a
failure of proepicardial cell migration and adhesion to the heart, and eventual
death of the embryo. Collectively, these studies establish a requirement for the 
Lhx9-integrin-paxillin pathway in proepicardial organ positioning and epicardial 
formation.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26811386  [PubMed - in process]


4. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Oct 27;9:136. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00136. eCollection
2015.

LIM homeobox protein 5 (Lhx5) is essential for mamillary body development.

Miquelajáuregui A(1), Sandoval-Schaefer T(1), Martínez-Armenta M(2),
Pérez-Martínez L(2), Cárabez A(1), Zhao Y(3), Heide M(4), Alvarez-Bolado G(4),
Varela-Echavarría A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Neurobiología del Desarrollo y Neurofisiología, Instituto de
Neurobiología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México Querétaro, Mexico.
(2)Laboratorio de Neuroinmunobiología, Departamento de Medicina Molecular y
Bioprocesos, Instituto de Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México 
Cuernavaca, Mexico. (3)Program on Genomics of Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy
Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National
Institutes of Health Bethesda, MD, USA. (4)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Heidelberg Heidelberg, Germany.

The mamillary body (MM) is a group of hypothalamic nuclei related to memory and
spatial navigation that interconnects hippocampal, thalamic, and tegmental
regions. Here we demonstrate that Lhx5, a LIM-HD domain transcription factor
expressed early in the developing posterior hypothalamus, is required for the
generation of the MM and its derived tracts. The MM markers Foxb1, Sim2, and Lhx1
are absent in Lhx5 knock-out mice from early embryonic stages, suggesting
abnormal specification of this region. This was supported by the absence of
Nkx2.1 and expansion of Shh in the prospective mamillary area. Interestingly, we 
also found an ectopic domain expressing Lhx2 and Lhx9 along the anterio-posterior
hypothalamic axis. Our results suggest that Lhx5 controls early aspects of
hypothalamic development by regulating gene expression and cellular specification
in the prospective MM.

PMCID: PMC4621302
PMID: 26578897  [PubMed]


5. Gene Expr Patterns. 2015 Sep-Nov;19(1-2):45-51. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2015.07.002.
Epub 2015 Jul 26.

Lhx9 gene expression during early limb development in mice requires the FGF
signalling pathway.

Yang Y(1), Wilson MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Genomics Laboratory, Department of Anatomy, Otago
School of Medical Sciences, University of Otago, P.O. Box 56, Dunedin 9054, New
Zealand. (2)Developmental Biology and Genomics Laboratory, Department of Anatomy,
Otago School of Medical Sciences, University of Otago, P.O. Box 56, Dunedin 9054,
New Zealand. Electronic address: meganj.wilson@otago.ac.nz.

Lhx9 is a member of the LIM-homeodomain gene family necessary for the correct
development of many organs including gonads, limbs, heart and the nervous system.
In the context of limb development, Lhx9 has been implicated as an integrator for
Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) and Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signalling required for
proximal-distal (PD) and anterior-posterior (AP) development of the limb. Three
splice variants of the Lhx9 transcript are expressed during development, two of
which are predicted to act in a dominant negative fashion, competing with the DNA
binding version of Lhx9 for binding to cofactors via the LIM-domain. We examined 
the expression pattern for the three alternative splice forms of Lhx9; Lhx9a,
Lhx9ß and Lhx9c during early limb development. We have found that of the three
Lhx9 isoforms, only Lhx9a and Lhx9c (intact homeodomain) are expressed during
early limb development, each with their own distinct expression pattern.
Additionally we determined that Lhx9 expression overlaps with FGF10 expression in
the developing limb bud mesenchyme. Limb bud explant cultures, in the presence of
signalling pathway inhibitors, also indicated that Lhx9 mRNA expression in the
limb bud was dependent on FGF signalling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26220830  [PubMed - in process]


6. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Sep;12(3):4250-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3974. Epub 2015 Jun 22.

Integrated analysis of gene expression and DNA methylation changes induced by
hepatocyte growth factor in human hepatocytes.

Xie CR(1), Sun H(1), Wang FQ(1), Li Z(1), Yin YR(1), Fang QL(1), Sun Y(1), Zhao
WX(1), Zhang S(1), Zhao WX(1), Wang XM(1), Yin ZY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Xiamen University,
Fujian Provincial Key Laboratory of Chronic Liver Disease and Hepatocellular
Carcinoma, Xiamen, Fujian 361004, P.R. China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the one of most common malignant tumors. The
tumor microenvironment has a role in not only supporting growth and survival of
tumor cells, but also triggering tumor recurrence and metastasis. Hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF), one of the important growth factors in the tumor
microenvironment, has an important role in angiogenesis, tumorigenesis and
regeneration. However, the exact mechanism by which HGF regulates HCC initiation 
and development via epigenetic reprogramming has remained elusive. The present
study focused on the epigenetic modification and target tumor-suppressive genes
of HGF treatment in HCC. Expression profiling and DNA methylation array were
performed to investigate the function of HGF and examine global genomic DNA
methylation changes, respectively. Integrated analysis of gene expression and DNA
methylation revealed potential tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) in HCC. The present 
study showed the multiple functions of HGF in tumorous and non-tumorous pathways 
and global genomic DNA methylation changes. HGF treatment upregulated the
expression of DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1). Overexpression of DNMT1 in HCC
patients correlated with the malignant potential and poor prognosis of HCC.
Furthermore, integration analysis of gene expression and DNA methylation changes 
revealed novel potential tumor suppressor genes TSGs including MYOCD, PANX2 and
LHX9. The present study has provided mechanistic insight into epigenetic
repression of TSGs through HGF-induced DNA hypermethylation.

PMCID: PMC4526041
PMID: 26099202  [PubMed - in process]


7. Mol Biol Evol. 2015 Sep;32(9):2263-72. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msv103. Epub 2015 Apr 
29.

Key Role of Amino Acid Repeat Expansions in the Functional Diversification of
Duplicated Transcription Factors.

Radó-Trilla N(1), Arató K(2), Pegueroles C(3), Raya A(2), de la Luna S(4), Albà
MM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Evolutionary Genomics Group, Research Programme on Biomedical Informatics
(GRIB), Hospital del Mar Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
(UPF), Barcelona, Spain Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain
Centro de Investigación Biomèdica en Red en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
Barcelona, Spain. (3)Evolutionary Genomics Group, Research Programme on
Biomedical Informatics (GRIB), Hospital del Mar Research Institute (IMIM),
Barcelona, Spain Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra
(UPF), Barcelona, Spain Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Barcelona, Spain
Centro de Investigación Biomèdica en Red en Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER),
Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA),
Barcelona, Spain susana.luna@crg.es malba@imim.es. (5)Evolutionary Genomics
Group, Research Programme on Biomedical Informatics (GRIB), Hospital del Mar
Research Institute (IMIM), Barcelona, Spain Department of Experimental and Health
Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain Institució Catalana de
Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), Barcelona, Spain susana.luna@crg.es
malba@imim.es.

The high regulatory complexity of vertebrates has been related to two rounds of
whole genome duplication (2R-WGD) that occurred before the divergence of the
major vertebrate groups. Following these events, many developmental transcription
factors (TFs) were retained in multiple copies and subsequently specialized in
diverse functions, whereas others reverted to their singleton state. TFs are
known to be generally rich in amino acid repeats or low-complexity regions
(LCRs), such as polyalanine or polyglutamine runs, which can evolve rapidly and
potentially influence the transcriptional activity of the protein. Here we test
the hypothesis that LCRs have played a major role in the diversification of TF
gene duplicates. We find that nearly half of the TF gene families originated
during the 2R-WGD contains LCRs. The number of gene duplicates with LCRs is 155
out of 550 analyzed (28%), about twice as many as the number of single copy genes
with LCRs (15 out of 115, 13%). In addition, duplicated TFs preferentially
accumulate certain LCR types, the most prominent of which are alanine repeats. We
experimentally test the role of alanine-rich LCRs in two different TF gene
families, PHOX2A/PHOX2B and LHX2/LHX9. In both cases, the presence of the
alanine-rich LCR in one of the copies (PHOX2B and LHX2) significantly increases
the capacity of the TF to activate transcription. Taken together, the results
provide strong evidence that LCRs are important driving forces of evolutionary
change in duplicated genes.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

PMCID: PMC4540963
PMID: 25931513  [PubMed - in process]


8. Development. 2015 Mar 15;142(6):1113-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.117424. Epub 2015 Feb
27.

Evolutionarily conserved regulation of hypocretin neuron specification by Lhx9.

Liu J(1), Merkle FT(2), Gandhi AV(1), Gagnon JA(3), Woods IG(3), Chiu CN(1),
Shimogori T(4), Schier AF(5), Prober DA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of
Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA. (2)Departments of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, and Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA
02138, USA. (3)Departments of Molecular and Cellular Biology, and Stem Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (4)Brain
Science Institute, RIKEN, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (5)Departments of Molecular
and Cellular Biology, and Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA Division of Sleep Medicine, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02115, USA. (6)Division of Biology and Biological Engineering,
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA dprober@caltech.edu.

Loss of neurons that express the neuropeptide hypocretin (Hcrt) has been
implicated in narcolepsy, a debilitating disorder characterized by excessive
daytime sleepiness and cataplexy. Cell replacement therapy, using Hcrt-expressing
neurons generated in vitro, is a potentially useful therapeutic approach, but
factors sufficient to specify Hcrt neurons are unknown. Using zebrafish as a
high-throughput system to screen for factors that can specify Hcrt neurons in
vivo, we identified the LIM homeobox transcription factor Lhx9 as necessary and
sufficient to specify Hcrt neurons. We found that Lhx9 can directly induce hcrt
expression and we identified two potential Lhx9 binding sites in the zebrafish
hcrt promoter. Akin to its function in zebrafish, we found that Lhx9 is
sufficient to specify Hcrt-expressing neurons in the developing mouse
hypothalamus. Our results elucidate an evolutionarily conserved role for Lhx9 in 
Hcrt neuron specification that improves our understanding of Hcrt neuron
development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4360184
PMID: 25725064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Development. 2014 Dec;141(24):4794-805. doi: 10.1242/dev.115691.

Fezf2 promotes neuronal differentiation through localised activation of
Wnt/ß-catenin signalling during forebrain development.

Zhang S(1), Li J(1), Lea R(1), Vleminckx K(2), Amaya E(3).

Author information: 
(1)The Healing Foundation Centre, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. (2)Department for Biomedical Molecular
Biology, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium. (3)The Healing Foundation
Centre, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT,
UK enrique.amaya@manchester.ac.uk.

Brain regionalisation, neuronal subtype diversification and circuit connectivity 
are crucial events in the establishment of higher cognitive functions. Here we
report the requirement for the transcriptional repressor Fezf2 for proper
differentiation of neural progenitor cells during the development of the Xenopus 
forebrain. Depletion of Fezf2 induces apoptosis in postmitotic neural
progenitors, with concomitant reduction in forebrain size and neuronal
differentiation. Mechanistically, we found that Fezf2 stimulates neuronal
differentiation by promoting Wnt/ß-catenin signalling in the developing
forebrain. In addition, we show that Fezf2 promotes activation of Wnt/ß-catenin
signalling by repressing the expression of two negative regulators of Wnt
signalling, namely lhx2 and lhx9. Our findings suggest that Fezf2 plays an
essential role in controlling when and where neuronal differentiation occurs
within the developing forebrain and that it does so by promoting local
Wnt/ß-catenin signalling via a double-repressor model.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4299278
PMID: 25468942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Sex Dev. 2014;8(6):364-75. doi: 10.1159/000369116. Epub 2014 Nov 25.

Chronology, magnitude and duration of expression of putative
sex-determining/differentiation genes in a turtle with temperature-dependent sex 
determination.

Bieser KL(1), Wibbels T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Ala., 
USA.

The red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta) possesses temperature-dependent
sex determination (TSD) in which the incubation temperature determines gonadal
sex. Although a number of mammalian gene homologues have been identified in
reptiles with TSD, the exact sex-determining trigger(s) is not known. To date,
the current study represents the most comprehensive simultaneous evaluation of
the chronology of mRNA expression profiles of putative
sex-determining/differentiation genes (Dmrt1, Sox9, Amh, Lhx9, and Foxl2) from
gonads incubated at male- and female-producing temperatures in T. scripta.
Additionally, sex-reversing treatments with 17ß-estradiol and letrozole were
examined. At a male-producing temperature, Dmrt1 expression was sexually
dimorphic by stage 17, Sox9 by 19 and Amh by 21. In contrast, Foxl2 did not
significantly increase until after the thermosensitive period at a
female-producing temperature. Treatment with 17ß-estradiol resulted in reduced
gonad size and/or inhibited gonadal development and differentiation. Gene
expression was subsequently low in this group. Sex reversal utilizing letrozole
failed to produce testes at a female-producing temperature and as such, gene
expression was comparable to ovary. These results indicate that Dmrt1 and Sox9
are potential triggers for testis differentiation and Amh, Lhx9 and Foxl2
represent a conserved core set of genes in the sex-determining/differentiation
pathway of TSD species.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25427533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Genesis. 2014 Sep;52(9):827-32. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22805. Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Generation and characterization of Lhx9-GFPCreER(T2) knock-in mouse line.

Balasubramanian R(1), Bui A, Xie X, Deng M, Gan L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Flaum Eye Institute, University of Rochester, 
Rochester, New York; Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of
Rochester, Rochester, New York.

LHX9 is a LIM-homeodomain transcription factor essential for the development of
gonads, spinal cord interneurons, and thalamic neurons to name a few. We recently
reported the expression of LHX9 in retinal amacrine cells during development. In 
this study, we generated an Lhx9-GFPCreER(T) (2) (GCE) knock-in mouse line by
knocking-in a GCE cassette at the Lhx9 locus, thus inactivating endogenous Lhx9. 
Lhx9(GCE) (/+) mice were viable, fertile, and displayed no overt phenotypical
characteristics. Lhx9(GCE) (/) (GCE) mice were all phenotypically female, smaller
in size, viable, but infertile. The specificity and efficacy of the Lhx9-GCE
mouse line was verified by crossing it to a Rosa26-tdTomato reporter mouse line, 
which reveals the Cre recombinase activities in retinal amacrine cells,
developing limbs, testis, hippocampal neurons, thalamic neurons, and cerebellar
neurons. Taken together, the Lhx9-GCE mouse line could serve as a beneficial tool
for lineage tracing and gene manipulation experiments. genesis

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4167977
PMID: 25112520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Front Neuroanat. 2014 Jul 4;8:59. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2014.00059. eCollection
2014.

Combinatorial expression of Lef1, Lhx2, Lhx5, Lhx9, Lmo3, Lmo4, and Prox1 helps
to identify comparable subdivisions in the developing hippocampal formation of
mouse and chicken.

Abellán A(1), Desfilis E(1), Medina L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Institute of Biomedical Research of Lleida, University of Lleida
Lleida, Spain.

We carried out a study of the expression patterns of seven developmental
regulatory genes (Lef1, Lhx2, Lhx9, Lhx5, Lmo3, Lmo4, and Prox1), in combination 
with topological position, to identify the medial pallial derivatives, define its
major subdivisions, and compare them between mouse and chicken. In both species, 
the medial pallium is defined as a pallial sector adjacent to the cortical hem
and roof plate/choroid tela, showing moderate to strong ventricular zone
expression of Lef1, Lhx2, and Lhx9, but not Lhx5. Based on this, the hippocampal 
formation (indusium griseum, dentate gyrus, Ammon's horn fields, and subiculum), 
the medial entorhinal cortex, and part of the amygdalo-hippocampal transition
area of mouse appeared to derive from the medial pallium. In the chicken, based
on the same position and gene expression profile, we propose that the hippocampus
(including the V-shaped area), the parahippocampal area (including its
caudolateral part), the entorhinal cortex, and the amygdalo-hippocampal
transition area are medial pallial derivatives. Moreover, the combinatorial
expression of Lef1, Prox1, Lmo4, and Lmo3 allowed the identification of dentate
gyrus/CA3-like, CA1/subicular-like, and medial entorhinal-like comparable sectors
in mouse and chicken, and point to the existence of mostly conserved molecular
networks involved in hippocampal complex development. Notably, while the mouse
medial entorhinal cortex derives from the medial pallium (similarly to the
hippocampal formation, both being involved in spatial navigation and spatial
memory), the lateral entorhinal cortex (involved in processing non-spatial,
contextual information) appears to derive from a distinct dorsolateral caudal
pallial sector.

PMCID: PMC4082316
PMID: 25071464  [PubMed]


13. Brain Struct Funct. 2015;220(3):1497-509. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0740-x. Epub
2014 Mar 20.

The Lhx9 homeobox gene controls pineal gland development and prevents postnatal
hydrocephalus.

Yamazaki F(1), Møller M, Fu C, Clokie SJ, Zykovich A, Coon SL, Klein DC, Rath MF.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Neuroendocrinology, Program in Developmental Endocrinology and
Genetics, The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, 49 Convent Drive, Room 6A82,
Bethesda, MD, 20892-4510, USA.

Lhx9 is a member of the LIM homeobox gene family. It is expressed during
mammalian embryogenesis in the brain including the pineal gland. Deletion of Lhx9
results in sterility due to failure of gonadal development. The current study was
initiated to investigate Lhx9 biology in the pineal gland. Lhx9 is highly
expressed in the developing pineal gland of the rat with transcript abundance
peaking early in development; transcript levels decrease postnatally to nearly
undetectable levels in the adult, a temporal pattern that is generally similar to
that reported for Lhx9 expression in other brain regions. Studies with C57BL/6J
Lhx9(-/-) mutant mice revealed marked alterations in brain and pineal
development. Specifically, the superficial pineal gland is hypoplastic, being
reduced to a small cluster of pinealocytes surrounded by meningeal and vascular
tissue. The deep pineal gland and the pineal stalk are also reduced in size.
Although the brains of neonatal Lhx9(-/-) mutant mice appear normal, severe
hydrocephalus develops in about 70% of the Lhx9(-/-) mice at 5-8 weeks of age;
these observations are the first to document that deletion of Lhx9 results in
hydrocephalus and as such indicate that Lhx9 contributes to the maintenance of
normal brain structure. Whereas hydrocephalus is absent in neonatal
Lhx9(-/-)mutant mice, the neonatal pineal gland in these animals is hypoplastic. 
Accordingly, it appears that Lhx9 is essential for early development of the
mammalian pineal gland and that this effect is not secondary to hydrocephalus.

PMCID: PMC4197116
PMID: 24647753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Anat. 2014 May;224(5):564-74. doi: 10.1111/joa.12168. Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Localization of BDNF expression in the developing brain of zebrafish.

De Felice E(1), Porreca I, Alleva E, De Girolamo P, Ambrosino C, Ciriaco E,
Germanà A, Sordino P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Developmental Biology, Stazione Zoologica Anton
Dohrn, Naples, Italy; Department of Morphology, Biochemistry, Physiology and
Animal Productions, Section of Morphology, University of Messina, Messina, Italy.

The brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene is expressed in differentiating
and post-mitotic neurons of the zebrafish embryo, where it has been implicated in
Huntington's disease. Little is known, however, about the full complement of
neuronal cell types that express BDNF in this important vertebrate model. Here,
we further explored the transcriptional profiles during the first week of
development using real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and 
whole-mount in situ hybridization (WISH). RT-qPCR results revealed a high level
of maternal contribution followed by a steady increase of zygotic transcription, 
consistent with the notion of a prominent role of BDNF in neuronal maturation and
maintenance. Based on WISH, we demonstrate for the first time that BDNF
expression in the developing brain of zebrafish is structure specific. Anatomical
criteria and co-staining with genetic markers (shh, pax2a, emx1, krox20, lhx2b
and lhx9) visualized major topological domains of BDNF-positive cells in the
pallium, hypothalamus, posterior tuberculum and optic tectum. Moreover, the
relative timing of BDNF transcription in the eye and tectum may illustrate a
mechanism for coordinated development of the retinotectal system. Taken together,
our results are compatible with a local delivery and early role of BDNF in the
developing brain of zebrafish, adding basic knowledge to the study of
neurotrophin functions in neural development and disease.

© 2014 Anatomical Society.

PMID: 24588510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. FASEB J. 2014 May;28(5):2020-8. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-246108. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

FOXL2 transcriptionally represses Sf1 expression by antagonizing WT1 during
ovarian development in mice.

Takasawa K(1), Kashimada K, Pelosi E, Takagi M, Morio T, Asahara H, Schlessinger 
D, Mizutani S, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. kkashimada.ped@tmd.ac.jp.

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1; Ad4BP/NR5A1) plays key roles in gonadal development.
Initially, the Sf1 gene is expressed in mouse fetal gonads of both sexes, but
later is up-regulated in testes and down-regulated in ovaries. While Sf1
expression is activated and maintained by Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) and LIM homeobox 9 
(LHX9), the mechanism of sex-specific regulation remains unclear. We hypothesized
that Sf1 is repressed by the transcription factor Forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) during 
ovarian development. In an in vitro system (TM3 cells), up-regulation of Sf1 by
the WT1 splice variant WT1-KTS was antagonized by FOXL2, as determined by
quantitative RT-PCR. Using reporter assays, we localized the Sf1 proximal
promoter region involved in this antagonism to a 674-bp interval. A conserved
FOXL2 binding site was identified in this interval by in vitro chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Introducing mutations into this site abolished negative
regulation by FOXL2 in reporter assays. Finally, in Foxl2-null mice, Sf1
expression was increased 2-fold relative to wild-type XX fetal gonads. Our
results support the hypothesis that FOXL2 negatively regulates Sf1 expression by 
antagonizing WT1-KTS during early ovarian development in mice.

PMCID: PMC3986836
PMID: 24451388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Neural Dev. 2014 Jan 9;9:1. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-9-1.

Developmental origins of diversity in cerebellar output nuclei.

Green MJ, Wingate RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th floor
New Hunt's House, London SE1 1UL UK. richard.wingate@kcl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The functional integration of the cerebellum into a number of
different neural systems is governed by the connection of its output axons. In
amniotes, the majority of this output is mediated by an evolutionarily diverse
array of cerebellar nuclei that, in mice, are derived from the embryonic rhombic 
lip. To understand the origins of cerebellar nucleus diversity, we have explored 
how nucleus development is patterned in birds, which notably lack a dentate-like 
nucleus output to the dorsal thalamus.
RESULTS: Using targeted in ovo electoroporation of green fluorescent protein
(GFP) and red fluorescent protein (RFP) in a variety of combinations and with
different conditional enhancers, we show that cerebellar nuclei in chicks are
produced, as in the mouse, at the rhombic lip. Furthermore, the comparison of
fate-mapped neurons with molecular markers reveals a strict temporal sequence of 
cell fate allocation in establishing the avian lateral and medial cerebellar
nuclei. In contrast to the mouse cerebellum, Lhx9 expression is confined to
extracerebellar thalamic afferent nuclei corresponding to the absence, in chicks,
of a dentate nucleus. Spatiotemporally targeted over-expression of Lhx9 in chick 
cerebellar nuclei (recapitulating in part the mammalian expression pattern)
results in a loss of distinct nuclear boundaries and a change in axon initial
trajectories consistent with a role for Lhx9 specifying targeting.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm the relationship between cell fate and a fine
grain temporal patterning at the rhombic lip. This suggests that the lack of a
cerebellar output to the dorsal thalamus of birds corresponds with a restricted
expression of the LIM-homeodomain gene Lhx9 to earlier born rhombic lip cohorts
when compared to mice. The evolution of cerebellar nucleus diversity in amniotes 
may hence reflect a heterochronic adaptation of gene expression with respect to
the sequential production of rhombic lip derivatives resulting in altered axonal 
targeting.

PMCID: PMC3929244
PMID: 24405572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Development. 2014 Jan;141(2):389-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.099119.

Independently specified Atoh1 domains define novel developmental compartments in 
rhombomere 1.

Green MJ(1), Myat AM, Emmenegger BA, Wechsler-Reya RJ, Wilson LJ, Wingate RJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th floor
New Hunt's House, London SE1 1UL, UK.

The rhombic lip gives rise to neuronal populations that contribute to cerebellar,
proprioceptive and interoceptive networks. Cell production depends on the
expression of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Atoh1. In
rhombomere 1, Atoh1-positive cells give rise to both cerebellar neurons and
extra-cerebellar nuclei in ventral hindbrain. The origin of this cellular
diversity has previously been attributed to temporal signals rather than spatial 
patterning. Here, we show that in both chick and mouse the cerebellar Atoh1
precursor pool is partitioned into initially cryptic spatial domains that reflect
the activity of two different organisers: an isthmic Atoh1 domain, which gives
rise to isthmic nuclei, and the rhombic lip, which generates deep cerebellar
nuclei and granule cells. We use a combination of in vitro explant culture,
genetic fate mapping and gene overexpression and knockdown to explore the role of
isthmic signalling in patterning these domains. We show that an FGF-dependent
isthmic Atoh1 domain is the origin of distinct populations of Lhx9-positive
neurons in the extra-cerebellar isthmic nuclei. In the cerebellum, ectopic FGF
induces proliferation while blockade reduces the length of the cerebellar rhombic
lip. FGF signalling is not required for the specification of cerebellar cell
types from the rhombic lip and its upregulation inhibits their production. This
suggests that although the isthmus regulates the size of the cerebellar anlage,
the downregulation of isthmic FGF signals is required for induction of rhombic
lip-derived cerebellar neurons.

PMCID: PMC3879817
PMID: 24381197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Gene Expr Patterns. 2014 Jan;14(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2013.12.001. Epub 2013
Dec 10.

Expression of LIM-homeodomain transcription factors in the developing and mature 
mouse retina.

Balasubramanian R(1), Bui A(2), Ding Q(3), Gan L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Flaum Eye Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA; Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. (2)Department
of Biology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.
(3)Flaum Eye Institute and Department of Ophthalmology, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. (4)Flaum Eye Institute and Department
of Ophthalmology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642,
USA; Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Rochester Medical
Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA. Electronic address: lin_gan@urmc.rochester.edu.

LIM-homeodomain (LIM-HD) transcription factors have been extensively studied for 
their role in the development of the central nervous system. Their function is
key to several developmental events like cell proliferation, differentiation and 
subtype specification. However, their roles in retinal neurogenesis remain
largely unknown. Here we report a detailed expression study of LIM-HD
transcription factors LHX9 and LHX2, LHX3 and LHX4, and LHX6 in the developing
and mature mouse retina using immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization
techniques. We show that LHX9 is expressed during the early stages of development
in the retinal ganglion cell layer and the inner nuclear layer. We also show that
LHX9 is expressed in a subset of amacrine cells in the adult retina. LHX2 is
known to be expressed in retinal progenitor cells during development and in
Müller glial cells and a subset of amacrine cells in the adult retina. We found
that the LHX2 subset of amacrine cells is not cholinergic and that a very few of 
LHX2 amacrine cells express calretinin. LHX3 and LHX4 are expressed in a subset
of bipolar cells in the adult retina. LHX6 is expressed in cells in the ganglion 
cell layer and the neuroblast layer starting at embryonic stage 13.5 (E13.5) and 
continues to be expressed in cells in the ganglion cell layer and inner nuclear
layer, postnatally, suggesting its likely expression in amacrine cells or a
subset thereof. Taken together, our comprehensive assay of expression patterns of
LIM-HD transcription factors during mouse retinal development will help further
studies elucidating their biological functions in the differentiation of retinal 
cell subtypes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3921069
PMID: 24333658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Anat Rec (Hoboken). 2013 Sep;296(9):1317-32. doi: 10.1002/ar.22744. Epub 2013 Jul
31.

The olfactory amygdala in amniotes: an evo-devo approach.

Abellán A(1), Desfilis E, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lleida, Institute of Biomedical
Research of Lleida, Lleida, Spain.

In tetrapods, the medial amygdala is a forebrain center that integrates olfactory
and/or vomeronasal signals with the endocrine and autonomic systems, playing a
key role in different social behaviors. The vomeronasal system has undergone
important changes during evolution, which may be behind some interspecies
differences in chemosensory-mediated social behavior. These evolutionary changes 
are associated with variations in vomeronasal-recipient brain structures,
including the medial amygdala. Herein, we employed an evolutionary developmental 
biology approach for trying to understand the function and evolution of the
medial amygdala. For that purpose, we reviewed published data on fate mapping in 
mouse, and the expression of orthologous developmental regulatory genes (Nkx2.1, 
Lhx6, Shh, Tbr1, Lhx9, Lhx5, Otp, and Pax6) in embryos of mouse, chicken, emydid 
turtles, and a pipid frog. We also analyzed novel data on Lhx9 and Otp in a
lacertid lizard. Based on distinct embryonic origin and genetic profile, at least
five neuronal subpopulations exist in the medial amygdala of rodents, expressing 
either Nkx2.1/Lhx6, Shh, Lhx9, Otp/Lhx5, or Pax6. Each neuronal subpopulation
appears involved in different functional pathways. For example, Lhx6 cells are
specifically activated by sex pheromones and project to preoptic and hypothalamic
centers involved in reproduction. Based on data in nonmammals, at least three of 
these neuronal subtypes might have been present in the medial amygdala of the
amniote common ancestor. During mammalian evolution, the downregulation of Nkx2.1
in the alar hypothalamus may have been a driving force for an increment of the
Otp/Lhx5 subpopulation.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23904411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2013 Sep;32(5):444-53. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e3182800ad5.

The stem-cell profile of ovarian surface epithelium is reproduced in the
oviductal fimbriae, with increased stem-cell marker density in distal parts of
the fimbriae.

Auersperg N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada. auersper@mail.ubc.ca

High-grade serous ovarian carcinomas are the most common and most lethal ovarian 
cancers, but their histologic origin is still controversial. Current evidence
suggests that they may originate in the ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) and/or
epithelium of oviductal fimbriae (FE). To further investigate this question we
compared the stem-cell profiles of these epithelia. Formalin-fixed sections of
normal FE (N=21) and ovaries (N=21) were stained immunohistochemically for the
stem-cell markers NANOG, SFRP1, LHX9, ALDH1A1, and ALDH1A2. All markers were
detected in both OSE and FE. A total of 75% to 100% of surface OSE expressed all 
markers except ALDH1A1, which occurred in about 25% of cells. Among epithelial
inclusion cysts with flat-to-cuboidal epithelium, resembling OSE, ALDH1A1 was
significantly increased, whereas SFRP1 was reduced compared with surface OSE,
suggesting an increased trend towards malignant transformation. Similarly, among 
cysts lined by columnar cells resembling FE, SFRP1 expression was low, whereas
ALDH1A1 approached 100% of the cysts. FE exhibited considerable variation between
and within specimens. In about half of the samples, SFRP1 and NANOG were detected
in =25% FE. The most widespread markers were ALDH1A1 and ALDH1A2. The highest
proportion of all markers occurred in the distal parts of the FE, the site of the
putative ovarian cancer precursors. Marker expression in tubal ampullae was low
or absent except for ALDH1A1 and ALDH1A2. The results provide an explanation for 
the characteristic distal location of fimbrial high-grade serous ovarian
carcinoma precursor lesions, and indicate that both OSE and FE have the capacity 
to undergo neoplastic transformation.

PMID: 23896717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(7):e1003629. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003629. Epub 2013 Jul 
11.

Gata4 is required for formation of the genital ridge in mice.

Hu YC(1), Okumura LM, Page DC.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

In mammals, both testis and ovary arise from a sexually undifferentiated
precursor, the genital ridge, which first appears during mid-gestation as a
thickening of the coelomic epithelium on the ventromedial surface of the
mesonephros. At least four genes (Lhx9, Sf1, Wt1, and Emx2) have been
demonstrated to be required for subsequent growth and maintenance of the genital 
ridge. However, no gene has been shown to be required for the initial thickening 
of the coelomic epithelium during genital ridge formation. We report that the
transcription factor GATA4 is expressed in the coelomic epithelium of the genital
ridge, progressing in an anterior-to-posterior (A-P) direction, immediately
preceding an A-P wave of epithelial thickening. Mouse embryos conditionally
deficient in Gata4 show no signs of gonadal initiation, as their coelomic
epithelium remains a morphologically undifferentiated monolayer. The failure of
genital ridge formation in Gata4-deficient embryos is corroborated by the absence
of the early gonadal markers LHX9 and SF1. Our data indicate that GATA4 is
required to initiate formation of the genital ridge in both XX and XY fetuses,
prior to its previously reported role in testicular differentiation of the XY
gonad.

PMCID: PMC3708810
PMID: 23874227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Nov;521(16):3666-701. doi: 10.1002/cne.23406.

Molecular profiling of the developing avian telencephalon: regional timing and
brain subdivision continuities.

Chen CC(1), Winkler CM, Pfenning AR, Jarvis ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Duke University
Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, 27710.

Comment in
    J Comp Neurol. 2013 Nov;521(16):3601-3.
    J Comp Neurol. 2013 Nov;521(16):3604-13.

In our companion study (Jarvis et al. [2013] J Comp Neurol. doi:
10.1002/cne.23404) we used quantitative brain molecular profiling to discover
that distinct subdivisions in the avian pallium above and below the ventricle and
the associated mesopallium lamina have similar molecular profiles, leading to a
hypothesis that they may form as continuous subdivisions around the lateral
ventricle. To explore this hypothesis, here we profiled the expression of 16
genes at eight developmental stages. The genes included those that define brain
subdivisions in the adult and some that are also involved in brain development.
We found that phyletic hierarchical cluster and linear regression network
analyses of gene expression profiles implicated single and mixed ancestry of
these brain regions at early embryonic stages. Most gene expression-defined
pallial subdivisions began as one ventral or dorsal domain that later formed
specific folds around the lateral ventricle. Subsequently a clear ventricle
boundary formed, partitioning them into dorsal and ventral pallial subdivisions
surrounding the mesopallium lamina. These subdivisions each included two parts of
the mesopallium, the nidopallium and hyperpallium, and the arcopallium and
hippocampus, respectively. Each subdivision expression profile had a different
temporal order of appearance, similar in timing to the order of analogous cell
types of the mammalian cortex. Furthermore, like the mammalian pallium,
expression in the ventral pallial subdivisions became distinct during prehatch
development, whereas the dorsal portions did so during posthatch development.
These findings support the continuum hypothesis of avian brain subdivision
development around the ventricle and influence hypotheses on homologies of the
avian pallium with other vertebrates.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3863995
PMID: 23818174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2013 Jun;320(4):238-46. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22497. Epub
2013 Apr 23.

The cloning and expression analysis of Lhx9 during gonadal sex differentiation in
the red-eared slider turtle, Trachemys scripta, a species with
temperature-dependent sex determination.

Bieser KL(1), Wibbels T, Mourad G, Paladino F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294-1170, USA. kbieser@uab.edu

Many reptiles, including the red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta), possess
a temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD) mechanism where the temperature
at which the developing embryos are incubated dictates the gonadal sex of the
animal. A number of mammalian gene orthologues have been identified in the sex
determination/differentiation cascade of reptiles with TSD although the exact
trigger(s) is not well understood. A potential early regulator of gonadal
differentiation, Lhx9, controls the proliferation of gonadal cells in mice and
its absence prevents gonadal development and drastically reduces the expression
of Sf-1, a gene that regulates the expression of steroidogenic enzymes in the
bipotential gonad. In the current study, we cloned Lhx9 from T. scripta and
analyzed its expression throughout the thermosensitive period of gonad
development using quantitative PCR. We examined the expression profiles of Lhx9
in embryos incubated under control conditions at male- and female-producing
temperatures and with the application of exogenous 17ß-estradiol or an aromatase 
inhibitor, Letrozole, to induce sex reversal. The T. scripta Lhx9 cDNA and
predicted amino acid sequence showed high homology to those of chicken, anole,
and mouse. Lhx9 was expressed at both male- and female-producing temperatures
with expression levels increasing throughout the thermosensitive period.
Letrozole induced sex-reversal did not alter Lhx9 expression levels.
17ß-estradiol treatments appeared to inhibit or delay gonadal differentiation and
resulted in lower Lhx9 expression from the presumptive gonadal ridge region. The 
structural homology and temporal expression pattern of Lhx9 suggests that this
represents a conserved element in the gonadal differentiation cascade of T.
scripta.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc., A Wiley Company.

PMID: 23671035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genes Dev. 2013 Mar 1;27(5):565-78. doi: 10.1101/gad.207654.112. Epub 2013 Feb
21.

Translational profiling of hypocretin neurons identifies candidate molecules for 
sleep regulation.

Dalal J(1), Roh JH, Maloney SE, Akuffo A, Shah S, Yuan H, Wamsley B, Jones WB, de
Guzman Strong C, Gray PA, Holtzman DM, Heintz N, Dougherty JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

Hypocretin (orexin; Hcrt)-containing neurons of the hypothalamus are essential
for the normal regulation of sleep and wake behaviors and have been implicated in
feeding, anxiety, depression, and reward. The absence of these neurons causes
narcolepsy in humans and model organisms. However, little is known about the
molecular phenotype of these cells; previous attempts at comprehensive profiling 
had only limited sensitivity or were inaccurate. We generated a Hcrt translating 
ribosome affinity purification (bacTRAP) line for comprehensive translational
profiling of all ribosome-bound transcripts in these neurons in vivo. From this
profile, we identified >6000 transcripts detectably expressed above background
and 188 transcripts that are highly enriched in these neurons, including all
known markers of the cells. Blinded analysis of in situ hybridization databases
suggests that ~60% of these are expressed in a Hcrt marker-like pattern. Fifteen 
of these were confirmed with double labeling and microscopy, including the
transcription factor Lhx9. Ablation of this gene results in a >30% loss
specifically of Hcrt neurons, without a general disruption of hypothalamic
development. Polysomnography and activity monitoring revealed a profound
hypersomnolence in these mice. These data provide an in-depth and accurate
profile of Hcrt neuron gene expression and suggest that Lhx9 may be important for
specification or survival of a subset of these cells.

PMCID: PMC3605469
PMID: 23431030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. F1000Res. 2013 Oct 4;2:205. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.2-205.v1. eCollection
2013.

Seizure evoked regulation of LIM-HD genes and co-factors in the postnatal and
adult hippocampus.

Lakhina V(1), Subramanian L(2), Huilgol D(3), Shetty AS(4), Vaidya VA(4), Tole
S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India ; Current affiliation: Lewis Sigler Institute for Integrative
Genomics, Princeton University, NJ, USA. (2)Department of Biological Sciences,
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India ; Current affiliation:
Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India ; Current affiliation: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Biological Sciences, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Mumbai, India.

The LIM-homeodomain (LIM-HD) family of transcription factors is well known for
its functions during several developmental processes including cell fate
specification, cell migration and axon guidance, and its members play fundamental
roles in hippocampal development. The hippocampus is a structure that displays
striking activity dependent plasticity.  We examined whether LIM-HD genes and
their co-factors are regulated during kainic acid induced seizure in the adult
rat hippocampus as well as in early postnatal rats, when the hippocampal
circuitry is not fully developed.  We report a distinct and field-specific
regulation of LIM-HD genes Lhx1, Lhx2, and Lhx9, LIM-only gene Lmo4, and cofactor
Clim1a in the adult hippocampus after seizure induction. In contrast none of
these genes displayed altered levels upon induction of seizure in postnatal
animals.  Our results provide evidence of temporal and spatial seizure mediated
regulation of LIM-HD family members and suggest that LIM-HD gene function may be 
involved in activity dependent plasticity in the adult hippocampus.

PMCID: PMC4111125
PMID: 25110573  [PubMed]


26. Development. 2012 Dec;139(24):4633-43. doi: 10.1242/dev.086991. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Gbx2 regulates thalamocortical axon guidance by modifying the LIM and Robo codes.

Chatterjee M(1), Li K, Chen L, Maisano X, Guo Q, Gan L, Li JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, 400 Farmington Avenue, Farmington, CT 06030-6403, USA.

Combinatorial expression of transcription factors forms transcriptional codes to 
confer neuronal identities and connectivity. However, how these intrinsic factors
orchestrate the spatiotemporal expression of guidance molecules to dictate the
responsiveness of axons to guidance cues is less understood. Thalamocortical
axons (TCAs) represent the major input to the neocortex and modulate cognitive
functions, consciousness and alertness. TCAs travel a long distance and make
multiple target choices en route to the cortex. The homeodomain transcription
factor Gbx2 is essential for TCA development, as loss of Gbx2 abolishes TCAs in
mice. Using a novel TCA-specific reporter, we have discovered that thalamic axons
are mostly misrouted to the ventral midbrain and dorsal midline of the
diencephalon in Gbx2-deficient mice. Furthermore, conditionally deleting Gbx2 at 
different embryonic stages has revealed a sustained role of Gbx2 in regulating
TCA navigation and targeting. Using explant culture and mosaic analyses, we
demonstrate that Gbx2 controls the intrinsic responsiveness of TCAs to guidance
cues. The guidance defects of Gbx2-deficient TCAs are associated with abnormal
expression of guidance receptors Robo1 and Robo2. Finally, we demonstrate that
Gbx2 controls Robo expression by regulating LIM-domain transcription factors
through three different mechanisms: Gbx2 and Lhx2 compete for binding to the Lmo3
promoter and exert opposing effects on its transcription; repressing Lmo3 by Gbx2
is essential for Lhx2 activity to induce Robo2; and Gbx2 represses Lhx9
transcription, which in turn induces Robo1. Our findings illustrate the
transcriptional control of differential expression of Robo1 and Robo2, which may 
play an important role in establishing the topography of TCAs.

PMCID: PMC3509725
PMID: 23136391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jan;27(1):63-73. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1256. Epub 2012 Nov 2.

Contribution of Leydig and Sertoli cells to testosterone production in mouse
fetal testes.

Shima Y(1), Miyabayashi K, Haraguchi S, Arakawa T, Otake H, Baba T, Matsuzaki S, 
Shishido Y, Akiyama H, Tachibana T, Tsutsui K, Morohashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Testosterone is a final product of androgenic hormone biosynthesis, and Leydig
cells are known to be the primary source of androgens. In the mammalian testis,
two distinct populations of Leydig cells, the fetal and the adult Leydig cells,
develop sequentially, and these two cell types differ both morphologically and
functionally. It is well known that the adult Leydig cells maintain male
reproductive function by producing testosterone. However, it has been
controversial whether fetal Leydig cells can produce testosterone, and the
synthetic pathway of testosterone in the fetal testis is not fully understood. In
the present study, we generated transgenic mice in which enhanced green
fluorescence protein was expressed under the control of a fetal Leydig
cell-specific enhancer of the Ad4BP/SF-1 (Nr5a1) gene. The transgene construct
was prepared by mutating the LIM homeodomain transcription factor (LHX9)-binding 
sequence in the promoter, which abolished promoter activity in the
undifferentiated testicular cells. These transgenic mice were used to collect
highly pure fetal Leydig cells. Gene expression and steroidogenic enzyme
activities in the fetal Leydig cells as well as in the fetal Sertoli cells and
adult Leydig cells were analyzed. Our results revealed that the fetal Leydig
cells synthesize only androstenedione because they lack expression of Hsd17b3,
and fetal Sertoli cells convert androstenedione to testosterone, whereas adult
Leydig cells synthesize testosterone by themselves. The current study
demonstrated that both Leydig and Sertoli cells are required for testosterone
synthesis in the mouse fetal testis.

PMID: 23125070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Endocrinology. 2012 Feb;153(2):913-24. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1055. Epub 2011 Dec
20.

Cbx2, a polycomb group gene, is required for Sry gene expression in mice.

Katoh-Fukui Y(1), Miyabayashi K, Komatsu T, Owaki A, Baba T, Shima Y, Kidokoro T,
Kanai Y, Schedl A, Wilhelm D, Koopman P, Okuno Y, Morohashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aging Intervention, National Institute for Longevity Sciences,
Obu 474-8511, Japan. yfukui@ncgg.go.jp

Mice lacking the function of the polycomb group protein CBX2 (chromobox homolog
2; also known as M33) show defects in gonadal, adrenal, and splenic development. 
In particular, XY knockout (KO) mice develop ovaries but not testes, and the
gonads are hypoplastic in both sexes. However, how CBX2 regulates development of 
these tissues remains largely unknown. In the present study, we used microarray, 
RT-PCR, and immunohistochemical analyses to show that the expression of Sry,
Sox9, Lhx9, Ad4BP/SF-1, Dax-1, Gata4, Arx, and Dmrt1, genes encoding
transcription factors essential for gonadal development, is affected in Cbx2 KO
gonads. Male-to-female sex reversal in Cbx2 KO mice was rescued by crossing them 
with transgenic mice displaying forced expression of Sry or Sox9. However, testes
remained hypoplastic in these mice, indicating that the size and the sex of the
gonad are determined by different sets of genes. Our study implicates Cbx2 in
testis differentiation through regulating Sry gene expression.

PMID: 22186409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS Biol. 2011 Dec;9(12):e1001218. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001218. Epub 2011 
Dec 13.

Lhx2 and Lhx9 determine neuronal differentiation and compartition in the caudal
forebrain by regulating Wnt signaling.

Peukert D(1), Weber S, Lumsden A, Scholpp S.

Author information: 
(1)Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Institute of Toxicology and Genetics,
Karlsruhe, Germany.

Initial axial patterning of the neural tube into forebrain, midbrain, and
hindbrain primordia occurs during gastrulation. After this patterning phase,
further diversification within the brain is thought to proceed largely
independently in the different primordia. However, mechanisms that maintain the
demarcation of brain subdivisions at later stages are poorly understood. In the
alar plate of the caudal forebrain there are two principal units, the thalamus
and the pretectum, each of which is a developmental compartment. Here we show
that proper neuronal differentiation of the thalamus requires Lhx2 and Lhx9
function. In Lhx2/Lhx9-deficient zebrafish embryos the differentiation process is
blocked and the dorsally adjacent Wnt positive epithalamus expands into the
thalamus. This leads to an upregulation of Wnt signaling in the caudal forebrain.
Lack of Lhx2/Lhx9 function as well as increased Wnt signaling alter the
expression of the thalamus specific cell adhesion factor pcdh10b and lead
subsequently to a striking anterior-posterior disorganization of the caudal
forebrain. We therefore suggest that after initial neural tube patterning,
neurogenesis within a brain compartment influences the integrity of the neuronal 
progenitor pool and border formation of a neuromeric compartment.

PMCID: PMC3236734
PMID: 22180728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Brain Behav Evol. 2011;78(3):216-36. doi: 10.1159/000330056. Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Contribution of genoarchitecture to understanding forebrain evolution and
development, with particular emphasis on the amygdala.

Medina L(1), Bupesh M, Abellán A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lleida, Institute of Biomedical
Research of Lleida, Spain. loreta.medina@mex.udl.cat

The amygdala is a forebrain center involved in functions and behaviors that are
critical for survival (such as control of the neuroendocrine system and
homeostasis, and reproduction and fear/escape responses) and in cognitive
functions such as attention and emotional learning. In mammals, the amygdala is
highly complex, with multiple subdivisions, neuronal subtypes, and connections,
making it very difficult to understand its functional organization and
evolutionary origin. Since evolution is the consequence of changes that occurred 
in development, herein we review developmental data based on genoarchitecture and
fate mapping in mammals (in the mouse model) and other vertebrates in order to
identify its basic components and embryonic origin in different species and
understand how they changed in evolution. In all tetrapods studied, the amygdala 
includes at least 4 components: (1) a ventral pallial part, characterized by
expression of Lhx2 and Lhx9, that includes part of the basal amygdalar complex in
mammals and a caudal part of the dorsal ventricular ridge in sauropsids and also 
produces a cell subpopulation of the medial amygdala; (2) a striatal part,
characterized by expression of Pax6 and/or Islet1, which includes the central
amygdala in different species; (3) a pallidal part, characterized by expression
of Nkx2.1 and, in amniotes, Lhx6, which includes part of the medial amygdala, and
(4) a hypothalamic part (derived from the supraoptoparaventricular domain or
SPV), characterized by Otp and/or Lhx5 expression, which produces an important
subpopulation of cells of the medial extended amygdala (medial amygdala and/or
medial bed nucleus of the stria terminalis). Importantly, the size of the SPV
domain increases upon reduction or lack of Nkx2.1 function in the hypothalamus.
It appears that Nkx2.1 expression was downregulated in the alar hypothalamus
during evolution to mammals, which may have produced an enlargement of SPV and
the amygdalar cell subpopulation derived from it.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21860224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20197. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020197. Epub 2011 May 26.

Directed neural differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells is a sensitive
system for the identification of novel Hox gene effectors.

Bami M(1), Episkopou V, Gavalas A, Gouti M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Biomedical Research Foundation of the
Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.

The evolutionarily conserved Hox family of homeodomain transcription factors
plays fundamental roles in regulating cell specification along the anterior
posterior axis during development of all bilaterian animals by controlling cell
fate choices in a highly localized, extracellular signal and cell context
dependent manner. Some studies have established downstream target genes in
specific systems but their identification is insufficient to explain either the
ability of Hox genes to direct homeotic transformations or the breadth of their
patterning potential. To begin delineating Hox gene function in neural
development we used a mouse ES cell based system that combines efficient neural
differentiation with inducible Hoxb1 expression. Gene expression profiling
suggested that Hoxb1 acted as both activator and repressor in the short term but 
predominantly as a repressor in the long run. Activated and repressed genes
segregated in distinct processes suggesting that, in the context examined, Hoxb1 
blocked differentiation while activating genes related to early developmental
processes, wnt and cell surface receptor linked signal transduction and
cell-to-cell communication. To further elucidate aspects of Hoxb1 function we
used loss and gain of function approaches in the mouse and chick embryos. We show
that Hoxb1 acts as an activator to establish the full expression domain of CRABPI
and II in rhombomere 4 and as a repressor to restrict expression of Lhx5 and
Lhx9. Thus the Hoxb1 patterning activity includes the regulation of the cellular 
response to retinoic acid and the delay of the expression of genes that commit
cells to neural differentiation. The results of this study show that ES neural
differentiation and inducible Hox gene expression can be used as a sensitive
model system to systematically identify Hox novel target genes, delineate their
interactions with signaling pathways in dictating cell fate and define the extent
of functional overlap among different Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC3102681
PMID: 21637844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Development. 2011 Jun;138(12):2467-76. doi: 10.1242/dev.054106.

Restoring eye size in Astyanax mexicanus blind cavefish embryos through
modulation of the Shh and Fgf8 forebrain organising centres.

Pottin K(1), Hinaux H, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Développement Evolution du Cerveau Antérieur, UPR3294 NeD, CNRS,
Institut Alfred Fessard, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

The cavefish morph of the Mexican tetra (Astyanax mexicanus) is blind at adult
stage, although an eye that includes a retina and a lens develops during
embryogenesis. There are, however, two major defects in cavefish eye development.
One is lens apoptosis, a phenomenon that is indirectly linked to the expansion of
ventral midline sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression during gastrulation and that
induces eye degeneration. The other is the lack of the ventral quadrant of the
retina. Here, we show that such ventralisation is not extended to the entire
forebrain because fibroblast growth factor 8 (Fgf8), which is expressed in the
forebrain rostral signalling centre, is activated 2 hours earlier in cavefish
embryos than in their surface fish counterparts, in response to stronger Shh
signalling in cavefish. We also show that neural plate patterning and
morphogenesis are modified in cavefish, as assessed by Lhx2 and Lhx9 expression. 
Inhibition of Fgf receptor signalling in cavefish with SU5402 during
gastrulation/early neurulation mimics the typical surface fish phenotype for both
Shh and Lhx2/9 gene expression. Fate-mapping experiments show that posterior
medial cells of the anterior neural plate, which lack Lhx2 expression in
cavefish, contribute to the ventral quadrant of the retina in surface fish,
whereas they contribute to the hypothalamus in cavefish. Furthermore, when Lhx2
expression is rescued in cavefish after SU5402 treatment, the ventral quadrant of
the retina is also rescued. We propose that increased Shh signalling in cavefish 
causes earlier Fgf8 expression, a crucial heterochrony that is responsible for
Lhx2 expression and retina morphogenesis defect.

PMID: 21610028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Comp Neurol. 2011 Jun 1;519(8):1505-25. doi: 10.1002/cne.22581.

Multiple telencephalic and extratelencephalic embryonic domains contribute
neurons to the medial extended amygdala.

Bupesh M(1), Legaz I, Abellán A, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Lleida, Institut of Biomedical Research of Lleida (IRBLLEIDA), Lleida, Spain.

Dysfunctions in emotional control and social behavior are behind human
neuropsychiatric disorders, some of which are associated with an alteration of
amygdalar development. The medial extended amygdala is a key telencephalic center
for control of social behavior, but very little is known about its development.
We used in vitro migration assays for analyzing the origin of the neurons of the 
medial extended amygdala in mouse embryos (E13.5-E16.5). We compared the
migration assays with immunofluorescence/immunohistochemistry for calbindin and
radial glial fibers and with mRNA expression of several genetic markers of
distinct forebrain subdivisions. We provide experimental evidence for multiple
embryonic origins of the principal neurons of the medial extended amygdala. In
particular, we provide novel evidence indicating that a major part of the neurons
derives from a caudoventral pallidal subdivision (previously called or included
as part of the anterior peduncular area), forming a cell corridor with similar
molecular features (expression of Lhx6 and calbindin), connectivity, and
function, which relates to reproductive behavior. We also provide novel
experimental evidence indicating that the ventral pallium produces some neurons
for the medial amygdala, which correlates with data from Lhx9 expression. Our
results also confirm that some neurons of the medial extended amygdala originate 
in the preoptic area (our results indicate that these cells specifically
originate in its commissural subdivision) and the supraoptoparaventricular domain
of the hypothalamus. Our study helps to set up the foundations for a better
understanding of medial amygdalar control of behavior in normal and abnormal
conditions.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21452208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Apr;24(2):163-86. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2009.12.002.

Control of sex development.

Biason-Lauber A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology/Diabetology, University Children's Hospital,
Steinwiesstrasse 75, CH-8032 Zurich, Switzerland. Anna.Lauber@kispi.uzh.ch

The process of sexual differentiation is central for reproduction of almost all
metazoan, and therefore, for maintenance of practically all multicellular
organisms. In sex development, we can distinguish two different processes, sex
determination, that is the developmental decision that directs the
undifferentiated embryo into a sexually dimorphic individual. In mammals, sex
determination equals gonadal development. The second process known as sex
differentiation takes place once the sex determination decision has been made
through factors produced by the gonads that determine the development of the
phenotypic sex. Most of the knowledge on the factors involved in sexual
development came from animal models and from studies of cases in whom the genetic
or the gonadal sex does not match the phenotypical sex, that is, patients
affected by disorders of sex development (DSDs). Generally speaking, factors
influencing sex determination are transcriptional regulators, whereas factors
important for sex differentiation are secreted hormones and their receptors. This
review focuses on these factors and whenever possible, references regarding the
'prismatic' clinical cases are given.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20541146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Brain Res Bull. 2010 Apr 29;82(1-2):74-82. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.02.010. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

A refined map of early gene expression in the dorsal rhombomere 1 of mouse
embryos.

Liu ZR(1), Shi M, Hu ZL, Zheng MH, Du F, Zhao G, Ding YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xijng Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
15 Changle-xi Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, China.

Rhombomere 1 (r1), a temporary structure in the early developing brain, is
bounded rostrally by the isthmus organizer and caudally by the r2 domain. Many
genes involved in r1 induction and patterning have been identified. However, our 
knowledge of a comprehensive map of r1 regionalization defined by these genes at 
early embryonic stages remains fragmentary. In the present study, we examined the
expression of a variety of genes in the dorsal r1 of E9.0-E10.5 mouse embryos.
The expression domains within ventricular zone of these genes examined allowed us
to define four distinct regions along the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis of the
dorsal r1: the Wnt1/Lmx1a/Gdf7/Msx1/Msx2-positive roof plate,
Math1/Olig3/Msx1/Msx2-positive, upper rhombic lip, Mash1/Ngn1/Ngn2-positive
intermediate domain, and Mash1/Ngn1/Ngn2-positive rostral domain. Moreover, we
defined the distribution of several genes expressed in the mantle zone of the
dorsal r1, including Lmx1b, Lhx2, Lhx9, Phox2a and Phox2b. Taken together, our
gene expression data identify a refined subdivision of the dorsal r1 with four
distinct domains along the A-P axis and a mantle zone at early embryonic stages.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20206242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Dev Biol. 2010 May 1;341(1):305-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.010. Epub 2010
Feb 12.

Estrogen represses SOX9 during sex determination in the red-eared slider turtle
Trachemys scripta.

Barske LA(1), Capel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Production of male offspring in viviparous eutherian mammals requires a
sex-determining mechanism resistant to maternal hormones. This constraint is
relaxed in egg-laying species, which are sensitive to hormones during sex
determination and often use an increase in aromatase, the estrogen-synthesizing
enzyme, as a key feminizing signal. In the turtle Trachemys scripta, sex is
normally determined by temperature, but estrogen treatment overrides this cue and
leads exclusively to female development. We assessed whether the expression of
SOX9, a central male sex-determining gene in mammals, or three other conserved
transcription factors (WT1, GATA4, and LHX9) was regulated by estrogen signaling 
in the turtle. As in mice, all somatic cell types in the immature turtle gonad
initially expressed WT1 and GATA4, whereas SOX9 was restricted to the Sertoli
precursors and LHX9 to the coelomic epithelium and interstitium. After the
bipotential period, SOX9 was abruptly down-regulated at the female temperature.
Strikingly, embryos treated with beta-estradiol at the male temperature lost SOX9
expression more than two stages earlier than controls, though WT1, GATA4, and
LHX9 were unaffected. Conversely, inhibition of estrogen synthesis and signaling 
prevented or delayed SOX9 down-regulation at the female temperature. These
results suggest that endogenous estrogen feminizes the medulla of the bipotential
turtle gonad by inhibiting SOX9 expression. This mechanism may be involved in the
male-to-female sex reversal in wild populations exposed to environmental
estrogens, and is consistent with results showing that the estrogen receptor
represses Sox9 to block transdifferentiation of granulosa cells into Sertoli-like
cells in the adult mouse ovary.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20153744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Cereb Cortex. 2010 Aug;20(8):1788-98. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp242. Epub 2009 Nov
18.

Differential expression of LIM-homeodomain factors in Cajal-Retzius cells of
primates, rodents, and birds.

Abellan A(1), Menuet A, Dehay C, Medina L, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lleida, Institute of Biomedical
Research of Lleida, 25008 Lleida, Spain.

Reelin-expressing Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells are among the earliest generated cells
in the mammalian cerebral cortex and are believed to be crucial for both the
development and the evolution of a laminated pattern in the pallial wall of the
telencephalon. LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd) transcription factors are expressed
during brain development in a highly restricted and combinatorial manner, and
they specify regional and cellular identity. We have investigated the expression 
of the LIM-hd members Lhx1/Lhx2/Lhx5/Lhx6/Lhx9 in the reelin-expressing cells,
the pallium, and the regions of origin of CR cells including the cortical hem of 
3 amniote species: the mouse, the chick, and the macaque monkey. We found major
differences in the combinatorial LIM-hd expression in the marginal zone as well
as in the hem. 1) Lhx5 is a "preferential LIM-hd" for CR cells in mammals but not
expressed by these cells in chicks. 2) Lhx2 is expressed in the hem of the chick,
whereas it is excluded from this region in mouse. 3) Whereas mouse CR cells
express Lhx5/Lhx1, their monkey counterparts express 4 of these factors:
Lhx1/Lhx2/Lhx5/Lhx9. We discuss our findings in evolutionary terms for the
specification of the midline hem and CR cell type and the emergence of the
cortical lamination pattern.

PMID: 19923199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Sep 20;516(3):166-86. doi: 10.1002/cne.22102.

Olfactory and amygdalar structures of the chicken ventral pallium based on the
combinatorial expression patterns of LIM and other developmental regulatory
genes.

Abellán A(1), Legaz I, Vernier B, Rétaux S, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Brain Development and Evolution, Department of Experimental
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Lleida, Institut of Biomedical
Research of Lleida (IRBLLEIDA), 25008 Lleida, Spain.

We compared the combinatorial expression patterns of several LIM
domain-containing regulatory genes in the ventrolateral pallium of mouse and
chicken, in order to identify the homologues of the ventral pallial amygdala and 
other olfactory structures in birds. Lmo3, Lmo4, Lhx2, and Lhx9 showed comparable
expression patterns in the telencephalon of mouse and chicken, which allowed
distinction of the ventrolateral pallium and, particularly, the ventral pallial
amygdala and entorhinal cortex. Lmo3 was expressed in most of the ventrolateral
pallium in both species, including, in chicken, the piriform cortex and dorsal
ventricular ridge (mesopallium, nidopallium, and arcopallium) and, in mouse, the 
piriform cortex, most of the claustral complex, and the pallial amygdala. Lhx9
was differentially expressed in the ventral pallium, where it was restricted to
its rostral (olfactory bulb) and caudal (amygdalar and entorhinal) poles. In the 
caudal pole, expression of Lhx9 overlapped that of its paralog Lhx2. According to
these expression patterns, the chicken ventral pallial amygdala appears to
include the caudal dorsolateral pallium, the caudal nidopallium, and the whole
arcopallium, and each one relates to a distinct ventricular sector. Finally, the 
combinatorial expression patterns of Lmo3, Lhx9, and Lmo4 distinguished four
distinct subdivisions in the superficial, olfactorecipient area of the chicken
ventral pallium, which appear comparable to the piriform, entorhinal,
amygdalopiriform, and amygdalar cortices of mammals. The results are discussed in
the context of the two existing, opposite views on the homology of the dorsal
ventricular ridge of sauropsids and in terms of the evolution of pallial
derivatives.

PMID: 19598282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Neoplasia. 2009 Jul;11(7):700-11.

Aberrant methylation and reduced expression of LHX9 in malignant gliomas of
childhood.

Vladimirova V(1), Mikeska T, Waha A, Soerensen N, Xu J, Reynolds PC, Pietsch T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn,
Germany. valentina.vladimirova@ukb.uni-bonn.de

High-grade gliomas (HGGs) of childhood represent approximately 7% of pediatric
brain tumors. They are highly invasive tumors and respond poorly to conventional 
treatments in contrast to pilocytic astrocytomas, which usually are well
demarcated and frequently can be cured by surgery. The molecular events for this 
clinical relevant finding are only partially understood. In the current study, to
identify aberrantly methylated genes that may be involved in the tumorigenesis of
pediatric HGGs, we performed a microarray-based differential methylation
hybridization approach and found frequent hypermethylation of the LHX9 (human
Lim-homebox 9) gene encoding a transcription factor involved in brain
development. Bisulfite genomic sequencing and combined bisulfite restriction
analysis showed that HGGs were frequently methylated at two CpG-rich LHX9 regions
in comparison to benign, nondiffuse pilocytic astrocytomas and normal brain
tissues. The LHX9 hypermethylation was associated with reduced messenger RNA
expression in pediatric HGG samples and corresponding cell lines. This epigenetic
modification was reversible by pharmacological inhibition
(5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine), and reexpression of LHX9 transcript was induced in
pediatric glioma cell lines. Exogenous expression of LHX9 in glioma cell lines
did not directly affect cell proliferation and apoptosis but specifically
inhibited glioma cell migration and invasion in vitro, suggesting a possible
implication of LHX9 in the migratory phenotype of HGGs. Our results demonstrate
that the LHX9 gene is frequently silenced in pediatric malignant astrocytomas by 
hypermethylation and that this epigenetic alteration is involved in glioma cell
migration and invasiveness.

PMCID: PMC2697356
PMID: 19568415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Neural Dev. 2009 Jun 19;4:21. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-21.

Transcriptional control of axonal guidance and sorting in dorsal interneurons by 
the Lim-HD proteins Lhx9 and Lhx1.

Avraham O(1), Hadas Y, Vald L, Zisman S, Schejter A, Visel A, Klar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Neurobiology, IMRIC, Hebrew University, Hadassah Medical
School, Jerusalem, Israel. oshria@ekmd.huji.ac.il

BACKGROUND: Lim-HD proteins control crucial aspects of neuronal differentiation, 
including subtype identity and axonal guidance. The Lim-HD proteins Lhx2/9 and
Lhx1/5 are expressed in the dorsal spinal interneuron populations dI1 and dI2,
respectively. While they are not required for cell fate acquisition, their role
in patterning the axonal trajectory of dI1 and dI2 neurons remains incompletely
understood.
RESULTS: Using newly identified dI1- and dI2-specific enhancers to trace axonal
trajectories originating from these interneurons, we found that each population
is subdivided into several distinct groups according to their axonal pathways.
dI1 neurons project axons rostrally, either ipsi- or contra-laterally, while dI2 
are mostly commissural neurons that project their axons rostrally and caudally.
The longitudinal axonal tracks of each neuronal population self-fasciculate to
form dI1- and dI2-specific bundles. The dI1 bundles are spatially located ventral
relative to dI2 bundles. To examine the functional contribution of Lim-HD
proteins to establishment of dI axonal projections, the Lim-HD code of dI neurons
was altered by cell-specific ectopic expression. Expression of Lhx1 in dI1
neurons caused a repression of Lhx2/9 and imposed caudal projection to the caudal
commissural dI1 neurons. Complementarily, when expressed in dI2 neurons, Lhx9
repressed Lhx1/5 and triggered a bias toward rostral projection in otherwise
caudally projecting dI2 neurons, and ventral shift of the longitudinal axonal
fascicule.
CONCLUSION: The Lim-HD proteins Lhx9 and Lhx1 serve as a binary switch in
controlling the rostral versus caudal longitudinal turning of the caudal
commissural axons. Lhx1 determines caudal turning and Lhx9 triggers rostral
turning.

PMCID: PMC2704203
PMID: 19545367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2009 Sep;48(9):828-41. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20687.

DNA hypermethylation accompanied by transcriptional repression in follicular
lymphoma.

Bennett LB(1), Schnabel JL, Kelchen JM, Taylor KH, Guo J, Arthur GL, Papageorgio 
CN, Shi H, Caldwell CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Anatomical Sciences, University of
Missouri-Columbia School of Medicine, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.
bennettlb@health.missouri.edu

High-throughput microarray technologies were used to study DNA methylation
accompanied by transcriptional changes in follicular lymphoma (FL). Using
Methylated CpG Island Amplification with Microarrays to study CpG Island DNA
methylation in FL, we discovered widespread hypermethylation of homeobox genes
and previously identified targets of polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) in cell
lines and primary tumors, but not in benign follicular hyperplasia (BFH). DNA
methylation for HOXA11, HOXD10, HOXB7, HOXC12, PAX6, LHX9, SFMBT2, EN2, and PAX7 
was independently validated in the RL cell line and HOXA11, HOXD10, PAX6, and EN2
in primary tumors. Combined Bisulfite Restriction Analysis (COBRA) also
established DNA methylation for the previously identified PRC2 targets DCC, DES, 
GAD2, AQP5, GPR61, GRIA4, GJD2, and AMPH in FL but not in BFH. Gene expression
analyses revealed 411 genes that were hypermethylated and transcriptionally
repressed in RL, 74% of which were reactivated by the demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-azaD) plus or minus the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA). Forty genes were also downregulated in primary FL. Our
results suggest that extensive hypermethylation in promoters of polycomb target
genes is a characteristic of FL and that loss of expression of certain SUZ12
target genes could be functionally relevant for lymphomagenesis.

PMCID: PMC2738630
PMID: 19530241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Neuroscience. 2009 Apr 10;159(4):1326-37. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.02.010. Epub 2009 Feb 13.

Molecular development of the lateral geniculate nucleus in the absence of retinal
waves during the time of retinal axon eye-specific segregation.

Iwai L(1), Kawasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Systems Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

When retinal waves are inhibited binocularly, eye-specific segregation of retinal
axons is disrupted, and retinal axons from the two eyes remain intermingled in
the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). This effect of binocular retinal wave
inhibition is mediated by the lack of activity-dependent competition between
retinal axons from the two eyes, but it is unknown whether this effect is also
mediated by the developmental arrest of the LGN in an immature state. Here we
find developmental markers of the LGN during eye-specific segregation. The
expression levels of Purkinje cell protein 4 (PCP4/PEP19), transcription factor
7-like 2 (TCF7L2/TCF4) and LIM homeobox protein 9 (Lhx9) in the LGN change
significantly during eye-specific segregation. Using PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9 as
developmental markers of the LGN, we examine whether LGN development is affected 
by binocular disruption of retinal waves during eye-specific segregation.
Binocular injection of epibatidine strongly inhibits eye-specific segregation,
whereas it does not affect the expression of PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9. Furthermore, 
the expression of PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9 is normal in binocularly enucleated
animals and in mice treated with the monoamine oxidase A (MAOA) inhibitor,
clorgyline. In addition, our experiments using LGN slice cultures show that the
expression of PCP4 and TCF7L2 in LGN slices changes as in vivo. Our results
suggest that LGN development proceeds, at least in part, even in the absence of
retinal inputs. PCP4, TCF7L2 and Lhx9 should be useful to examine LGN development
during eye-specific segregation in mice and in ferrets.

PMID: 19409202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Development. 2009 Apr;136(8):1375-85. doi: 10.1242/dev.026476.

LIM homeobox transcription factors integrate signaling events that control
three-dimensional limb patterning and growth.

Tzchori I(1), Day TF, Carolan PJ, Zhao Y, Wassif CA, Li L, Lewandoski M,
Gorivodsky M, Love PE, Porter FD, Westphal H, Yang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Mammalian Molecular Genetics, Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and
Development, Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human 
Development, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Vertebrate limb development is controlled by three signaling centers that
regulate limb patterning and growth along the proximodistal (PD), anteroposterior
(AP) and dorsoventral (DV) limb axes. Coordination of limb development along
these three axes is achieved by interactions and feedback loops involving the
secreted signaling molecules that mediate the activities of these signaling
centers. However, it is unknown how these signaling interactions are processed in
the responding cells. We have found that distinct LIM homeodomain transcription
factors, encoded by the LIM homeobox (LIM-HD) genes Lhx2, Lhx9 and Lmx1b
integrate the signaling events that link limb patterning and outgrowth along all 
three axes. Simultaneous loss of Lhx2 and Lhx9 function resulted in patterning
and growth defects along the AP and the PD limb axes. Similar, but more severe,
phenotypes were observed when the activities of all three factors, Lmx1b, Lhx2
and Lhx9, were significantly reduced by removing their obligatory co-factor Ldb1.
This reveals that the dorsal limb-specific factor Lmx1b can partially compensate 
for the function of Lhx2 and Lhx9 in regulating AP and PD limb patterning and
outgrowth. We further showed that Lhx2 and Lhx9 can fully substitute for each
other, and that Lmx1b is partially redundant, in controlling the production of
output signals in mesenchymal cells in response to Fgf8 and Shh signaling. Our
results indicate that several distinct LIM-HD transcription factors in
conjunction with their Ldb1 co-factor serve as common central integrators of
distinct signaling interactions and feedback loops to coordinate limb patterning 
and outgrowth along the PD, AP and DV axes after limb bud formation.

PMCID: PMC2687467
PMID: 19304889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Dyn. 2009 Feb;238(2):367-75. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21850.

FGF receptor dependent regulation of Lhx9 expression in the developing nervous
system.

Atkinson-Leadbeater K(1), Bertolesi GE, Johnston JA, Hehr CL, McFarlane S.

Author information: 
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Canada.
atkinsok@ucalgary.ca

LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd) proteins form a multifunctional family of transcription 
factors that plays critical roles in the development of progenitor and
post-mitotic cells. Considerable work has focused on what regulates their
expression post-mitotically in the spinal cord. However, little is known about
what regulates LIM-hd genes at earlier developmental stages. To address this
question, we explored the role of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signalling in
regulating the expression of a Xenopus laevis Lhx9 orthologue (XLhx9). XLhx9 is
first expressed in the eye field and hindbrain, and when FGF receptor (FGFR)
activation was inhibited prior to its onset, both brain and eye field expression 
was diminished. However, when FGFRs were inhibited after XLhx9 onset, retinal
expression remained strong and brain expression was again diminished. These data 
suggest that while FGF signalling initiates and maintains brain XLhx9 expression,
in the eye primordium the requirement of FGFs for expression is rapidly lost.

PMID: 19161224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Neuron. 2008 Aug 14;59(3):413-24. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.07.020.

A molecular program for contralateral trajectory: Rig-1 control by LIM
homeodomain transcription factors.

Wilson SI(1), Shafer B, Lee KJ, Dodd J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Cellular Biophysics, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10032, USA.

Despite increasing evidence for transcriptional control of neural connectivity,
how transcription factors regulate discrete steps in axon guidance remains
obscure. Projection neurons in the dorsal spinal cord relay sensory signals to
higher brain centers. Some projection neurons send their axons ipsilaterally,
whereas others, commissural neurons, send axons contralaterally. We show that two
closely related LIM homeodomain proteins, Lhx2 and Lhx9, are expressed by a set
of commissural relay neurons (dI1c neurons) and are required for the dI1c axon
projection. Midline crossing by dI1c axons is lost in Lhx2/9 double mutants, a
defect that results from loss of expression of Rig-1 from dI1c axons. Lhx2 binds 
to a conserved motif in the Rig-1 gene, suggesting that Lhx2/9 regulate directly 
the expression of Rig-1. Our findings reveal a link between the transcriptional
programs that define neuronal subtype identity and the expression of receptors
that guide distinctive aspects of their trajectory.

PMID: 18701067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 24;8:67. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-67.

GATA4/FOG2 transcriptional complex regulates Lhx9 gene expression in murine heart
development.

Smagulova FO(1), Manuylov NL, Leach LL, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.
fatimas_369@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: GATA4 and FOG2 proteins are required for normal cardiac development
in mice. It has been proposed that GATA4/FOG2 transcription complex exercises its
function through gene activation as well as repression; however, targets of
GATA4/FOG2 action in the heart remain elusive.
RESULTS: Here we report identification of the Lhx9 gene as a direct target of the
GATA4/FOG2 complex. We demonstrate that the developing mouse heart normally
expresses truncated isoforms of Lhx9 - Lhx9alpha and Lhx9beta, and not the
Lhx9-HD isoform that encodes a protein with an intact homeodomain. At E9.5
Lhx9alpha/beta expression is prominent in the epicardial primordium, septum
transversum while Lhx9-HD is absent from this tissue; in the E11.5 heart
LHX9alpha/beta-positive cells are restricted to the epicardial mesothelium.
Thereafter in the control hearts Lhx9alpha/beta epicardial expression is promptly
down-regulated; in contrast, mouse mutants with Fog2 gene loss fail to repress
Lhx9alpha/beta expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation from the E11.5 hearts
demonstrated that Lhx9 is a direct target for GATA4 and FOG2. In transient
transfection studies the expression driven by the cis-regulatory regions of Lhx9 
was repressed by FOG2 in the presence of intact GATA4, but not the GATA4ki mutant
that is impaired in its ability to bind FOG2.
CONCLUSION: In summary, the Lhx9 gene represents the first direct target of the
GATA4/FOG2 repressor complex in cardiac development.

PMCID: PMC2447832
PMID: 18577233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Zoolog Sci. 2007 Aug;24(8):798-802.

Expression of Lhx9 isoforms in the developing gonads of Rana rugosa.

Oshima Y(1), Noguchi K, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Education and Integrated Arts and Sciences, 
Waseda University, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8050, Japan.

Lhx9 is a LIM-homeodomain (HD) transcription factor. Transcripts of the Lhx9 gene
are present in the urogenital ridges of mouse embryos. In Lhx9-deficient mice, a 
discrete gonad is not formed (Birk et al., 2000). To date, however, the role of
Lhx9 in gonad formation has not been studied in animals other than chicks and
mice. Thus, this study was aimed at determining whether or not Lhx9 is expressed 
in the developing gonads of amphibians. We first isolated cDNAs of Lhx9 and four 
isoforms, named Lhx9alpha, beta, gamma and delta, from the frog Rana rugosa. All 
the isoforms lacked the last 14 amino acids of the HD (the DNA-binding motif).
RT-PCR analysis revealed that Lhx9 and Lhx9alpha were highly expressed in the
ovary, testis, brain and heart of adult frogs. However, neither Lhx9 nor any of
the four isoforms was expressed in the pancreas and kidney. When their expression
in the developing gonads of R. rugosa was examined by RT-PCR, transcripts of Lhx9
and Lhx9alpha were detected with no sexual dimorphism during sex determination.
Lhx9gamma and Lhx9delta were also expressed, but at a low level. In contrast, the
Lhx9beta transcript was hardly detected. In addition, in situ hybridization
analysis showed that R. rugosa Lhx9 was expressed in somatic cells in the
developing gonad and mesonephros far before sex determination. Taken together,
Lhx9 and its four isoforms are probably involved in organogenesis in R. rugosa.
All the isoforms may function as an endogenous dominant-negative form of Lhx9 in 
this species.

PMID: 18217486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Neurobiol. 2008 Mar;68(4):504-20. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20603.

Evidences for tangential migrations in Xenopus telencephalon: developmental
patterns and cell tracking experiments.

Moreno N(1), González A, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, University Complutense of
Madrid, Spain. nerea@bio.ucm.es

Extensive tangential cell migrations have been described in the developing
mammalian, avian, and reptilian forebrain, and they are viewed as a powerful
developmental mechanism to increase neuronal complexity in a given brain
structure. Here, we report for the first time anatomical and cell tracking
evidence for the presence of important migratory processes in the developing
forebrain of the anamniote Xenopus laevis. Combining developmental gene
expression patterns (Pax6, Nkx2.1, Isl1, Lhx5, Lhx9, and Dll3), neurotransmitter 
identity (GABA, NOS, ChAT), and connectivity information, several types of
putative migratory cell populations and migration routes originating in the
ventral pallium and the subpallium are proposed. By means of in vivo cell
tracking experiments, pallio-subpallial and subpallio-pallial migrating neurons
are visualized. Among them, populations of Nkx2.1(+) striatal interneurons and
pallial GABAergic interneurons, which also express the migratory marker
doublecortin, are identified. Finally, we find that these tangentially migrating 
pallial interneurons travel through an "isl1-free channel" that may guide their
course through the subpallium. Our findings strongly suggest that the developing 
Xenopus telencephalon shares many similarities with amniotes in terms of neuronal
specification and migrations. However, some differences are discussed,
particularly with regard to the evolution of the pallium.

PMID: 18214835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Mol Reprod Dev. 2008 Jun;75(6):1002-10.

Five azacytidine, a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor, specifically inhibits
testicular cord formation and Sertoli cell differentiation in vitro.

Mizukami T(1), Kanai Y, Fujisawa M, Kanai-Azuma M, Kurohmaru M, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. tmiz@nih.go.jp

In mammals, Sry, Sox9, and M33 act as regulators at a chromatin level and promote
the maturation of embryonic gonads into testes. Recently, it was shown that
transcriptional regulation by DNA methylation plays crucial roles in gene
expression during the differentiation and development of various cell types. To
determine the involvement of DNA methylation in sex determination of the gonad,
we developed and performed organ culture of gonad with the DNA methyltransferase 
inhibitor 5-azacytidine to induce global DNA methylation status changes. In vitro
treatment with 5-azacytidine specifically inhibited testicular cord formation in 
a dose-dependent manner; however, no appreciable defect was observed in ovarian
explants. Inhibition of testicular cord was observed only in gonads from 11.5
days post-coitus embryos. These effects were not observed in
5-azacytidine-treated gonads from 12.0 days post-coitus embryos. To determine the
effect of 5-azacytidine on Sertoli and Leydig cell differentiation in the testis,
we performed whole mount in situ hybridization analysis. The Leydig and stromal
cell marker genes Lhx9, Mfge8, and 3beta-Hsd were normally induced in
5-azaytidine-treated testicular explants. Sertoli cell marker genes, Sox9 and MIS
were normally induced, but Col9a3, encoding an extracellular matrix component,
was inhibited in 5-azacytidine-treated testicular explants. Thus, our data show
that DNA methylation is involved in testicular cord formation and Sertoli cell
differentiation, acting directly on the gonad at 11.5 days post-coitus.

PMID: 18033690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Dev Biol. 2008;52(1):33-41.

Expression dynamics of the LIM-homeobox genes, Lhx1 and Lhx9, in the diencephalon
during chick development.

Sun X(1), Saitsu H, Shiota K, Ishibashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Yoshida, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

The diencephalon is the caudal part of the developing forebrain, which
corresponds to prosomeres 1 to 3. The mature diencephalon is functionally and
anatomically divided into well-defined nuclei. Previous researches have shown
that LIM-homeobox genes are important transcription factors during diencephalon
regionalization in mice. Here we examined expression patterns of several chick
orthologs of LIM-homeobox genes. Lhx1 and Lhx9 were expressed in the diencephalon
from early stages and their expression in the diencephalon became restricted to
prosomeres 1 and 2 in distinct fashions. Then we also studied the regulatory
effects of possible upstream signals by in ovo electroporation. Lhx1 was found to
be up-regulated by Shh signaling. Whereas Lhx9 was up-regulated by Wnt3a and
Fgf15, it was down-regulated by Shh. Our data suggest that the LIM-homeobox
genes, Lhx1 and Lhx9, regulated by ventral and/or dorsal signals, may play
important roles in controlling regionalization of the diencephalon during chick
development.

PMID: 18033670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Jan 1;506(1):46-74.

Histogenetic compartments of the mouse centromedial and extended amygdala based
on gene expression patterns during development.

García-López M(1), Abellán A, Legaz I, Rubenstein JL, Puelles L, Medina L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Murcia, 30100 
Murcia, Spain.

The amygdala controls emotional and social behavior and regulates instinctive
reflexes such as defense and reproduction by way of descending projections to the
hypothalamus and brainstem. The descending amygdalar projections are suggested to
show a cortico-striato-pallidal organization similar to that of the basal ganglia
(Swanson [2000] Brain Res 886:113-164). To test this model we investigated the
embryological origin and molecular properties of the mouse centromedial and
extended amygdalar subdivisions, which constitute major sources of descending
projections. We analyzed the distribution of key regulatory genes that show
restricted expression patterns within the subpallium (Dlx5, Nkx2.1, Lhx6, Lhx7/8,
Lhx9, Shh, and Gbx1), as well as genes considered markers for specific subpallial
neuronal subpopulations. Our results indicate that most of the centromedial and
extended amygdala is formed by cells derived from multiple subpallial
subdivisions. Contrary to a previous suggestion, only the central--but not the
medial--amygdala derives from the lateral ganglionic eminence and has
striatal-like features. The medial amygdala and a large part of the extended
amygdala (including the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis) consist of
subdivisions or cell groups that derive from subpallial, pallial (ventral
pallium), or extratelencephalic progenitor domains. The subpallial part includes 
derivatives from the medial ganglionic eminence, the anterior peduncular area,
and possibly a novel subdivision, called here commissural preoptic area, located 
at the base of the septum and related to the anterior commissure. Our study
provides a molecular and morphological foundation for understanding the complex
embryonic origins and adult organization of the centromedial and extended
amygdala.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17990271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Nov 10;505(2):221-33.

Developmental mechanisms for retinal degeneration in the blind cavefish Astyanax 
mexicanus.

Alunni A(1), Menuet A, Candal E, Pénigault JB, Jeffery WR, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)MSNC INRA Group, Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, Centre National de 
la Recherche Scientifique, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

The sighted surface-dwelling (surface fish, SF) and the blind cave-living
(cavefish, CF) forms of Astyanax mexicanus offer a unique opportunity to study
the evolutionary changes in developmental mechanisms that lead to retinal
degeneration. Previous data have shown the role of increased midline Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh) signalling in cavefish eye degeneration (Yamamoto et al. [2004]
Nature 431:844-847). Here, we have compared the major steps of eye development in
SF and CF between 14 hours and 5 days of development. We have analyzed cell
proliferation through PCNA and phospho-histone H3 staining and apoptosis through 
TUNEL and live LysoTracker analysis. We have assessed the expression of the major
eye development signalling factors Shh and Fgf8, and the eye patterning genes
Pax6, Lhx2, Lhx9, and Vax1, together with the differentiation marker GAD65. We
show that eye development is retarded in CF and that cell proliferation in CF
retina is proportionately similar to SF during early development, yet the retina 
degenerates after massive apoptosis in the lens and widespread cell death
throughout the neuroretina. Moreover, and surprisingly, the signalling,
patterning, and differentiation processes leading to the establishment of retinal
layers and cell types happen almost normally in CF, although some signs of
disorganization, slight heterochronies, and a lack of expression gradients are
observable. Our data demonstrate that the evolutionary process of eye
degeneration in the blind CF does not occur because of patterning defects of the 
retina and are consistent with the proposed scenario in which the trigger for eye
degeneration in CF is lens apoptosis.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 17853442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Chromosome Res. 2007;15(6):777-85. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Search for the sex-determining switch in monotremes: mapping WT1, SF1, LHX1,
LHX2, FGF9, WNT4, RSPO1 and GATA4 in platypus.

Grafodatskaya D(1), Rens W, Wallis MC, Trifonov V, O'Brien PC, Clarke O, Graves
JA, Ferguson-Smith MA.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Resource Centre for Comparative Genomics, Department of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB3 OES, UK.

The duck-billed platypus has five pairs of sex chromosomes, but there is no
information about the primary sex-determining switch in this species. As there is
no apparent SRY orthologue in platypus, another gene must acquire the function of
a key regulator of the gonadal male or female fate. SOX9 was ruled out from being
this key regulator as it maps to an autosome in platypus. To check whether other 
genes in mammalian gonadogenesis could be the primary switch in monotremes, we
have mapped a number of candidates in platypus. We report here the autosomal
location of WT1, SF1, LHX1, LHX9, FGF9, WNT4 and RSPO1 in platypus, thus
excluding these from being key regulators of sex determination in this species.
We found that GATA4 maps to sex chromosomes Y1 and X2; however, it lies in the
pairing region shown by chromosome painting to be homologous, so is unlikely to
be either male-specific or differentially dosed in male and female.

PMID: 17717721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Rev Med Chir Soc Med Nat Iasi. 2007 Jan-Mar;111(1):200-9.

[Morphogenesis and differentiation of the female genital tract. Genetic
determinism and epithelium-stromal interactions].

[Article in Romanian]

Amalinei C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Disciplina de Histologie, Facultatea de Medicina, Universitatea de Medicina si
Farmacie "Gr. T. Popa", Iasi.

The epithelium-stromal interaction is important in the process of morphogenesis, 
differentiation, and hormone response, in female genital tract. This review is
organized in four sections: i) female genital tract morphogenesis, based on
genetic determinism; ii) hormonal control of endometrial proliferation; iii)
TGF-beta key-role in epithelium-stromal communication; iv) endometrial apoptosis.
Female genital tract derives from the Müllerian ducts, a number of genes being
involved in its regulation, like Lim1, Lhx9, Emx, Pax-2, Hox-A9, Hox-A10,
Hox-A11, Hox-A13, Wnt-4, Wnt-7, WT1, SF-1, and GATA-4. TGF-beta, whose expression
is modulated by ovarian steroids, regulates cell growth, differentiation,
apoptosis, inflammatory and immune responses, extracellular matrix deposition,
adhesion molecules, proteases, and protease inhibitor expression. In the
endometrium, TGF-beta regulates its own expression, and that of extracellular
matrix, adhesion molecules and proteases implicated in trophoblast invasion,
angiogenesis, and tumor metastasis during embryo implantation, endometriosis,
irregular bleeding, and endometrial cancer. Cellular response elicited by
TGF-beta, mediated through a serine/threonine kinase receptor, induces the
recruitment of multiple intracellular signals, specifically Smads, whose
activation and subsequent translocation into the nucleus results in gene
expression. Ubiquitin is involved in the degradation of short lived, regulatory
or misfolded proteins, by tagging them to be taken to the proteasome. In the
endometrium, ubiquitin may allow cells of stromal origin to grow, survive and
evade T-cell mediated disposal, showing a functional duality. A complete
understanding of the complex regulatory endometrial epithelium-stromal mechanism,
concertating genes, hormones, and cytokines, may provide new therapeutic targets 
in female reproductive tract pathology.

PMID: 17595868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Genetics. 2006 Nov;174(3):1573-81. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Amh and Dmrta2 genes map to tilapia (Oreochromis spp.) linkage group 23 within
quantitative trait locus regions for sex determination.

Shirak A(1), Seroussi E, Cnaani A, Howe AE, Domokhovsky R, Zilberman N, Kocher
TD, Hulata G, Ron M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Agricultural Research Organization, Volcani
Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.

Recent studies have revealed that the major genes of the mammalian sex
determination pathway are also involved in sex determination of fish. Several
studies have reported QTL in various species and strains of tilapia, regions
contributing to sex determination have been identified on linkage groups 1, 3,
and 23. Genes contributing to sex-specific mortality have been detected on
linkage groups 2, 6, and 23. To test whether the same genes might control sex
determination in mammals and fishes, we mapped 11 genes that are considered
putative master key regulators of sex determination: Amh, Cyp19, Dax1, Dmrt2,
Dmrta2, Fhl3l, Foxl2, Ixl, Lhx9, Sf1, and Sox8. We identified polymorphisms in
noncoding regions of these genes and genotyped these sites for 90 individuals of 
an F2 mapping family. Mapping of Dax1 joined LG16 and LG21 into a single linkage 
group. The Amh and Dmrta2 genes were mapped to two distinct regions of LG23. The 
Amh gene was mapped 5 cM from UNH879 within a QTL region for sex determination
and 2 cM from UNH216 within a QTL region for sex-specific mortality. Dmrta2 was
mapped 4 cM from UNH848 within another QTL region for sex determination. Cyp19
was mapped to LG1 far from a previously reported QTL region for sex determination
on this chromosome. Seven other candidate genes mapped to LG4, -11, -12, -14, and
-17.

PMCID: PMC1667067
PMID: 16951079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Sep;20(9):2093-108. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

The LIM-homeodomain proteins Isl-1 and Lhx3 act with steroidogenic factor 1 to
enhance gonadotrope-specific activity of the gonadotropin-releasing hormone
receptor gene promoter.

Granger A(1), Bleux C, Kottler ML, Rhodes SJ, Counis R, Laverrière JN.

Author information: 
(1)Physiologie de l'Axe Gonadotrope, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7079, Physiologie et Physiopathologie,
Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris6, 4 place Jussieu, 75252 Paris cedex 05,
France.

The GnRH receptor (GnRH-R) plays a central role in mammalian reproductive
function throughout adulthood. It also appears as an early marker gene of the
presumptive gonadotrope lineage in developing pituitary. Here, using transient
transfections combined with DNA/protein interaction assays, we have delineated
cis-acting elements within the rat GnRH-R gene promoter that represent targets
for the LIM-homeodomain (LIM-HD) proteins, Isl-1 and Lhx3. These factors,
critical in early pituitary development, are thus also crucial for
gonadotrope-specific expression of the GnRH-R gene. In heterologous cells, the
expression of Isl-1 and Lhx3, together with steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1),
culminates in the activation of both the rat as well as human GnRH-R promoter,
suggesting that this combination is evolutionarily conserved among mammals. The
specificity of these LIM-HD factors is attested by the inefficiency of related
proteins, including Lhx5 and Lhx9, to activate the GnRH-R gene promoter, as well 
as by the repressive capacity of a dominant-negative derivative of Lhx3.
Accordingly, targeted deletion of the LIM response element decreases promoter
activity. In addition, experiments with Gal4-SF-1 fusion proteins suggest that
LIM-HD protein activity in gonadotrope cells is dependent upon SF-1 binding.
Finally, using a transgenic model that allows monitoring of in vivo promoter
activity, we show that the overlapping expression of Isl-1 and Lhx3 in the
developing pituitary correlates with promoter activity. Collectively, these data 
suggest the occurrence of a specific LIM-HD pituitary code and designate the
GnRH-R gene as the first identified transcriptional target of Isl-1 in the
anterior pituitary.

PMID: 16613990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 1;288(1):100-12. Epub 2005 Nov 10.

Organisation of the lamprey (Lampetra fluviatilis) embryonic brain: insights from
LIM-homeodomain, Pax and hedgehog genes.

Osorio J(1), Mazan S, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR2197 Développement, Evolution, Plasticité du Système Nerveux, Institut de
Neurobiologie Alfred FESSARD, C.N.R.S., Avenue de la Terrasse, 91198
Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

To investigate the embryonic development of the central nervous system of the
lamprey Lampetra fluviatilis, we have isolated and analysed the expression
patterns of members of the LIM-homeodomain, Pax, Hedgehog and Nkx2.1 families.
Using degenerate RT-PCR, single representatives of Lhx1/Lhx5, Lhx2/Lhx9,
Pax3/Pax7 and Hedgehog families could be isolated in L. fluviatilis. Expression
analysis revealed that the lamprey forebrain presents a clear neuromeric pattern.
We describe the existence of 4 embryonic diencephalic prosomeres whose boundaries
can be identified by the combined and relative expressions of LfPax37, LfLhx15
and LfLhx29. This suggests that the embryonic lamprey and gnathostome forebrain
are patterned in a highly similar manner. Moreover, analysis of the LfHh gene,
which is expressed in the hypothalamus, zona limitans intrathalamica and floor
plate, reveals the possible molecular origin of this neuromeric brain pattern. By
contrast, LfHh and LfNkx2.1 expressions suggest major differences in patterning
mechanisms of the ventral telencephalon when compared to gnathostomes. In
summary, our findings highlight a neuromeric organisation of the embryonic
agnathan forebrain and point to the possible origin of this organisation, which
is thus a truly vertebrate character. They also suggest that Hh/Shh midline
signalling might act as a driving force for forebrain evolution.

PMID: 16289025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Neuron. 2005 Oct 6;48(1):31-43.

Math1 expression redefines the rhombic lip derivatives and reveals novel lineages
within the brainstem and cerebellum.

Wang VY(1), Rose MF, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas
77030, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2005 Oct 6;48(1):1-4.

The rhombic lip (RL) is an embryonic proliferative neuroepithelium that generates
several groups of hindbrain neurons. However, the precise boundaries and
derivatives of the RL have never been genetically identified. We use
beta-galactosidase expressed from the Math1 locus in Math1-heterozygous and
Math1-null mice to track RL-derived cells and to evaluate their developmental
requirements for Math1. We uncover a Math1-dependent rostral rhombic-lip
migratory stream (RLS) that generates some neurons of the parabrachial, lateral
lemniscal, and deep cerebellar nuclei, in addition to cerebellar granule neurons.
A more caudal Math1-dependent cochlear extramural stream (CES) generates the
ventral cochlear nucleus and cochlear granule neurons. Similarly, mossy-fiber
precerebellar nuclei require Math1, whereas the inferior olive and locus
coeruleus do not. We propose that Math1 expression delimits the extent of the
rhombic lip and is required for the generation of the hindbrain superficial
migratory streams, all of which contribute neurons to the
proprioceptive/vestibular/auditory sensory network.

PMID: 16202707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Neuron. 2005 May 19;46(4):647-60.

Lhx6 delineates a pathway mediating innate reproductive behaviors from the
amygdala to the hypothalamus.

Choi GB(1), Dong HW, Murphy AJ, Valenzuela DM, Yancopoulos GD, Swanson LW,
Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
California 91125, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2005 May 19;46(4):525-6.

In mammals, innate reproductive and defensive behaviors are mediated by
anatomically segregated connections between the amygdala and hypothalamus. This
anatomic segregation poses the problem of how the brain integrates activity in
these circuits when faced with conflicting stimuli eliciting such mutually
exclusive behaviors. Using genetically encoded and conventional axonal tracers,
we have found that the transcription factor Lhx6 delineates the reproductive
branch of this pathway. Other Lhx proteins mark neurons in amygdalar nuclei
implicated in defense. We have traced parallel projections from the posterior
medial amygdala, activated by reproductive or defensive olfactory stimuli,
respectively, to a point of convergence in the ventromedial hypothalamus. The
opposite neurotransmitter phenotypes of these convergent projections suggest a
"gate control" mechanism for the inhibition of reproductive behaviors by
threatening stimuli. Our data therefore identify a potential neural substrate for
integrating the influences of conflicting behavioral cues and a transcription
factor family that may contribute to the development of this substrate.

PMID: 15944132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Hered. 2005 Jul-Aug;96(4):452-4. Epub 2005 Apr 6.

Exclusion of Lhx9 as a candidate gene for Sry-negative XX sex reversal in the
American cocker spaniel model.

Pujar S(1), Kothapalli KS, Kirkness E, Van Wormer RH, Meyers-Wallen VN.

Author information: 
(1)J. A. Baker Institute for Animal Health, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

XX sex reversal is known in 17 breeds of dogs. In the American cocker spaniel, it
segregates as an autosomal recessive trait, and the affected animals lack the
testis determining Sry gene. In the search for an autosomal gene that causes this
trait, we considered the possibility of Lhx9, a gene encoding LIM homeobox
containing transcription factor 9, as a candidate gene. An American cocker
spaniel pedigree showing Sry-negative XX sex reversal phenotype was genotyped
with an intronic Lhx9 microsatellite marker. Segregation of the Lhx9 marker in
the pedigree indicated that a mutation in canine Lhx9 is not likely to be the
cause of Sry-negative XX sex reversal. In addition, using the recently available 
7.6X canine genomic sequence, we report the location and genomic organization of 
canine Lhx9.

PMID: 15814894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Comp Neurol. 2005 May 9;485(3):240-54.

LIM-homeodomain genes as territory markers in the brainstem of adult and
developing Xenopus laevis.

Moreno N(1), Bachy I, Rétaux S, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

We investigated expression patterns of the LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd) genes x-Lhx1,
x-Lhx2, x-Lhx5, and x-Lhx9 in the brainstem of Xenopus laevis during larval
development and in the adult. The two groups of paralogous genes, x-Lhx1/x-Lhx5
and x-Lhx2/x-Lhx9, showed fundamentally different expression patterns, being
expressed in ventral versus dorsal territories of the midbrain and hindbrain,
respectively. Indeed, prominent expression of x-Lhx1/5 was found in the
mesencephalic tegmentum and the hindbrain reticular formation, whereas
conspicuous x-Lhx2/9 expression was observed in the torus semicircularis and
isthmic nucleus. A few shared expression domains for the two pairs of paralogs
included the optic tectum and the anterodorsal and pedunculopontine nuclei. In
each structure, expression of the two paralogs was almost identical, indicating
that the regulation of their expression in this part of the brain has evolved
slightly since gene duplication occurred. Notable exceptions included the
expression of x-Lhx1 but not x-Lhx5 in the Purkinje cells and the expression of
x-Lhx9 but not x-Lhx2 in the lateral line nucleus. The analysis of LIM-hd
expression patterns throughout development allowed the origin of given structures
in early embryos to be traced back. x-Lhx1 and x-Lhx5 were relevant to locate the
cerebellar anlage and to follow morphogenesis of the cerebellar plate and
cerebellar nuclei. They also highlighted the rhombomeric organization of the
hindbrain. On the other hand, x-Lhx2 and x-Lhx9 showed a dynamic spatiotemporal
pattern relative to tectal development and layering, and x-Lhx9 was useful to
trace back the origin of the isthmus in early development.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15791640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. DNA Cell Biol. 2004 Nov;23(11):761-8.

Lhx9 and lhx9alpha: differential biochemical properties and effects on neuronal
differentiation.

Mollé B(1), Père S, Failli V, Bach I, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2197 "Développement, Evolution, Plasticité du Système Nerveux," Institut
de Neurobiologie Alfred FESSARD, C.N.R.S, GIF-sur-YVETTE cedex, France.

The Lhx9 LIM-homeodomain transcription factor and its truncated isoform Lhx9alpha
are generated by alternative splicing of the Lhx9 gene. Here we investigated the 
differential functional properties of these two isoforms. Lhx9alpha, which lacks 
parts of the homeodomain, was unable to bind DNA in EMSA experiments, but was
able to associate with CLIM cofactors in GST pull-down assays. In transfection
experiments in PC12 cells, Lhx9alpha fusion constructs systematically showed a
nuclear localization, as opposed to Lhx9 fusion constructs, which also localized 
to the cytoplasm. Moreover, Lhx9 increased NGF-induced neuronal differentiation
of PC12 cells. Lhx9alpha, on the other hand, did not significantly increase
neuronal differentiation but had an effect on the morphology of PC12 cells.
Finally, as tested by RT-PCR experiments on transfected PC12 cells, Lhx9 was not 
able to induce the transcription of Lhx9alpha. Our results show significantly
different functional properties for Lhx9 and Lhx9alpha, and suggest that
Lhx9alpha can compete away limiting amounts of nuclear CLIM cofactors. Thus, Lhx9
and Lhx9alpha isoforms could be implicated in regulating various aspects of
neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 15585134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mech Dev. 2004 Jul;121(7-8):977-83.

Cloning and developmental expression patterns of Dlx2, Lhx7 and Lhx9 in the
medaka fish (Oryzias latipes).

Alunni A(1), Blin M, Deschet K, Bourrat F, Vernier P, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2197 Développement, Evolution, Plasticité du Système Nerveux, Institut de 
Neurobiologie Alfred FESSARD, CNRS, Avenue de la Terrasse, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette
cedex, France.

We have isolated three homeodomain and LIM-homeodomain developmental
transcription factors from the medaka fish (Oryzias latipes): OlDlx2, OlLhx7, and
OlLhx9, and we have studied their expression patterns in the developing and adult
brain. This analysis showed that OlDlx2 and OlLhx7 (together with OlNkx2.1b)
delineate the subpallial divisions of the medaka telencephalon, and that OlLhx9
exhibits a typical and specific topology of expression in the pallium and
diencephalic neuromeres. The expression patterns of these three genes, when
compared in details with those of their tetrapod homologs, reveal both
commonalities and differences in the basic organization of the developing teleost
and vertebrate forebrain.

PMID: 15210202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 May;4(3):315-20.

Expression of Dlx and Lhx family homeobox genes in fetal thymus and thymocytes.

Woodside KJ(1), Shen H, Muntzel C, Daller JA, Sommers CL, Love PE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Building 6B, Room
2B-210, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892-2780, USA.

Homeobox genes comprise a nearly ubiquitous and highly conserved superfamily of
developmental regulatory genes that encode transcription factors involved in the 
determination of axis and tissue identity. While homeobox gene expression has
been well characterized in a variety of embryonic tissues, their expression has
not been extensively studied in lymphoid progenitor cells or in sites of
lymphogenesis. To examine homeobox gene expression in the developing thymus, we
screened an embryonic day 13.5 thymus cDNA library by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) using degenerate oligonucleotides within the highly conserved homeodomain
region of eight homeobox gene families. The resulting PCR products were then
cloned and sequenced. Transcripts for multiple Dlx family members and Lhx2 were
repeatedly detected in this screen. Screening of embryonic day 16.5 and adult
murine thymus and Thy1+ thymocytes was performed for selected members of these
homeobox gene families. Transcripts encoding Lhx2, Lhx3, and Lhx9, as well as
Dlx1 and Dlx2 were detected in both thymus and purified thymocytes. Dlx1 is a
member of the distal-less homeobox gene family that has been shown to regulate
embryonic craniofacial development. Significantly, Dlx1 is expressed in the third
branchial arch, which contributes to the thymus. Although Dlx1 knockout mice did 
not display any obvious developmental defects in thymus or thymocyte development,
the expression of these homeobox genes in neural crest derivatives suggests a
possible role in cell migration and development that may overlap with other
homeobox genes.

PMID: 15053981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Apr 19;472(1):52-72.

LIM-homeodomain genes as developmental and adult genetic markers of Xenopus
forebrain functional subdivisions.

Moreno N(1), Bachy I, Rétaux S, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular, Facultad de Biología, Universidad
Complutense, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

We have investigated the expression patterns of five LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd)
genes, x-Lhx1, x-Lhx2, x-Lhx5, x-Lhx7, and x-Lhx9 in the forebrain of the frog
Xenopus laevis during larval development and in the adult. The results were
analyzed in terms of neuromeric organization of the amphibian brain and of
combinatorial LIM-hd code and showed that LIM-hd developmental transcription
factors are particularly powerful to highlight the coherence of several groups or
nuclei, to delineate subdivisions, and/or to clarify structures that are still a 
matter of debate. Among other findings, we bring substantial evidence for the
following: (1) a dual origin of olfactory bulb neurons, based on x-Lhx5
expression; (2) the existence of a ventral pallium in frog, based on x-Lhx9
expression; (3) a multiple (pallial and subpallial) origin for the nuclei of the 
amygdaloid complex, based on distinct combinations of the five studied genes; (4)
a clear homology between the Xenopus medial pallium and the mammalian
hippocampus, based on x-Lhx2 pattern; and (5) a confirmed prosomeric organization
of the diencephalon, based on alternating x-Lhx1/5 and x-Lhx2/9 expressions. In
addition, the important expression levels for LIM-hd factors found throughout
development and in the adult brain suggest a role for these genes in development 
and maintenance of neuronal specification and phenotype, as for example in the
case of x-Lhx7 and cholinergic neurons. Moreover, following LIM-hd patterns
throughout development points out to some of the migrations and morphogenetic
movements, which give rise to the adult structures. Finally, the detailed
description of the LIM-hd code in the developing and adult Xenopus forebrain
provides interesting cues for the possible mechanisms of evolution of the
vertebrate forebrain.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15024752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Int J Oncol. 2004 Mar;24(3):743-9.

Identification and characterization of Crumbs homolog 2 gene at human chromosome 
9q33.3.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan.

Drosophila Crumbs (Crb)--Stardust (Sdt)--Discs lost (Dlt) complex plays a pivotal
role in the establishment and the maintenance of epithelial polarity. CRB1 and
CRB3 are human homologs of Drosophila Crb, MPP1-MPP7 are human homologs of
Drosophila Sdt, INADL/PATJ and MPDZ/MUPP1 are human homologs of Drosophila Dlt.
Here, we identified and characterized a novel Crumbs family gene, Crumbs homolog 
2 (CRB2), by using bioinformatics. CRB2 isoform 1 was assembled by adding
nucleotide position 1-3353 of FLJ16786 cDNA (AK123000) to the 5'-end of
5'-truncated FLJ38464 cDNA (NM_173689.1), while that of CRB2 isoform 2 was
derived from FLJ16786 cDNA. CRB2 isoform 1, consisting of exon 1-13, encoded a
1285-aa transmembrane protein. CRB2 isoform 2, consisting of exon 1-10 and intron
10, encoded a 1176-aa secreted protein. CRB2 gene was found to encode
transmembrane protein as well as secreted protein due to alternative splicing.
CRB2 isoform 1, showing 24.4% total amino-acid identity with CRB1, was type I
transmembrane protein with 14 extracellular EGF-like domains, 3 extracellular
Laminin G-like domains and the Crb cytoplasmic tail (CCT) domain. CCT domain,
functioning as the binding site for PDZ domain of Sdt homologs, was conserved
among human CRB1, CRB2, CRB3, mouse Crb1, Crb3, Drosophila Crb, and C. elegans
crb. Comparative genomics revealed that CRB2-KIAA1608-LHX2-NEK6 locus at human
chromosome 9q33.3 and CRB1-MGC27044-LHX9-NEK7 locus at human chromosome 1q31.3
were paralogous regions within the human genome. This is the first report on
identification and characterization of the CRB2 gene.

PMID: 14767562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2003;101(3-4):242-9.

Molecular characterization of three gonad cell lines.

Beverdam A(1), Wilhelm D, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland, Australia.

To facilitate the study of the regulation and downstream interactions of genes
involved in gonad development it is important to have a suitable cell culture
model. We therefore aimed to characterize molecularly three different mouse gonad
cell lines. TM3 and TM4 cells were originally isolated from prepubertal mouse
gonads and were tentatively identified as being of Leydig cell and Sertoli cell
origin, respectively, based upon their morphology and hormonal responses. The
third line is a conditionally immortalized cell line, derived from 10.5-11.5 days
post-coitum (dpc) male gonads of transgenic embryos carrying a
temperature-sensitive SV40 large T-antigen. We studied by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) the expression profiles of a
number of genes known to be important for early gonad development. Moreover, we
assessed these cell lines for their capacity to induce SOX9 transcription upon
expression of SRY, a key molecular event occurring during sex determination. We
found that all three cell lines were unable to upregulate SOX9 expression upon
transfection of SRY-expression constructs, even though these cells express many
of the studied embryonic gonad genes. These observations point to a requirement
for SRY cofactors for direct or indirect upregulation of SOX9 expression during
testis determination.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14684990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Trans Am Clin Climatol Assoc. 2003;114:51-63; discussion 64-5.

Battle of the sexes: new insights into genetic pathways of gonadal development.

Jameson JL(1), Achermann JC, Ozisik G, Meeks JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Sex determination is governed by a series of genetic switches that influence cell
fate and differentiation during critical periods of gonadal development.
Remarkably, the primordial fetal gonad is bipotential. Therefore, gonadal
development provides an excellent opportunity to identify genes involved in
differential organogenesis. The identification of the testis-determining gene,
SRY (Sex-reversed on the Y), was a pivotal first step towards unraveling this
genetic pathway. It is now clear that numerous other genes, in addition to SRY,
are necessary for normal testis development. For example, human mutations in a
variety of genes (SOX9, WT1, SF1) impair testis development. Murine models
provide evidence for additional genes (Lhx9, Emx2, M33, Dmrt, Fgf9). This lecture
will highlight insights gleaned from human mutations in the nuclear receptors,
SF1 (Steroidogenic Factor1) (NR5A1) and DAX1 (Dosage-sensitive sex reversal,
Adrenal hypoplasia congenita, X chromosome) (NR0B1). These studies reveal the
exquisite sensitivity of SF1-dependent developmental pathways to gene dosage and 
function in humans.

PMCID: PMC2194523
PMID: 12813911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Dyn. 2003 Mar;226(3):460-9.

Dynamic spatiotemporal expression of LIM genes and cofactors in the embryonic and
postnatal cerebral cortex.

Bulchand S(1), Subramanian L, Tole S.

Author information: 
(1)Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, India.

LIM-homeodomain (LIM-HD) genes encode a family of transcription factors known to 
be involved in development and patterning in several systems. Previously, we have
shown that LIM-HD gene Lhx2 is required for the formation of a crucial boundary
in the dorsal telencephalon (Bulchand et al. [2001] Mech Dev 100:165-175). To
further explore the role of LIM-HD genes as well as the broader LIM gene family
in dorsal telencephalic development, we examined the expression pattern of the
members of this gene family and their cofactors in the developing mouse cerebral 
cortex. Transcription factor activity of the LIM-HD proteins requires the
formation of a tetrameric complex consisting of two LIM-HD molecules linked by a 
dimer of cofactor (Clim) molecules. LIM-only (Lmo) proteins can interfere with
this process by competing for the cofactors. LIM-HD protein function, thus, can
be modulated by the presence of the appropriate Clim or Lmo molecules. At least
13 LIM-HD, 4 Lmo, and 2 Clim genes have been identified in the mouse. Several of 
these genes exhibit complex spatiotemporal patterns spanning different stages of 
cortical development, from embryonic to postnatal ages. Noteworthy features of
the expression patterns include delineation of boundaries within the developing
cortex, up- or down-regulation during formation of selected cortical layers, and 
a striking complementarity of expression of several members consistent with
specific functions in cortical development. Significantly, in some cases, Lmo or 
Clim gene expression is robust where no LIM-HD gene expression is detectable.
These results suggest multiple and distinct roles for LIM-HD, Lmo, and Clim genes
in cortical development, and also support a LIM-HD-independent role for some Lmo 
and Clim members.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12619132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Dec;2(3-4):373-7.

Lhx9 expression during gonadal morphogenesis as related to the state of cell
differentiation.

Mazaud S(1), Oréal E, Guigon CJ, Carré-Eusèbe D, Magre S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie et Physiopathologie, CNRS-UMR 7079, Université
Paris VI, 7 quai Saint-Bernard, 75005 Paris, France.

Lhx9 (LIM/Homeobox gene 9) encodes a transcription factor implicated in various
developmental processes, including gonadogenesis. Our observations in the rat
show that Lhx9 expression present in undifferentiated gonads disappears as
epithelial cells differentiate into Sertoli cells and begin to express AMH. In
rat and in chick testes, Lhx9 expression present in interstitial cells decreases 
progressively to become undetectable after birth. In the female rat, Lhx9 is
highly expressed in epithelial ovigerous cords of the fetal ovary. Its expression
is down-regulated as epithelial cells differentiate into granulosa cells during
the process of folliculogenesis occurring at birth. If this process is impaired
by the lack of oocytes, ovigerous cord organization is maintained together with
Lhx9 expression. In conclusion, Lhx9 expression can be inversely correlated with 
the commitment into a differentiation pathway of the different categories of
mesothelium-derived cells of the gonad.

PMID: 12617828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):221-32.

Different patterns of anti-Müllerian hormone expression, as related to DMRT1,
SF-1, WT1, GATA-4, Wnt-4, and Lhx9 expression, in the chick differentiating
gonads.

Oréal E(1), Mazaud S, Picard JY, Magre S, Carré-Eusèbe D.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur l'Endocrinologie du Développement, INSERM U493, Ecole 
Normale Supérieure, Montrouge, France.

In mammals, anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) is produced by Sertoli cells from the
onset of testicular differentiation and by granulosa cells after birth. In birds,
AMH starts to be expressed in indifferent gonads of both sexes at a similar level
and is later up-regulated in males. We previously demonstrated that, unlike in
mammals, the onset of AMH expression occurs in chick embryo in the absence of
SOX9. We looked for potential factors that might be involved in regulating AMH
expression at different stages of chick gonad differentiation by comparing its
expression pattern in embryos and young chicken with that of DMRT1, SF-1, WT1,
GATA-4, Wnt-4, and Lhx9, by in situ hybridization. The results allowed us to
distinguish different phases. (1) In indifferent gonads of both sexes, AMH is
expressed in dispersed medullar cells. SF-1, WT1, GATA-4, Wnt-4, and DMRT1 are
transcribed in the same region of the gonads, but none of these factors has an
expression strictly coincident with that of AMH. Lhx9 is present only in the
cortical area. (2) After this period, AMH is up-regulated in male gonads. The
up-regulation is concomitant with the beginning of SOX9 expression and a sex
dimorphic level of DMRT1 transcripts. It is followed by the aggregation of the
AMH-positive cells (Sertoli cells) into testicular cords in which AMH is
coexpressed with DMRT1, SF-1, WT1, GATA-4, and SOX9. (3) In the females, the low 
level of dispersed medullar AMH expression is conserved. With development of the 
cortex in the left ovary, cells expressing AMH accumulate in the juxtacortical
part of the medulla, whereas they remain dispersed in the right ovary. At this
stage, AMH expression is not strictly correlated with any of the studied factors.
(4) After hatching, the organization of left ovarian cortex is characterized by
the formation of follicles. Follicular cells express AMH in conjunction with
SF-1, WT1, and GATA-4 and in the absence of SOX9, as in mammals. In addition,
they express Lhx9 and Wnt-4, the latter being also found in the oocytes. (5)
Moreover, unlike in mammals, the chicken ovary retains a dispersed AMH expression
in cortical interstitial cells between the follicles, with no obvious correlation
with any of the factors studied. Thus, the dispersed type of AMH expression in
indifferent and female gonads appears to be bird-specific and not controlled by
the same factors as testicular or follicular AMH transcription.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Genes Dev. 2002 Jul 15;16(14):1839-51.

The Wilms tumor suppressor WT1 regulates early gonad development by activation of
Sf1.

Wilhelm D(1), Englert C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Toxikologie und Genetik, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, 76021
Karlsruhe, Germany.

In mammals, several genes including the Wilms tumor suppressor gene Wt1, the Lim 
homeobox gene Lhx9, and the gene encoding steroidogenic factor 1 (Sf1) have been 
implicated in the development of the indifferent gonad prior to sexual
differentiation. Interactions among these genes have not yet been elucidated.
Using biochemical and genetic experiments, we demonstrate here that WT1 and LHX9 
function as direct activators of the Sf1 gene. Interestingly, only the -KTS form 
of WT1 is able to bind to and transactivate the Sf1 promoter. This observation is
consistent with differential roles for the -KTS and +KTS variants of WT1 which
have been postulated on the basis of human disorders such as the Frasier
syndrome. Our data suggest a pathway in which the products of the Wt1 and Lhx9
genes activate expression of Sf1 and thus mediate early gonadogenesis.

PMCID: PMC186395
PMID: 12130543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Novartis Found Symp. 2002;244:4-18; discussion 18-22, 35-42, 253-7.

Sex-determining genes in mice: building pathways.

Lovell-Badge R(1), Canning C, Sekido R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Genetics, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, London, UK.

Sry is active in the mouse for a very brief period in somatic cells of the
genital ridge to initiate Sertoli cell differentiation. SRY protein must act
within the context of other gene products required for gonadal development and
must itself act on one or more target genes that will ensure the further
differentiation and maintenance of Sertoli cells. Over the last few years several
genes have been found that have important roles in gonadal development and sex
determination. These include genes encoding transcription factors such as Lhx9,
Wt1, Sf1, Dax1, Gata4, Dmrt1 and Sox9, and some involved in cell cell signalling,
including Amh, Wnt4 and Dhh. While more await discovery, it is now possible to
start putting some of the known genes into pathways or networks. Sox9 probably
occupies a critical role in mammals for both the initiation and maintenance of
Sertoli cell differentiation. Data will be presented that are consistent with SRY
acting directly on Sox9 to ensure its up-regulation. SF1 is also central to
gonadal differentiation. Our results imply that it contributes to transcriptional
activation of several relevant genes, not just those required for male
development, including Sox9 and Amh, but also those that can have an antagonistic
effect on Sertoli cell differentiation, such as Dax1. Progress in establishing
other regulatory interactions will also be discussed.

PMID: 11990796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Novartis Found Symp. 2002;244:23-31; discussion 31-42, 253-7.

Early gonadal development: exploring Wt1 and Sox9 function.

Guo JK(1), Hammes A, Chaboissier MC, Vidal V, Xing Y, Wong F, Schedl A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Unit, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Prior to sex determination the gonadal anlage is formed as a bipotential
primordium with the capacity to differentiate into either testes or ovaries
depending on the presence or absence of the Sry gene. Knockout experiments have
implicated five genes in the formation or survival of the gonadal primordium:
Wt1, Sf1, Lim1, Lhx9 and Emx2. We are particularly interested in the Wilms tumour
suppressor, WT1, which is characterized by complex posttranscriptional
modifications. Here we will focus on published in vitro evidence suggesting
distinct functions for the various isoforms and present our own results from in
vivo experiments. Our data suggest that WT1 is an important regulator of the
transcription or stability of the sex-determining gene Sry. One of the first
genes expressed after the initial male sex-determining signal is the Sox9 gene.
Human SOX9 has been implicated in male-to-female sex reversal. To analyse Sox9
function in mouse development we have performed transgenic experiments and
ectopically expressed this gene in XX gonads. Our data indicate that Sox9 is
sufficient to induce testis formation in mice. Here we will discuss our new data 
and present an updated model for Wt1 and Sox9 function in gonad formation and sex
determination.

PMID: 11990794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Neurosci. 2001 Oct 1;21(19):7620-9.

The LIM-homeodomain gene family in the developing Xenopus brain: conservation and
divergences with the mouse related to the evolution of the forebrain.

Bachy I(1), Vernier P, Retaux S.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2197 "Développement, Evolution, Plasticité du Système Nerveux," Institut
de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
91198 Gif-sur-Yvette cedex, France.

A comparative analysis of LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd) expression patterns in the
developing stage 32 Xenopus brain is presented. x-Lhx2, x-Lhx7, and x-Lhx9 were
isolated and their expression, together with that of x-Lhx1 and x-Lhx5, was
analyzed in terms of prosomeric brain development and LIM-hd combinatorial code
and compared with mouse expression data. The results show an almost complete
conservation of expression patterns in the diencephalon. The Lhx1/5 and Lhx2/9
subgroups label the pretectum/ventral thalamus/zona limitans versus the dorsal
thalamus, respectively, in alternating stripes of expression in both species.
Conversely, strong divergences in expression patterns are observed between the
telencephalon of the two species for Lhx1/5 and Lhx2/9. Lhx7 exhibits
particularly conservative patterns and is proposed as a medial ganglionic
eminence marker. The conservation of diencephalic segments is proposed to mirror 
the conservative nature of diencephalic structures across vertebrates. In
contrast, the telencephalic divergences are proposed to reflect the emergence of 
significant novelty in the telencephalon (connectivity changes) at the
anamniote/amniote transition. Moreover, the data allow the new delineation of
pallial and subpallial domains in the developing frog telencephalon, which are
compared with mouse subdivisions. In the pallium, the mouse combinatorial
expression of LIM-hd is notably richer than in the frog, again possibly
reflecting evolutionary changes in cortical connectivity.

PMID: 11567052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Jun;86(6):2465-9.

Absence of mutations involving the LIM homeobox domain gene LHX9 in 46,XY gonadal
agenesis and dysgenesis.

Ottolenghi C(1), Moreira-Filho C, Mendonça BB, Barbieri M, Fellous M, Berkovitz
GD, McElreavey K.

Author information: 
(1)Immunogénétique Humaine, INSERM E0025, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris, France.

The etiology of most cases of 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis in the absence of
extragenital anomalies is not accounted for by mutations in the genes known to
date to be involved in sex determination. We have investigated the possibility
that mutations in the gene LHX9, whose murine ortholog causes isolated gonadal
agenesis when inactivated, might be responsible for gonadal dysgenesis and
agenesis in humans. We isolated a human LHX9 complementary DNA (cDNA), mapped the
gene to the long arm of human chromosome 1, and determined its genomic structure.
We found that LHX9 is highly conserved between species, sharing in particular
over 98% amino acid identity. A mutational screen was performed in a sample of
patients with a range of gonadal maldevelopment, including bilateral gonadal
agenesis in two sisters with an opposite sex karyotype. We did not detect
mutations in the open reading frame of LHX9 in the patients studied. However, the
extent of between-species structural conservation suggests that LHX9 deserves
further consideration as a determinant of gonadal function in humans.

PMID: 11397841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Neuron. 2001 May;30(2):411-22.

Proprioceptor pathway development is dependent on Math1.

Bermingham NA(1), Hassan BA, Wang VY, Fernandez M, Banfi S, Bellen HJ, Fritzsch
B, Zoghbi HY.

Collaborators: Bellen HJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The proprioceptive system provides continuous positional information on the limbs
and body to the thalamus, cortex, pontine nucleus, and cerebellum. We showed
previously that the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Math1 is
essential for the development of certain components of the proprioceptive
pathway, including inner-ear hair cells, cerebellar granule neurons, and the
pontine nuclei. Here, we demonstrate that Math1 null embryos lack the D1
interneurons and that these interneurons give rise to a subset of proprioceptor
interneurons and the spinocerebellar and cuneocerebellar tracts. We also identify
three downstream genes of Math1 (Lh2A, Lh2B, and Barhl1) and establish that Math1
governs the development of multiple components of the proprioceptive pathway.

PMID: 11395003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Neurosci. 2001 Apr 15;21(8):2711-25.

Combinatorial expression patterns of LIM-homeodomain and other regulatory genes
parcellate developing thalamus.

Nakagawa Y(1), O'Leary DD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
92037, USA.

The anatomical and functional organization of dorsal thalamus (dTh) and ventral
thalamus (vTh), two major regions of the diencephalon, is characterized by their 
parcellation into distinct cell groups, or nuclei, that can be histologically
defined in postnatal animals. However, because of the complexity of dTh and vTh
and difficulties in histologically defining nuclei at early developmental stages,
our understanding of the mechanisms that control the parcellation of dTh and vTh 
and the differentiation of nuclei is limited. We have defined a set of regulatory
genes, which include five LIM-homeodomain transcription factors (Isl1, Lhx1,
Lhx2, Lhx5, and Lhx9) and three other genes (Gbx2, Ngn2, and Pax6), that are
differentially expressed in dTh and vTh of early postnatal mice in distinct but
overlapping patterns that mark nuclei or subsets of nuclei. These genes exhibit
differential expression patterns in dTh and vTh as early as embryonic day 10.5,
when neurogenesis begins; the expression of most of them is detected as
progenitor cells exit the cell cycle. Soon thereafter, their expression patterns 
are very similar to those that we observe postnatally, indicating that unique
combinations of these genes mark specific cell groups from the time they are
generated to their later differentiation into nuclei. Our findings suggest that
these genes act in a combinatorial manner to control the specification of
nuclei-specific properties of thalamic cells and the differentiation of nuclei
within dTh and vTh. These genes may also influence the pathfinding and targeting 
of thalamocortical axons through both cell-autonomous and non-autonomous
mechanisms.

PMID: 11306624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mech Dev. 2000 Sep;96(2):223-7.

Identification of a stromal cell type characterized by the secretion of a soluble
integrin-binding protein, MFG-E8, in mouse early gonadogenesis.

Kanai Y(1), Kanai-Azuma M, Tajima Y, Birk OS, Hayashi Y, Sanai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, The University of Tokyo, Yayoi 1-1,
Bunkyo-ku, 113-8657, Tokyo, Japan. aykanai@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Mfge8 (milk fat globule-EGF-factor 8) encodes a soluble integrin-binding protein 
containing two Notch-like EGF domains and two discoidin domains. It mediates
cell-to-cell interaction by binding to integrin alphavbeta3 via the RGD motif of 
its second EGF domain. Mfge8 was first expressed at 10.0 dpc in cells of the
coelomic epithelium covering the mesonephros, and at 10.5 dpc Mfge8-expressing
cells were found in the mesenchyme underneath the coelomic epithelium of the
genital ridges. At 11.5-12.5 dpc, Mfge8 expressing cells were found in the
stromal tissues subjacent to the coelomic epithelium that envelop the fetal gonad
of both sexes. MFG-E8 protein was accumulated extracellularly in the interstitial
tissues at the boundary of the mesonephros and the genital ridges. A comparison
of the expression domains of Mfge8 and several gene markers showed that Mfge8
expression did not significantly overlap with the expression domain of Wt1 or
Emx2, but partially with that of Lhx9 in 11.5-day XY gonads. Comparison of the
expression pattern of Mfge8 with that of Hsd3beta1 in the 12.5-day testes
revealed that the Mfge8-positive cells constitute a previously uncharacterized
somatic cell type which is distinct from Sertoli cells, Leydig cells, peritubular
myoid cells and the endothelial cells.

PMID: 10960788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Genomics. 2000 Mar 15;64(3):307-17.

Lhx9 and Lhx9alpha LIM-homeodomain factors: genomic structure, expression
patterns, chromosomal localization, and phylogenetic analysis.

Failli V(1), Rogard M, Mattei MG, Vernier P, Rétaux S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurochimie-Anatomie, Institut des Neurosciences, 9 quai St
Bernard, Paris, 75005, France.

Lhx9 is a LIM-homeodomain (LIM-hd) transcription factor expressed in the
embryonic mouse brain. We report the isolation of Lhx9alpha, a cDNA encoding a
truncated isoform of Lhx9 that lacks the recognition helix of the homeodomain and
differs from Lhx9 cDNA in its 3'-coding and 3'-UTR sequences. Isolation of the
Lhx9 gene showed that Lhx9 and Lhx9alpha are coded by six exons spanning 10 kb of
genomic sequence and that Lhx9alpha is an isoform generated by alternative
splicing of the fifth exon. Lhx9 was mapped to the subtelomeric region of
chromosome 1. Further molecular analysis showed that Lhx9 is a new candidate gene
for the unidentified dreher (dr) mutation in mouse. The comparison of genomic
structure and molecular phylogenetic analysis led to the identification of six
groups of LIM-hd proteins, a basis for further classification and knowledge of
their evolutionary relationships. To investigate a possible role for Lhx9alpha,
the expression patterns of Lhx9 and Lhx9alpha were compared during embryogenesis.
Lhx9alpha was expressed at lower levels than Lhx9, with a similar but distinct
pattern in the brain, especially in the neocortex. We suggest that Lhx9alpha
could function as an endogenous dominant-negative form of Lhx9 during
development, both to regulate in space and time the transcriptional effects of
Lhx9 and to add a degree of refinement to the LIM-hd code.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10756098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nature. 2000 Feb 24;403(6772):909-13.

The LIM homeobox gene Lhx9 is essential for mouse gonad formation.

Birk OS(1), Casiano DE, Wassif CA, Cogliati T, Zhao L, Zhao Y, Grinberg A, Huang 
S, Kreidberg JA, Parker KL, Porter FD, Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

During mammalian embryonic development, the ovaries and testes develop from
somatic cells of the urogenital ridges as indifferent gonads, harbouring
primordial germ cells that have migrated there. After sex determination of the
gonads, the testes produce testosterone and anti-Mullerian hormone which mediate 
male sexual differentiation, and the female developmental pathway ensues in their
absence. Here we show that transcripts of the LIM homeobox gene Lhx9 are present 
in urogenital ridges of mice at embryonic day 9.5; later they localize to the
interstitial region as morphological differentiation occurs. In mice lacking Lhx9
function, germ cells migrate normally, but somatic cells of the genital ridge
fail to proliferate and a discrete gonad fails to form. In the absence of
testosterone and anti-Mullerian hormone, genetically male mice are phenotypically
female. The expression of steroidogenic factor 1 (Sf1), a nuclear receptor
essential for gonadogenesis, is reduced to minimal levels in the Lhx9-deficient
genital ridge, indicating that Lhx9 may lie upstream of Sf1 in a developmental
cascade. Unlike mice lacking other genes that mediate early stages of
gonadogenesis, Lhx9 mutants do not exhibit additional major developmental
defects. Thus, LHX9 mutations may underlie certain forms of isolated gonadal
agenesis in humans.

PMID: 10706291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Mech Dev. 1999 Mar;81(1-2):193-8.

Characterization of Lhx9, a novel LIM/homeobox gene expressed by the pioneer
neurons in the mouse cerebral cortex.

Bertuzzi S(1), Porter FD, Pitts A, Kumar M, Agulnick A, Wassif C, Westphal H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA. 
bertuzzi@salk.edu

In order to explain the phenotype observed in Lhx2 mutant embryos, we previously 
proposed that an Lhx2 related gene might exist. We now have cloned a new
LIM/homeobox gene called Lhx9. Lhx9 is closely related to Lhx2 and is expressed
in the developing central nervous system (CNS). Lhx9 and Lhx2 have expression
patterns that overlap in some areas but are distinct in others. Thus, in some
developmental domains these two highly related proteins may be functionally
redundant. Lhx9 is expressed in the pioneer neurons of the cerebral cortex, while
Lhx2 is expressed throughout the cortical layers. Postnatally, Lhx9 is expressed 
in the inner nuclei of the cerebellum, while Lhx2 is in the granular layer. In
the developing limbs, both genes are highly expressed in a similar pattern. Based
on the expression pattern and the developmental regulation of Lhx9, we propose
that Lhx9 may be involved in the specification or function of the pioneer neurons
of the cerebral cortex. We show that both Lhx9 and Lhx2 bind the LIM domain
binding protein Ldb1/Nli1/Clim2.

PMID: 10330499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Neurosci. 1999 Jan 15;19(2):783-93.

Lhx9: a novel LIM-homeodomain gene expressed in the developing forebrain.

Rétaux S(1), Rogard M, Bach I, Failli V, Besson MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Neurochimie-Anatomie, Institut des Neurosciences, 75005 Paris, 
France.

A novel LIM-homeodomain gene, Lhx9, was isolated by degenerate RT-PCR followed by
mouse embryonic library screening. Lhx9 cDNA encodes a protein that is most
closely related to Drosophila apterous and rodent Lhx2 proteins. The Lhx9
spatiotemporal pattern of expression during embryogenesis was similar but
distinct from Lhx2. Highest expression levels were found in the diencephalon,
telencephalic vesicles, and dorsal mesencephalon. Domains of expression respected
the proposed neuromeric boundaries (). Lhx9 was also expressed in the spinal
cord, forelimb and hindlimb mesenchyme, and urogenital system. Although Lhx9
expression was sustained in diencephalon and mesencephalon from embryonic day
10.5 (E10.5) to postnatal stages, it was transient in the future cerebral cortex,
where it was turned off between E14.5 and E16.5. Lhx9 expression was highest if
not exclusively located (depending on the region of interest) in the intermediate
and mantle zones, as opposed to the mitotic ventricular zone. Lhx9 protein was
tested for interaction with the recently discovered cofactors of LIM-homeodomain 
proteins and was found to interact strongly both with CLIM1 and CLIM2. The
expression pattern and structural characteristics of Lhx9 suggest that it encodes
a transcription factor that might be involved in the control of cell
differentiation of several neural cell types. Furthermore, Lhx9 protein could act
in a combinatorial manner with other LIM-homeodomain factors expressed in
overlapping pattern.

PMID: 9880598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


