
1. J Cell Mol Med. 2016 Mar 29. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12846. [Epub ahead of print]

Potentially functional polymorphisms in the LIN28B gene contribute to
neuroblastoma susceptibility in Chinese children.

He J(1,)(2), Yang T(1), Zhang R(1), Zhu J(3), Wang F(1), Zou Y(1), Xia H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Guangzhou Women and Children's Medical
Center, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (2)Sun Yat-sen
University Cancer Center, State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China,
Department of Experimental Research, Collaborative Innovation Center for Cancer
Medicine, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (3)Molecular Epidemiology Laboratory and
Department of Laboratory Medicine, Harbin Medical University Cancer Hospital,
Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.

Neuroblastoma is the most commonly diagnosed solid tumour outside the central
nervous system in children. However, genetic factors underlying neuroblastoma
remain largely unclear. Previous genome-wide association study indicated that
lin-28 homolog B (LIN28B) might play an important role in the development of
neuroblastoma and also contributed to its poor overall survival. With the purpose
to evaluate the association between LIN28B gene polymorphisms and neuroblastoma
susceptibility in Southern Chinese population, we conducted this study with 256
neuroblastoma cases and 531 cancer-free controls. Four potentially functional
polymorphisms (rs221634 A>T, rs221635 T>C, rs314276 C>A and rs9404590 T>G) were
genotyped using Taqman method. Odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals
(CIs) were calculated to assess the associations between the selected single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and neuroblastoma susceptibility. We also
performed genotype-phenotype association analysis to explore the effects of the
selected SNPs on LIN28B gene transcripts. Our results indicated that the rs221634
TT genotype was associated with an increased neuroblastoma risk (TT versus AA/AT:
adjusted OR = 1.50, 95% CI = 1.04-2.17). The association was more pronounced in
males, patients with tumour of mediastinum origin, as well as patients in early
clinical stages. Moreover, overall analysis and stratified analysis also showed
an increased risk of neuroblastoma for carrier of the 2-4 risk genotypes. In
summary, these results indicated that the LIN28B rs221634 A>T polymorphism was
associated with an increased neuroblastoma risk in Southern Chinese children.
These findings need further validation in large studies with different
ethnicities involved.

© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMID: 27021521  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 19. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8199. [Epub ahead of print]

Differential regulation of the c-Myc/Lin28 axis discriminates subclasses of
rearranged MLL leukemia.

Chen L(1), Sun Y(1), Wang J(1), Jiang H(2), Muntean AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA. (2)Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health,University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

MLL rearrangements occur in myeloid and lymphoid leukemias and are generally
associated with a poor prognosis, however this varies depending on the fusion
partner. We modeled acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in mice using various MLL fusion
proteins (MLL-FPs) and observed significantly different survival outcomes. To
better understand the differences between these leukemias, we examined the genome
wide expression profiles of leukemic cells transformed with different MLL-FPs.
RNA-sequencing and pathway analysis identified the c-Myc transcriptional program 
as one of the top distinguishing features. c-Myc protein levels were highly
correlative with AML disease latency in mice. Functionally, overexpression of
c-Myc resulted in a more aggressive proliferation rate in MLL-FP cell lines.
While all MLL-FP transformed cells displayed sensitivity to BET inhibitors, high 
c-Myc expressing cells showed greater resistance to Brd4 inhibition. The Myc
target Lin28B was also differentially expressed in MLL-FP cell lines in agreement
with c-Myc expression. Examination of Lin28B miRNAs targets revealed that let-7g 
was significantly increased in leukemic cells associated with the longest disease
latency and forced let-7g expression induced differentiation of leukemic blasts. 
Thus, differential regulation of the c-Myc/Lin28/let-7g program by different
MLL-FPs is functionally related to disease latency and BET inhibitor resistance
in MLL leukemias.

PMID: 27007052  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cell Rep. 2016 Mar 29;14(12):2950-61. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2016.02.075. Epub
2016 Mar 17.

Merlin/NF2-Lin28B-let-7 Is a Tumor-Suppressive Pathway that Is Cell-Density
Dependent and Hippo Independent.

Hikasa H(1), Sekido Y(2), Suzuki A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Genetics, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
(2)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Nagoya
464-8681, Japan. (3)Division of Cancer Genetics, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan. Electronic address: suzuki@bioreg.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

Contact inhibition of proliferation is critical for tissue organization, and its 
dysregulation contributes to tumorigenesis. Merlin/NF2 is a tumor suppressor that
governs contact inhibition. Although Merlin/NF2 inhibits YAP1 and TAZ, which are 
paralogous Hippo pathway transcriptional co-activators and oncoproteins, it is
not fully understood how Merlin/NF2-mediated signal transduction triggered by
cell-cell contact exerts tumor suppression. Here, we identify Lin28B, an
inhibitor of let-7 microRNAs (miRNAs), as an important downstream target of
Merlin/NF2. Functional studies revealed that, at low cell density, Merlin/NF2 is 
phosphorylated and does not bind to Lin28B, allowing Lin28B to enter the nucleus,
bind to pri-let-7 miRNAs, and inhibit their maturation in a YAP1/TAZ-independent 
manner. This inhibition of pri-let-7 maturation then promotes cell growth.
However, cell-cell contact triggers Merlin/NF2 dephosphorylation, which
sequesters Lin28B in the cytoplasm and permits pri-let-7 maturation. Our results 
reveal that Merlin/NF2-mediated signaling drives a tumor-suppressive pathway that
is cell-density dependent and Hippo independent.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26997273  [PubMed - in process]


4. Hepatology. 2016 Mar 17. doi: 10.1002/hep.28548. [Epub ahead of print]

Suppression of let-7b and miR-125a/b maturation by Lin28b enables maintenance of 
stem cell properties in hepatoblasts.

Takashima Y(1), Terada M(1), Udono M(1), Miura S(1), Yamamoto J(1), Suzuki
A(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organogenesis and Regeneration, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. (2)Core Research for 
Evolutional Science and Technology, The Japan Agency for Medical Research and
Development, 1-7-1 Otemachi, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo, 100-0004, Japan.

In liver development, hepatoblasts that act as hepatic stem/progenitor cells
proliferate and differentiate into both hepatocytes and cholangiocytes to form
liver tissues. Although numerous factors contribute to this event, little is
known about the roles of microRNAs (miRNAs) in hepatoblast proliferation and
differentiation. In this study, we focused on the Lin28 family proteins, which
are required for miRNA regulation in pluripotent stem cells and cancer cells, and
investigated their roles as regulatory factors for the properties of
hepatoblasts.CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrated that Lin28b was specifically
expressed in hepatoblasts, and that Lin28b suppression induced growth arrest and 
cholangiocyte differentiation of hepatoblasts. Mechanistically, Lin28b positively
regulates the expression of Lin28b itself and cell cycle-related proteins in
hepatoblasts by suppressing the maturation of target miRNAs, let-7b and
miR-125a/b, enabling maintenance of the stem cell properties of hepatoblasts,
such as their capabilities for proliferation and bi-lineage differentiation,
during liver development. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

© 2016 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 26990797  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Haematologica. 2016 Mar 11. pii: haematol.2016.143818. [Epub ahead of print]

LIN28B is overexpressed in specific subtypes of paediatric leukaemia and
regulates long non-coding RNA H19.

Helsmoortel HH(1), De Moerloose B(2), Pieters T(1), Ghazavi F(1), Bresolin S(3), 
Cave' H(4), de Vries A(5), de Haas V(6), Flotho C(7), Labarque V(8), Niemeyer
C(7), De Paepe P(9), Van Roy N(2), Stary J(10), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(11),
Benoit Y(12), Schulte J(13), Goossens S(1), Berx G(1), Haigh JJ(14), Speleman
F(1), Van Vlierberghe P(1), Lammens T(15).

Author information: 
(1)Ghent University; (2)Ghent University Hospital; (3)Padova University;
(4)Paris-Diderot University; (5)Erasmus MC-Sophia Children Hospital; (6)Dutch
Childhood Oncology Group; (7)University of Freiburg; (8)University Hospitals
Leuven; (9)AZ Sint Jan Bruges; (10)Charles University and University Hospital
Motol; (11)Princess Maxima Center for pediatric oncology; (12)University Hospital
Gent; (13)University Children Hospital Essen; (14)Monash University. (15)Ghent
University Hospital; tim.lammens@ugent.be.

PMID: 26969084  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Mar 9. pii: gkw146. [Epub ahead of print]

E2F7 regulates transcription and maturation of multiple microRNAs to restrain
cell proliferation.

Mitxelena J(1), Apraiz A(2), Vallejo-Rodríguez J(1), Malumbres M(3), Zubiaga
AM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Physical Anthropology and Animal Physiology,
University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, 48080 Bilbao, Spain. (2)Department of
Cell Biology and Histology, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU, 48080
Bilbao, Spain. (3)Cell Division and Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), 28029 Madrid, Spain. (4)Department of Genetics, Physical 
Anthropology and Animal Physiology, University of the Basque Country UPV/EHU,
48080 Bilbao, Spain ana.zubiaga@ehu.es.

E2F transcription factors (E2F1-8) are known to coordinately regulate the
expression of a plethora of target genes, including those coding for microRNAs
(miRNAs), to control cell cycle progression. Recent work has described the
atypical E2F factor E2F7 as a transcriptional repressor of cell cycle-related
protein-coding genes. However, the contribution of E2F7 to miRNA gene expression 
during the cell cycle has not been defined. We have performed a genome-wide RNA
sequencing analysis to identify E2F7-regulated miRNAs and show that E2F7 plays as
a major role in the negative regulation of a set of miRNAs that promote cellular 
proliferation. We provide mechanistic evidence for an interplay between E2F7 and 
the canonical E2F factors E2F1-3 in the regulation of multiple miRNAs. We show
that miR-25, -26a, -27b, -92a and -7 expression is controlled at the
transcriptional level by the antagonistic activity of E2F7 and E2F1-3. By
contrast, let-7 miRNA expression is controlled indirectly through a novel
E2F/c-MYC/LIN28B axis, whereby E2F7 and E2F1-3 modulate c-MYC and LIN28B levels
to impact let-7 miRNA processing and maturation. Taken together, our data uncover
a new regulatory network involving transcriptional and post-transcriptional
mechanisms controlled by E2F7 to restrain cell cycle progression through
repression of proliferation-promoting miRNAs.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26961310  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016 Feb 24. pii: gkw099. [Epub ahead of print]

The oncogenic triangle of HMGA2, LIN28B and IGF2BP1 antagonizes tumor-suppressive
actions of the let-7 family.

Busch B(1), Bley N(1), Müller S(1), Glaß M(1), Misiak D(1), Lederer M(1), Vetter 
M(2), Strauß HG(2), Thomssen C(2), Hüttelmaier S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Section for Molecular Cell Biology, Faculty
of Medicine, Martin-Luther-University Halle Wittenberg, ZAMED,
Heinrich-Damerow-Str.1, 06120 Halle, Germany. (2)Clinic of Gynecology, Faculty of
Medicine, Martin-Luther-University Halle Wittenberg, Ernst-Grube-Straße 40, 06120
Halle, Germany. (3)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Section for Molecular Cell
Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Martin-Luther-University Halle Wittenberg, ZAMED,
Heinrich-Damerow-Str.1, 06120 Halle, Germany
stefan.huettelmaier@medizin.uni-halle.de.

The tumor-suppressive let-7 microRNA family targets various oncogene-encoding
mRNAs. We identify the let-7 targets HMGA2, LIN28B and IGF2BP1 to form a let-7
antagonizing self-promoting oncogenic triangle. Surprisingly, 3'-end processing
of IGF2BP1 mRNAs is unaltered in aggressive cancers and tumor-derived cells
although IGF2BP1 synthesis was proposed to escape let-7 attack by APA-dependent
(alternative polyadenylation) 3' UTR shortening. However, the expression of the
triangle factors is inversely correlated with let-7 levels and promoted by LIN28B
impairing let-7 biogenesis. Moreover, IGF2BP1 enhances the expression of all
triangle factors by recruiting the respective mRNAs in mRNPs lacking AGO proteins
and let-7 miRNAs. This indicates that the downregulation of let-7, largely
facilitated by LIN28B upregulation, and the protection of let-7 target mRNAs by
IGF2BP1-directed shielding in mRNPs synergize in enhancing the expression of
triangle factors. The oncogenic potential of this triangle was confirmed in
ovarian cancer (OC)-derived ES-2 cells transduced with let-7 targeting decoys. In
these, the depletion of HMGA2 only diminishes tumor cell growth under permissive 
conditions. The depletion of LIN28B and more prominently IGF2BP1 severely impairs
tumor cell viability, self-renewal and 2D as well as 3D migration. In conclusion,
this suggests the targeting of the HMGA2-LIN28B-IGF2BP1 triangle as a promising
strategy in cancer treatment.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMID: 26917013  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2016 Apr;9(4):324-34. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-15-0339. Epub 2016 Feb 5.

Hepatic Premalignant Alterations Triggered by Human Nephrotoxin Aristolochic Acid
I in Canines.

Jin K(1), Su KK(2), Li T(1), Zhu XQ(1), Wang Q(1), Ge RS(3), Pan ZF(1), Wu BW(1),
Ge LJ(1), Zhang YH(1), Wang YF(1), Shen GF(1), Zhu DY(1), Xiang CS(2), Li LJ(4), 
Lou YJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China. (2)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis
and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou, PR China. Collaborative
Innovation Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The 1st
Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR
China. (3)The Population Council at the Rockefeller University, New York, USA.
Institute of Reproductive Biomedicine, the 2nd Affiliated Hospital, Wenzhou
Medical University, Wenzhou, PR China. (4)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and 
Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou, PR China. Collaborative Innovation
Center for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The 1st Affiliated
Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China.
yijialou@zju.edu.cn ljli@zju.edu.cn. (5)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China.
yijialou@zju.edu.cn ljli@zju.edu.cn.

Aristolochic acid I (AAI) existing in plant drugs fromAristolochiaspecies is an
environmental human carcinogen associated with urothelial cancer. Although gene
association network analysis demonstrated gene expression profile changes in the 
liver of humanTP53knock-in mice after acute AAI exposure, to date, whether AAI
causes hepatic tumorigenesis is still not confirmed. Here, we show that hepatic
premalignant alterations appeared in canines after a 10-day AAI oral
administration (3 mg/kg/day). We observed c-Myc oncoprotein and oncofetal
RNA-binding protein Lin28B overexpressions accompanied by cancer progenitor-like 
cell formation in the liver by AAI exposure. Meanwhile, we found that forkhead
box O1 (FOXO1) was robustly phosphorylated, thereby shuttling into the cytoplasm 
of hepatocytes. Furthermore, utilizing microarray and qRT-PCR analysis, we
confirmed that microRNA expression significantly dysregulated in the liver
treated with AAI. Among them, we particularly focused on the members in let-7
miRNAs and miR-23a clusters, the downstream of c-Myc and IL6 receptor (IL6R)
signaling pathway linking the premalignant alteration. Strikingly, when IL6 was
addedin vitro, IL6R/NF-<U+03BA>B signaling activation contributed to the increase of
FOXO1 phosphorylation by the let-7b inhibitor. Therefore, it highlights the new
insight into the interplay of the network in hepatic tumorigenesis by AAI
exposure, and also suggests that anti-premalignant therapy may be crucial for
preventing AAI-induced hepatocarcinogenesis.Cancer Prev Res; 9(4); 324-34. ©2016 
AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26851235  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Mol Med (Berl). 2016 Jan 20. [Epub ahead of print]

miR-26a suppresses EMT by disrupting the Lin28B/let-7d axis: potential
cross-talks among miRNAs in IPF.

Liang H(1), Liu S(1), Chen Y(1), Bai X(1), Liu L(1), Dong Y(1), Hu M(1), Su X(1),
Chen Y(2), Huangfu L(1), Li X(1), Gu Y(3), Shan H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology (State-Province Key Laboratories of
Biomedicine-Pharmaceutics of China, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Research,
Ministry of Education), Harbin Medical University, Xuefu Road 194, Harbin,
Heilongjiang, 150081, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Pathology, the
2nd Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 150081,
People's Republic of China. (3)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, 
Harbin Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 150081, People's Republic of
China. (4)Department of Pharmacology (State-Province Key Laboratories of
Biomedicine-Pharmaceutics of China, Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Research,
Ministry of Education), Harbin Medical University, Xuefu Road 194, Harbin,
Heilongjiang, 150081, People's Republic of China. shanhongli@ems.hrbmu.edu.cn.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic, progressive, and highly lethal 
fibrotic lung disease with unknown cause or cure. Although some microRNAs
(miRNAs), such as miR-26a and let-7d, have been confirmed, the contribution to
the pathophysiological processes of IPF, the roles of miRNAs and intrinsic links 
between them in fibrotic lung diseases are not yet well understood. In this
study, we found that Lin28B could induce the process of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) by inhibiting let-7d, whereas inhibition of Lin28B mitigated
TGF-ß1-induced fibrogenesis and attenuated EMT in both cultured A549 cells and
MLE-12 cells. More importantly, over-expression of miR-26a could simultaneously
enhance the expression of let-7d in A549 cells, and further study confirmed that 
Lin28B was one of the direct targets of miR-26a, which mediates, at least in
part, the regulatory effects of miR-26a on the biogenesis of let-7d. Finally, we 
constructed a regulatory network among miRNAs involved in the progression of IPF.
Taken together, our study deciphered the essential role of Lin28B in the
pathogenesis of EMT, and unraveled a novel mechanism that miR-26a is a modulator 
of let-7d. This study also defines the miRNAs network involved in IPF, which may 
have implications for developing new strategies for pulmonary fibrosis.KEY
MESSAGE: Upregulation of Lin28B contributes to idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Lin28B causes epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) by inhibition of let-7d.
Lin28B is one of the targets of microRNA-26a. miR-26a enhances the expression of 
let-7d via targeting regulation of Lin28B. A regulatory network among miRNAs
involved in the progression of IPF.

PMID: 26787543  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Exp Hematol. 2016 Apr;44(4):282-296.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.12.009. Epub
2016 Jan 7.

Ezh2 regulates the Lin28/let-7 pathway to restrict activation of fetal gene
signature in adult hematopoietic stem cells.

Oshima M(1), Hasegawa N(2), Mochizuki-Kashio M(1), Muto T(2), Miyagi S(1), Koide 
S(1), Yabata S(2), Wendt GR(2), Saraya A(1), Wang C(3), Shimoda K(4), Suzuki
Y(5), Iwama A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; JST, CREST, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University,
Chiba, Japan. (3)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School
of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; JST, CREST, Tokyo, Japan; College of
Life Sciences, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot, China. (4)Department of
Gastroenterology and Hematology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Miyazaki,
Miyazaki, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Functional Genomics, Department of Medical
Genome Sciences, Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School
of Medicine, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan; JST, CREST, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic
address: aiwama@faculty.chiba-u.jp.

Fetal liver hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) seed bone marrow (BM) and undergo
reprograming into adult-type HSCs that are largely quiescent and restricted in
their self-renewal activity. Here we report that in the absence of the
polycomb-group gene Ezh2, a cohort of fetal-specific genes, including let-7
target genes, were activated in BM hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs),
leading to acquisition of fetal phenotypes by BM HSPCs, such as enhanced
self-renewal activity and production of fetal-type lymphocytes. The Lin28b/let-7 
pathway determines developmentally timed changes in HSPC programs. Of note, many 
of the fetal-specific let-7 target genes, including Lin28, appear to be
transcriptionally repressed by Ezh2-mediated H3K27me3 in BM HSPCs, and Ezh2 loss 
results in their ectopic expression, particularly in hematologic malignancies
that develop in the absence of Ezh2. These findings suggest that Ezh2 cooperates 
with let-7 microRNAs in silencing the fetal gene signature in BM HSPCs and
restricts their transformation.

Copyright © 2016 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26773568  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cell Cycle. 2016 Mar 18;15(6):772-4. doi: 10.1080/15384101.2015.1137712.

LIN28B: an orchestrator of oncogenic signaling in neuroblastoma.

Schnepp RW(1), Diskin SJ(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia , Philadelphia , PA , USA. (2)b Department of Pediatrics
, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA ,
USA. (3)c Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine 
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia , PA , USA.

PMID: 26743584  [PubMed - in process]


12. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Jan 5. [Epub ahead of print]

The Bromodomain Inhibitor JQ1 and the Histone Deacetylase Inhibitor Panobinostat 
Synergistically Reduce N-Myc Expression and Induce Anticancer Effects.

Shahbazi J(1), Liu PY(2), Atmadibrata B(2), Bradner JE(3), Marshall GM(4), Lock
RB(5), Liu T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Cancer Institute Australia, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University
of New South Wales Australia, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia. School of
Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales Faculty of
Science, University of New South Wales Australia, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia. (2)Children's Cancer Institute Australia, Lowy Cancer Research Centre,
University of New South Wales Australia, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia.
(3)The Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, Massachusetts. Department
of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts.
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(4)Children's Cancer Institute Australia, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University
of New South Wales Australia, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia. Kids Cancer
Centre, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia.
(5)Children's Cancer Institute Australia, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University
of New South Wales Australia, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia. School of
Women's & Children's Health, University of New South Wales Australia, Randwick,
New South Wales, Australia. (6)Children's Cancer Institute Australia, Lowy Cancer
Research Centre, University of New South Wales Australia, Randwick, New South
Wales, Australia. School of Women's & Children's Health, University of New South 
Wales Australia, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia. tliu@ccia.unsw.edu.au.

PURPOSE: Patients with neuroblastoma associated with MYCN oncogene amplification 
experience a very poor prognosis. BET bromodomain inhibitors are among the most
promising novel anticancer agents as they block BRD3 and BRD4 from activating
oncogene transcription. However, treatment with BET bromodomain inhibitors alone 
does not result in cancer remission in many murine models.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cells were treated with vehicle
control, the BET bromodomain inhibitor JQ1, the histone deacetylase inhibitor
panobinostat, or the combination of JQ1 and panobinostat. Genes modulated by JQ1,
panobinostat, or the combination therapy were identified by Affymetrix
microarray, and cell proliferation and apoptosis were examined by Alamar blue
assays and flow cytometry analysis. Modulation of LIN28B promoter activity by
BRD3 and BRD4 was examined by chromatin immunoprecipitation and luciferase
assays. In addition, neuroblastoma-bearing mice were treated with vehicle
control, JQ1, and/or panobinostat.
RESULTS: LIN28B was one of the top genes synergistically reduced by JQ1 and
panobinostat. BRD3 and BRD4 directly bound to the LIN28B gene promoter and
activated LIN28B gene transcription, and knocking down LIN28B reduced the
expression of N-Myc protein, but not N-Myc mRNA. JQ1 and panobinostat
synergistically reduced LIN28B gene and N-Myc protein expression, and
synergistically induced growth inhibition and apoptosis in neuroblastoma cells,
but not normal nonmalignant cells in vitro. In neuroblastoma-bearing mice, JQ1
and panobinostat synergistically and considerably reduced N-Myc protein
expression in tumor tissues and blocked tumor progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings have identified a novel strategy to reduce the N-Myc
oncoprotein expression and a novel therapeutic approach for the treatment of
aggressive neuroblastoma. Clin Cancer Res; 1-11. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26733615  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Blood. 2016 Mar 3;127(9):1163-72. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-09-667808. Epub 2015
Dec 28.

LIN28B overexpression defines a novel fetal-like subgroup of juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia.

Helsmoortel HH(1), Bresolin S(2), Lammens T(3), Cavé H(4), Noellke P(5), Caye
A(4), Ghazavi F(1), de Vries A(6), Hasle H(7), Labarque V(8), Masetti R(9), Stary
J(10), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(11), Philippé J(12), Van Roy N(13), Benoit Y(3),
Speleman F(13), Niemeyer C(5), Flotho C(5), Basso G(2), Te Kronnie G(2), Van
Vlierberghe P(13), De Moerloose B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation,
Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium; (2)Department of Women and Child Health, University
of Padova, Padua, Italy; (3)Department of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology and Stem 
Cell Transplantation, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium; (4)Department of
Genetics, University Hospital of Robert Debré and Paris-Diderot University,
Paris, France; (5)Division of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Department of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany;
(6)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; (7)Department of Pediatrics, Aarhus
University Hospital Skejby, Aarhus, Denmark; (8)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology,
University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; (9)Pediatric Hematology and
Oncology, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy; (10)Department of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague,
Czech Republic; (11)Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology, Utrecht, The
Netherlands; Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, The Hague, The Netherlands; and.
(12)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. (13)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent
University, Ghent, Belgium;

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) is a rare and aggressive stem cell
disease of early childhood. RAS activation constitutes the core component of
oncogenic signaling. In addition, leukemic blasts in one-fourth of JMML patients 
present with monosomy 7, and more than half of patients show elevated
age-adjusted fetal hemoglobin (HbF) levels. Hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation is the current standard of care and results in an event-free
survival rate of 50% to 60%, indicating that novel molecular-driven therapeutic
options are urgently needed. Using gene expression profiling in a series of 82
patient samples, we aimed at understanding the molecular biology behind JMML and 
identified a previously unrecognized molecular subgroup characterized by high
LIN28B expression. LIN28B overexpression was significantly correlated with higher
HbF levels, whereas patients with monosomy 7 seldom showed enhanced LIN28B
expression. This finding gives a biological explanation of why patients with
monosomy 7 are rarely diagnosed with high age-adjusted HbF levels. In addition,
this new fetal-like JMML subgroup presented with reduced levels of most members
of the let-7 microRNA family and showed characteristic overexpression of genes
involved in fetal hematopoiesis and stem cell self-renewal. Lastly, high LIN28B
expression was associated with poor clinical outcome in our JMML patient series
but was not independent from other prognostic factors such as age and
age-adjusted HbF levels. In conclusion, we identified elevated LIN28B expression 
as a hallmark of a novel fetal-like subgroup in JMML.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26712910  [PubMed - in process]


14. J Endocrinol. 2016 Mar;228(3):179-91. doi: 10.1530/JOE-15-0360. Epub 2015 Dec 23.

Sex-specific regulation of weight and puberty by the Lin28/let-7 axis.

Corre C(1), Shinoda G(1), Zhu H(1), Cousminer DL(2), Crossman C(1), Bellissimo
C(1), Goldenberg A(2), Daley GQ(1), Palmert MR(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of EndocrinologyThe Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University
Avenue, Toronto ON, M5G 1X8, CanadaDivision of Hematology/OncologyBoston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USADepartments of Pediatrics and
Internal MedicineChildren's Research Institute, University of Texas Southwestern 
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USAInstitute for Molecular MedicineFinland (FIMM),
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FinlandGenetics and Genome Biology ProgramThe
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartment of Computer
ScienceUniversity of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartments of Paediatrics 
and PhysiologyThe University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (2)Division of
EndocrinologyThe Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto ON,
M5G 1X8, CanadaDivision of Hematology/OncologyBoston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USADepartments of Pediatrics and Internal MedicineChildren's
Research Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas, USAInstitute for Molecular MedicineFinland (FIMM), University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, FinlandGenetics and Genome Biology ProgramThe Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartment of Computer ScienceUniversity of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartments of Paediatrics and PhysiologyThe
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Division of EndocrinologyThe
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto ON, M5G 1X8,
CanadaDivision of Hematology/OncologyBoston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USADepartments of Pediatrics and Internal MedicineChildren's
Research Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas, USAInstitute for Molecular MedicineFinland (FIMM), University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, FinlandGenetics and Genome Biology ProgramThe Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartment of Computer ScienceUniversity of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartments of Paediatrics and PhysiologyThe
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Division of EndocrinologyThe 
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto ON, M5G 1X8,
CanadaDivision of Hematology/OncologyBoston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USADepartments of Pediatrics and Internal MedicineChildren's
Research Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas, USAInstitute for Molecular MedicineFinland (FIMM), University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, FinlandGenetics and Genome Biology ProgramThe Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartment of Computer ScienceUniversity of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartments of Paediatrics and PhysiologyThe
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Division of EndocrinologyThe
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto ON, M5G 1X8,
CanadaDivision of Hematology/OncologyBoston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USADepartments of Pediatrics and Internal MedicineChildren's
Research Institute, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
Texas, USAInstitute for Molecular MedicineFinland (FIMM), University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, FinlandGenetics and Genome Biology ProgramThe Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartment of Computer ScienceUniversity of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, CanadaDepartments of Paediatrics and PhysiologyThe
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada mark.palmert@sickkids.ca.

Growth and pubertal timing differ in boys and girls. Variants in/near LIN28B
associate with age at menarche (AAM) in genome-wide association studies and some 
AAM-related variants associate with growth in a sex-specific manner. Sex-specific
growth patterns in response to Lin28b perturbation have been detected in mice,
and overexpression of Lin28a has been shown to alter pubertal timing in female
mice. To investigate further how Lin28a and Lin28b affect growth and puberty in
both males and females, we evaluated Lin28b loss-of-function (LOF) mice and
Lin28a gain-of-function (GOF) mice. Because both Lin28a and Lin28b can act via
the conserved microRNA let-7, we also examined let-7 GOF mice. As reported
previously, Lin28b LOF led to lighter body weights only in male mice while Lin28a
GOF yielded heavier mice of both sexes. Let-7 GOF mice weighed less than
controls, and males were more affected than females. Timing of puberty was
assessed by vaginal opening (VO) and preputial separation (PS). Male Lin28b LOF
and male let-7 GOF, but not female, mice displayed alteration of pubertal timing,
with later PS than controls. In contrast, both male and female Lin28a GOF mice
displayed late onset of puberty. Together, these data point toward a complex
system of regulation by Lin28a, Lin28b, and let-7, in which Lin28b and let-7 can 
impact both puberty and growth in a sex-specific manner, raising the possibility 
that this pathway may contribute to differential regulation of male and female
growth and puberty in humans.

© 2016 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4772724 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26698568  [PubMed - in process]


15. Stem Cells Dev. 2016 Mar 1;25(5):367-77. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0322. Epub 2016
Feb 17.

LIN28: A Stem Cell Factor with a Key Role in Pediatric Tumor Formation.

Carmel-Gross I(1), Bollag N(1), Armon L(1), Urbach A(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Mina and Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University ,
Ramat Gan, Israel .

Differentiation and development are normally unidirectional processes in which
progenitor/stem cells differentiate into more mature cells. Transformation of
adult cells into cancer cells is accompanied in many cases by dedifferentiation
of the adult cell, while differentiation failure of progenitor cells can result
in the formation of unique type of cancers called pediatric cancer. LIN28A and
its paralog LIN28B are pluripotent genes that are expressed mainly in
stem/progenitor cells. Since the first identification of LIN28 in mammals,
numerous studies demonstrated the general oncogenic features of these genes. In
this review, we emphasize the unique role of LIN28 in pediatric tumor formation. 
We show, based on comprehensive literature screen and analysis of published
microarray data, that LIN28 expression in pediatric tumors is even more common
than in adult tumors, and discuss the possibility that in the case of pediatric
cancers, LIN28 acts by preventing normal development/differentiation rather than 
by transformation of mature cells into cancer cells. Overall, this review
highlights the role of LIN28 as a bridge point between embryonic development,
stem cell biology, and cancer.

PMID: 26692113  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Dec 17. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25291. [Epub ahead of print]

Let-7d miRNA Shows Both Antioncogenic and Oncogenic Functions in
Osteosarcoma-Derived 3AB-OS Cancer Stem Cells.

Di Fiore R(1), Drago-Ferrante R(1), Pentimalli F(2), Di Marzo D(2), Forte IM(2), 
Carlisi D(3), De Blasio A(1), Tesoriere G(4), Giordano A(4), Vento R(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Biological, Chemical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences and Technologies, University of Palermo, Polyclinic,
Palermo, Italy. (2)Oncology Research Center of Mercogliano (CROM), Istituto
Nazionale per lo Studio e la Cura dei Tumori "Fondazione Giovanni Pascale",
IRCCS, Naples, Italy. (3)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Experimental
Biomedicine and Clinical Neurosciences, University of Palermo, Polyclinic,
Palermo, Italy. (4)Sbarro Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Medicine,
Center for Biotechnology, College of Science and Technology, Temple University,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Osteosarcoma (OS), an aggressive highly invasive and metastatic bone-malignancy, 
shows therapy resistance and recurrence, two features that likely depend on
cancer stem cells (CSCs), which hold both self-renewing and malignant potential. 
So, effective anticancer therapies against OS should specifically target and
destroy CSCs. We previously found that the let-7d microRNA was downregulated in
the 3AB-OS-CSCs, derived from the human OS-MG63 cells. Here, we aimed to assess
whether let-7d modulation affected tumorigenic and stemness properties of these
OS-CSCs. We found that let-7d-overexpression reduced cell proliferation by
decreasing CCND2 and E2F2 cell-cycle-activators and increasing p21 and p27
CDK-inhibitors. Let-7d also decreased sarcosphere-and-colony forming ability, two
features associated with self-renewing, and it reduced the expression of stemness
genes, including Oct3/4, Sox2, Nanog, Lin28B, and HMGA2. Moreover, let-7d induced
mesenchymal-to-epithelial-transition, as shown by both
N-Cadherin-E-cadherin-switch and decrease in vimentin. Surprisingly, such switch 
was accompanied by enhanced migratory/invasive capacities, with a strong increase
in MMP9, CXCR4 and VersicanV1. Let-7d- overexpression also reduced cell
sensitivity to apoptosis induced by both serum-starvation and various
chemotherapy drugs, concomitant with decrease in caspase-3 and increase in BCL2
expression. Our data suggest that let-7d in 3AB-OS-CSCs could induce
plastic-transitions from CSCs-to-non-CSCs and vice-versa. To our knowledge this
is the first study to comprehensively examine the expression and functions of
let-7d in OS-CSCs. By showing that let-7d has both tumor suppressor and oncogenic
functions in this context, our findings suggest that, before prospecting new
therapeutic strategies based on let-7d modulation, it is urgent to better define 
its multiple functions. J. Cell. Physiol. 9999: 1-10, 2016. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26679758  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. J Neurosci. 2015 Dec 16;35(50):16531-44. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2560-15.2015.

Lin28B and Let-7 in the Control of Sympathetic Neurogenesis and Neuroblastoma
Development.

Hennchen M(1), Stubbusch J(2), Abarchan-El Makhfi I(1), Kramer M(2), Deller T(3),
Pierre-Eugene C(4), Janoueix-Lerosey I(4), Delattre O(4), Ernsberger U(2),
Schulte JB(5), Rohrer H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute for Brain Research, 60438
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (2)Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute
for Brain Research, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Institute of Clinical
Neuroanatomy, Goethe University of Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany,
Ernst Strüngmann Institute, 60528 Frankfurt am Main, Germany. (3)Institute of
Clinical Neuroanatomy, Goethe University of Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. (4)Unité Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
U830, Centre de Recherche Institut Curie, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, France.
(5)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Haematology, Children's Hospital Essen,
45122 Essen, Germany, and. (6)Developmental Neurobiology, Max Planck Institute
for Brain Research, 60438 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Institute of Clinical
Neuroanatomy, Goethe University of Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany,
Ernst Strüngmann Institute, 60528 Frankfurt am Main, Germany,
hermann.rohrer@brain.mpg.de.

The RNA binding protein Lin28B is expressed in developing tissues and sustains
stem and progenitor cell identity as a negative regulator of the Let-7 family of 
microRNAs, which induces differentiation. Lin28B is activated in neuroblastoma
(NB), a childhood tumor in sympathetic ganglia and adrenal medulla. Forced
expression of Lin28B in embryonic mouse sympathoadrenal neuroblasts elicits
postnatal NB formation. However, the normal function of Lin28B in the development
of sympathetic neurons and chromaffin cells and the mechanisms involved in
Lin28B-induced tumor formation are unclear. Here, we demonstrate a mirror-image
expression of Lin28B and Let-7a in developing chick sympathetic ganglia. Lin28B
expression is not restricted to undifferentiated progenitor cells but, is
observed in proliferating noradrenergic neuroblasts. Lin28 knockdown in cultured 
sympathetic neuroblasts decreases proliferation, whereas Let-7 inhibition
increases the proportion of neuroblasts in the cell cycle. Lin28B overexpression 
enhances proliferation, but only during a short developmental period, and it does
not reduce Let-7a. Effects of in vivo Lin28B overexpression were analyzed in the 
LSL-Lin28B(DBHiCre) mouse line. Sympathetic ganglion and adrenal medulla volume
and the expression level of Let-7a were not altered, although Lin28B expression
increased by 12- to 17-fold. In contrast, Let-7a expression was strongly reduced 
in LSL-Lin28B(DbhiCre) NB tumor tissue. These data demonstrate essential
functions for endogenous Lin28 and Let-7 in neuroblast proliferation. However,
Lin28B overexpression neither sustains neuroblast proliferation nor affects let-7
expression. Thus, in contrast to other pediatric tumors, Lin28B-induced NB is not
due to expansion of proliferating embryonic neuroblasts, and Let-7-independent
functions are implicated during initial NB development.SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT:
Lin28A/B proteins are highly expressed in early development and maintain
progenitor cells by blocking the biogenesis and differentiation function of Let-7
microRNAs. Lin28B is aberrantly upregulated in the childhood tumor neuroblastoma 
(NB). NB develops in sympathetic ganglia and adrenal medulla and is elicited by
forced Lin28B expression. We demonstrate that Lin28A/B and Let-7 are essential
for sympathetic neuroblast proliferation during normal development. Unexpectedly,
Lin28B upregulation in a mouse model does not affect neuroblast proliferation,
ganglion size, and Let-7 expression during early postnatal development.
Lin28B-induced NB, in contrast to other pediatric cancers, does not evolve from
neuroblasts that continue to divide and involves Let-7-independent functions
during initial development.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3516532-14$15.00/0.

PMID: 26674877  [PubMed - in process]


18. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Sep 15;8(9):15108-16. eCollection 2015.

Lin28B over-expression mediates the repression of let-7 by hepatitis B virus X
protein in hepatoma cells.

Wu G(1), Huang P(2), Ju X(3), Li Z(4), Wang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Hospital of The University of Electronic 
Science and Technology of China and Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital 32
Yihuan Road, Chengdu 610072, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Sun-Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun-Yat-Sen University 107 
Yanjiang West Road, Guangzhou 510120, People's Republic of China. (3)Department
of Ultrasound, Hospital of The University of Electronic Science and Technology of
China and Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital 32 Yihuan Road, Chengdu 610072,
People's Republic of China. (4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital of The
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China and Sichuan Provincial
People's Hospital 32 Yihuan Road, Chengdu 610072, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Hospital of The University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China and Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital 32
Yihuan Road, Chengdu 610072, People's Republic of China.

The Let-7 microRNA (miRNA) family is frequently downregulated in multiple human
tumors, including hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Our previous report
demonstrated that hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) suppressed the expression of 
let-7 in HepG2 hepatoma cells. However, the underlying mechanisms were not
elucidated. Lin28B is known to negatively regulate the maturation of let-7, and
this prompted us to determine whether HBx acts through Lin28B to suppress let-7. 
Real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) was performed
to examine let-7 expression before and after treatment with c-Myc-and
Lin28B-specific siRNAs in HepG2 cells stably/transiently transfected with HBx.
mRNA and protein analyses were employed to determine the correlation of HBx,
c-Myc and Lin28B in HCC tissues and cells. Cell cycle and proliferation assays
were performed to delineate the consequences of Lin28B repression in HepG2 cells 
expressing HBx. Lin28B was overexpressed in HBx-transfected cells and
HBV-infected liver tissues. HBx-c-Myc-Lin28B axis mediated the repression of
let-7 in HepG2 cells. Reduced expression of Lin28B inhibited the growth and cell 
cycle progression of HepG2 cells by derepressing let-7 and repressing c-Myc.
There was not only a preliminary HBx-c-Myc-Lin28B-let-7 pathway but also another 
possible double-negative feedback loop between c-Myc/Lin28B and let-7 in HepG2
cells transfected with HBx, which together induced the deregulation of let-7.
Lin28B has the potential to be a novel molecular target in the treatment of
HBV(+) HCC.

PMCID: PMC4658883
PMID: 26628994  [PubMed]


19. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 15;5(9):2643-59. eCollection 2015.

LIN28B suppresses microRNA let-7b expression to promote CD44+/LIN28B+ human
pancreatic cancer stem cell proliferation and invasion.

Shao Y(1), Zhang L(1), Cui L(2), Lou W(1), Wang D(1), Lu W(1), Jin D(1), Liu
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University Shanghai
200032, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Jiangsu University Affiliated
Hospital Zhengjiang 212000, China. (3)Shanghai Geriatric Institute of Chinese
Medicine, Longhua Hospital, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Shanghai 200031, China.

Although the highly proliferative, migratory, and multi-drug resistant phenotype 
of human pancreatic cancer stem cells (PCSCs) is well characterized, knowledge of
their biological mechanisms is limited. We used CD44 and LIN28B as markers to
screen, isolate, and enrich CSCs from human primary pancreatic cancer. Using flow
cytometry, we identified a human primary pancreatic cancer cell (PCC)
subpopulation expressing high levels of both CD44 and LIN28B. CD44+/LIN28B+ PCSCs
expressed high levels of stemness marker genes and possessed higher migratory and
invasive ability than CD44-/LIN28B- PCCs. CD44+/LIN28B+ PCSCs were more resistant
to growth inhibition induced by the chemotherapeutic drugs cisplatin and
gemcitabine hydrochloride, and readily established tumors in vivo in a relatively
short time. Moreover, microarray analysis revealed significant differences
between the cDNA expression patterns of CD44+/LIN28B+ PCSCs and CD44-/LIN28B-
PCCs. Following siRNA interference of endogenous LIN28B gene expression in
CD44+/LIN28B+ PCSCs, not only was their proliferation decreased, there was also
cell cycle arrest due to suppression of cyclin D1 expression following the
stimulation of miRNA let-7b expression. In conclusion, CD44+/LIN28B+ cells, which
possess CSC characteristics, can be reliably sorted from human primary PCCs and
represent a valuable model for studying cancer cell physiology and multi-drug
resistance.

PMCID: PMC4633895
PMID: 26609473  [PubMed]


20. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2015 Dec;39(12):2386-93. doi: 10.1111/acer.12905. Epub 2015
Nov 26.

Differential Effects of Alcohol on Excitatory and Inhibitory Puberty-Related
Peptides in the Basal Hypothalamus of the Female Rat.

Srivastava VK(1), Hiney JK(1), Stevener K(1), Dees WL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Integrative Biosciences, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas.

BACKGROUND: An increase in development of excitatory inputs along with a decline 
in inhibitory inputs ultimately govern the timely increased secretion of
hypothalamic luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone (LHRH) at the time of puberty.
As chronic alcohol (ALC) exposure acts at the hypothalamic level to suppress LHRH
secretion and delay puberty, we assessed its ability to differentially affect the
expression of key puberty-related proteins.
METHODS: ALC was administered to female rats from days 27 to 33, at which time
animals were killed and tissues collected for protein expression. In the medial
basal hypothalamus (MBH), we assessed kisspeptin (Kp) 10, an excitatory peptide
critical for prepubertal LHRH secretion, and Lin28b, a peptide with an inhibitory
influence on puberty. As a direct mechanism of action of Lin28b was not known, we
determined whether its central administration could induce dynorphin (DYN), a
peptide that is inhibitory on LHRH secretion. Also, ALC's effect on DYN protein
expression was assessed, as well as its effect on DYN release in vitro.
RESULTS: ALC markedly suppressed (p < 0.01) the expression of the excitatory Kp
protein, while at the same time increased (p < 0.001) the expression of
inhibitory Lin28b protein. Subsequently, we showed for the first time that the
central administration of Lin28b stimulated (p < 0.01) the synthesis of DYN.
Finally, ALC also induced (p < 0.01) the protein expression and stimulated
(p < 0.01) the in vitro release of DYN from the MBH.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that ALC can simultaneously and
differentially alter both excitatory and inhibitory influences governing pubertal
development, show for the first time a mechanism of action by which Lin28b exerts
its prepubertal inhibitory tone, and further demonstrate the negative influences 
of ALC on the pubertal process.

Copyright © 2015 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMCID: PMC4712109 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26608747  [PubMed - in process]


21. Biomed Res Int. 2015;2015:701390. doi: 10.1155/2015/701390. Epub 2015 Oct 25.

High LIN28A Expressing Ovarian Cancer Cells Secrete Exosomes That Induce Invasion
and Migration in HEK293 Cells.

Enriquez VA(1), Cleys ER(2), Da Silveira JC(3), Spillman MA(4), Winger QA(2),
Bouma GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Program, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1683, USA ; Animal Reproduction
and Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1683, USA. (2)Animal Reproduction and
Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State
University, Fort Collins, CO 80523-1683, USA. (3)Department of Veterinary
Medicine, Faculty of Animal Science and Food Engineering, University of São
Paulo, 13635-900 São Paulo, SP, Brazil. (4)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, Aurora, CO 80045,
USA.

Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most aggressive and deadly form of ovarian
cancer and is the most lethal gynecological malignancy worldwide; therefore,
efforts to elucidate the molecular factors that lead to epithelial ovarian cancer
are essential to better understand this disease. Recent studies reveal that tumor
cells release cell-secreted vesicles called exosomes and these exosomes can
transfer RNAs and miRNAs to distant sites, leading to cell transformation and
tumor development. The RNA-binding protein LIN28 is a known marker of stem cells 
and when expressed in cancer, it is associated with poor tumor outcome. We
hypothesized that high LIN28 expressing ovarian cancer cells secrete exosomes
that can be taken up by nontumor cells and cause changes in gene expression and
cell behavior associated with tumor development. IGROV1 cells were found to
contain high LIN28A and secrete exosomes that were taken up by HEK293 cells.
Moreover, exposure to these IGROV1 secreted exosomes led to significant increases
in genes involved in Epithelial-to-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), induced HEK293
cell invasion and migration. These changes were not observed with exosomes
secreted by OV420 cells, which contain no detectable amounts of LIN28A or LIN28B.
No evidence was found of LIN28A transfer from IGROV1 exosomes to HEK293 cells.

PMCID: PMC4637063
PMID: 26583126  [PubMed - in process]


22. Med Princ Pract. 2015 Oct 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of BioResponse 3,3'-Diindolylmethane in the Treatment of Human Prostate
Cancer: Clinical Experience.

Li Y(1), Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, Mich., USA.

Castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) progression after androgen
deprivation therapy shows upregulated expression of androgen receptor (AR) splice
variants, induced epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition phenotypes and enhanced
stem cell characteristics, all of which are associated with resistance to
enzalutamide. Since there is no curative treatment for CRPC, innovative
treatments are urgently needed. In our recent study, we found that resistance to 
enzalutamide was partly due to deregulated expression of microRNAs such as
miR-34a, miR-124, miR-27b, miR-320 and let-7, which play important roles in
regulating AR and stem cell marker gene expression that appears to be linked with
resistance to enzalutamide. Importantly, we found that BioResponse
3,3'-diindolylmethane (BR-DIM) treatment in vitro and in vivo caused
downregulation in the expression of wild-type AR. The AR splice variants, Lin28B 
and EZH2, appear to be deregulated through the re-expression of let-7, miR-27b,
miR-320 and miR-34a in human prostate cancer (PCa). BR-DIM administered in
clinical trials was well tolerated, and 93% of patients had detectable prostatic 
DIM levels. The inhibitory effects of BR-DIM on AR and AR target gene such as
prostate-specific antigen were also observed in the clinical trial. Our
preclinical and clinical studies provide the scientific basis for a
'proof-of-concept' clinical trial in CRPC patients treated with enzalutamide in
combination with BR-DIM. This strategy could be expanded in future clinical
trials in patients with PCa to determine whether or not they could achieve a
better treatment outcome which could be partly mediated by delaying or preventing
the development of CRPC.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26501150  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 23;5:15683. doi: 10.1038/srep15683.

Testicular expression of the Lin28/let-7 system: Hormonal regulation and changes 
during postnatal maturation and after manipulations of puberty.

Sangiao-Alvarellos S(1,)(2), Manfredi-Lozano M(1), Ruiz-Pino F(1), León S(1),
Morales C(3), Cordido F(2), Gaytán F(1), Pinilla L(1), Tena-Sempere M(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, University of Córdoba; 
CIBER Fisiopatología de la Obesidad y Nutrición, Instituto de Salud Carlos III;
and Instituto Maimónides de Investigación Biomédica (IMIBIC)/Hospital
Universitario Reina Sofía, 14004 Córdoba, Spain. (2)Department of Medicine,
School of Health Science, University of A Coruña, and Instituto de Investigación 
Biomédica de A Coruña (INIBIC), 15006, A Coruña, Spain. (3)Department of
Pathology, University of Córdoba, 14004 Córdoba, Spain. (4)FiDiPro Program,
Department of Physiology, University of Turku, Kiinamyllynkatu 10, FIN-20520
Turku, Finland.

The Lin28/let-7 system, which includes the RNA-binding proteins, Lin28a/Lin28b,
and let-7 miRNAs, has emerged as putative regulator of puberty and male
gametogenesis; yet, its expression pattern and regulation in postnatal testis
remain ill defined. We report herein expression profiles of Lin28 and let-7
members, and related mir-145 and mir-132, in rat testis during postnatal
maturation and in models of altered puberty and hormonal deregulation. Neonatal
expression of Lin28a and Lin28b was low and rose markedly during the infantile
period; yet, expression patterns diverged thereafter, with persistently elevated 
levels only for Lin28b, which peaked at puberty. Let-7a, let-7b, mir-132 and
mir-145 showed profiles opposite to Lin28b. In fact, let-7b and mir-145 were
abundant in pachytene spermatocytes, but absent in elongating spermatids, where
high expression of Lin28b was previously reported. Perturbation of puberty by
neonatal estrogenization reverted the Lin28/let-7 expression ratio; expression
changes were also detected in other models of delayed puberty, due to early
photoperiod or nutritional manipulations. In addition, hypophysectomy or growth
hormone (GH) deficiency revealed regulation of this system by gonadotropins and
GH. Our data document the expression profiles of the Lin28/let-7 system in rat
testis along postnatal/pubertal maturation, and their perturbation in models of
pubertal and hormonal manipulation.

PMCID: PMC4616161
PMID: 26494358  [PubMed - in process]


24. J Mol Med (Berl). 2016 Mar;94(3):311-20. doi: 10.1007/s00109-015-1348-1. Epub
2015 Oct 21.

MicroRNA let-7g cooperates with interferon/ribavirin to repress hepatitis C virus
replication.

Chou WW(1), Huang CF(1,)(2), Yeh ML(1,)(3), Tsai YS(1), Hsieh MY(1), Huang CI(1),
Huang JF(1,)(2), Tsai PC(1), Hsi E(4,)(3,)(5), Juo SH(4,)(5), Tsai WL(6,)(7),
Chuang WL(1,)(2,)(8,)(9), Yu ML(1,)(2,)(8,)(9,)(10), Dai
CY(11,)(12,)(13,)(14,)(15,)(16,)(17).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatobiliary Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, No. 100, Tzyou 1st Road, Kaohsiung, 807, Taiwan. (2)Faculty 
of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Medical
Research, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (5)Department
of Genome Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan. (6)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine,
Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (7)School of Medicine,
National Yang Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Center for Infectious Disease
and Cancer Research, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University,
Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (9)Center for Lipid Science and Aging Research, College of
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. (10)Institute of
Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan. (11)Hepatobiliary Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Kaohsiung
Medical University Hospital, No. 100, Tzyou 1st Road, Kaohsiung, 807, Taiwan.
daichiayen@gmail.com. (12)Department of Preventive Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University Hospital, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. daichiayen@gmail.com. (13)Faculty of
Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan. daichiayen@gmail.com. (14)Graduate Institute of Medicine, College of
Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. daichiayen@gmail.com. 
(15)Center for Infectious Disease and Cancer Research, College of Medicine,
Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. daichiayen@gmail.com. (16)Center
for Lipid Science and Aging Research, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical
University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. daichiayen@gmail.com. (17)Institute of Clinical
Medicine, College of Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
daichiayen@gmail.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNA) have been implicated in HCV infection. The present study
analyzed the effects of let-7g on HCV infection in vitro, in clinical tissue and 
serum samples. Here, we show that the expression of let-7g in serum and liver
tissue is significantly higher in patients with sustained virologic response
(SVR). We show that interferon (IFN)/ribavirin (RBV) induces let-7g expression
through p38/AP-1 signaling. Overexpression of let-7g reduced HCV gene or core
protein level and inhibited the HCV viral load. The let-7g and IFN/RBV have
additively inhibitory effect on HCV replication. These data implicate let-7g as a
new therapeutic drug to additively cooperate with IFN/RBV to repress HCV
replication.KEY MESSAGES: let-7g expression is increased in serum and liver
tissue of patients with SVR. Interferon/ribavirin induces let-7g expression
through p38/AP-1 signaling. Overexpression of let-7g can repress HCV replication.
Let-7g additively cooperates with interferon/ribavirin to repress HCV
replication. Lin28B silencing can reverse let-7g expression and repress HCV
replication.

PMID: 26489607  [PubMed - in process]


25. Cancer Cell. 2015 Nov 9;28(5):599-609. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.09.012. Epub
2015 Oct 17.

A LIN28B-RAN-AURKA Signaling Network Promotes Neuroblastoma Tumorigenesis.

Schnepp RW(1), Khurana P(1), Attiyeh EF(2), Raman P(3), Chodosh SE(1), Oldridge
DA(1), Gagliardi ME(1), Conkrite KL(1), Asgharzadeh S(4), Seeger RC(4), Madison
BB(5), Rustgi AK(6), Maris JM(7), Diskin SJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Division of Oncology
and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Division of
Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Biomedical and Health
Informatics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA. (4)Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Blood and Marrow Transplantation,
Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027,
USA. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Washington University School of Medicine in
St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (6)Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Division of
Gastroenterology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Genetics, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA. (7)Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Pediatrics, 
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA; Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address:
maris@email.chop.edu. (8)Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer
Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA;
Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Abramson Family Cancer Research
Institute, Perelman School of Medicine at University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: diskin@email.chop.edu.

A more complete understanding of aberrant oncogenic signaling in neuroblastoma, a
malignancy of the developing sympathetic nervous system, is paramount to
improving patient outcomes. Recently, we identified LIN28B as an oncogenic driver
in high-risk neuroblastoma. Here, we identify the oncogene RAN as a LIN28B target
and show regional gain of chromosome 12q24 as an additional somatic alteration
resulting in increased RAN expression. We show that LIN28B influences RAN
expression by promoting RAN Binding Protein 2 expression and by directly binding 
RAN mRNA. Further, we demonstrate a convergence of LIN28B and RAN signaling on
Aurora kinase A activity. Collectively, these findings demonstrate that
LIN28B-RAN-AURKA signaling drives neuroblastoma oncogenesis, suggesting that this
pathway may be amenable to therapeutic targeting.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4643330 [Available on 2016-11-09]
PMID: 26481147  [PubMed - in process]


26. Cancer Cell Int. 2015 Oct 15;15:99. doi: 10.1186/s12935-015-0252-7. eCollection
2015.

The pluripotency factor LIN28B is involved in oral carcinogenesis and associates 
with tumor aggressiveness and unfavorable prognosis.

Wang D(1), Zhu Y(2), Wang Y(1), Li Z(1), Yuan C(2), Zhang W(3), Yuan H(4), Ye
J(1), Yang J(4), Jiang H(1), Cheng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, 210029 China ; Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Oral Disease, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, 210029 China. (2)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029 China. (3)Department of Oral
and Maxillofacial Pathology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029 China.
(4)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Oral Disease, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
210029 China.

OBJECTIVE: LIN28B is a conserved RNA-binding protein critically involved in
development, cellular metabolism and tumorigenesis. It is frequently
overexpressed in human cancers and correlates with tumor aggressiveness as well
as unfavorable prognosis. However, the expression pattern and oncogenic roles of 
LIN28B during oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) development and progression has
not been well established yet. Here, we sought to determine the expression of
LIN28B and its clinical significance using chemical-induced OSCC animal model,
cell lines and primary specimens.
METHOD: The OSCC animal model was induced using 7,12-dimethyl-1,2-bezan-tracene
(DMBA) painting in the hamster buccal pouch. Buccal lesions from animals were
obtained from different time points and subjected to routine histological
analyses and immunohistochemical staining of LIN28B. The mRNA, protein abundance 
and subcellular localization of LIN28B was determined in a panel of OSCC cell
lines by real-time RT-PCR, western blot and immunofluorescence. The expression
levels of LIN28B in human primary OSCC samples were further evaluated by
immunohistochemical staining. Moreover, the relationship between LIN28B and
several clinicopathological parameters as well as patients' prognosis were also
assessed.
RESULTS: Our results revealed that negative or low LIN28B expression was commonly
observed in normal epithelial, whereas more LIN28B abundance was identified in
epithelial dysplasia and invasive SCC in the DMBA-induced OSCC animal model.
Overexpression of LIN28B was identified in a major fraction of OSCC
samples(39/58) and significantly associated with tumor size (P = 0.049) and
advanced clinical stages (P = 0.0286). Patients with increased LIN28B had
markedly reduced overall survival as compared to those with low LIN28B.
Multivariate survival analyses further indicated that LIN28B abundance served as 
an independent prognostic factor for patients' overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings reveal that LIN28B is critically involved in OSCC
initiation and progression and aberrantly overexpressed in human OSCC. It might
represent a novel diagnostic and prognostic biomarker for oral cancer.

PMCID: PMC4608152
PMID: 26478718  [PubMed]


27. Nat Commun. 2015 Oct 14;6:8584. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9584.

The Lin28/let-7 axis is critical for myelination in the peripheral nervous
system.

Gökbuget D(1), Pereira JA(1), Bachofner S(1), Marchais A(2), Ciaudo C(1), Stoffel
M(1), Schulte JH(3), Suter U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, ETH Zurich,
Otto-Stern-Weg 7, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland. (2)Department of Biology, Institute
of Agricultural Sciences, ETH Zurich, Universitaetsstrasse 2, 8092 Zurich,
Switzerland. (3)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Haematology, Children's
Hospital Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are crucial regulators of myelination in the peripheral
nervous system (PNS). However, the miRNAs species involved and the underlying
mechanisms are largely unknown. We found that let-7 miRNAs are highly abundant
during PNS myelination and that their levels are inversely correlated to the
expression of lin28 homolog B (Lin28B), an antagonist of let-7 accumulation.
Sustained expression of Lin28B and consequently reduced levels of let-7 miRNAs
results in a failure of Schwann cell myelination in transgenic mouse models and
in cell culture. Subsequent analyses revealed that let-7 miRNAs promote
expression of the myelination-driving master transcription factor Krox20 (also
known as Egr2) through suppression of myelination inhibitory Notch signalling. We
conclude that the Lin28B/let-7 axis acts as a critical driver of PNS myelination,
in particular by regulating myelination onset, identifying this pathway also as a
potential therapeutic target in demyelinating diseases.

PMCID: PMC4634210
PMID: 26466203  [PubMed - in process]


28. Eur J Immunol. 2015 Nov;45(11):2978-84. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445146. Epub 2015 Sep
23.

Perspectives on fetal derived CD5+ B1 B cells.

Hardy RR(1), Hayakawa K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

CD5(+) B-cell origins and their predisposition to lymphoma are long-standing
issues. Transfer of fetal and adult liver BM Pro-B cells generates B cells with
distinct phenotypes: fetal cells generate IgM(high) IgD(low) CD5(+) , whereas
adult cells IgM(low) IgD(high) CD5(-) . This suggests a developmental switch in B
lymphopoiesis, similar to the switch in erythropoiesis. Comparison of mRNA and
miRNA expression in fetal and adult Pro-B cells revealed differential expression 
of Lin28b mRNA and Let-7 miRNA, providing evidence that this regulatory axis
functions in the switch. Recent work has shown that Arid3a is a key transcription
factor mediating fetal-type B-cell development. Lin28b-promoted fetal development
generates CD5(+) B cells as a consequence of positively selected self-reactivity.
CD5(+) B cells play important roles in clearance of apoptotic cells and in
protective immune responses, but also pose a risk of progression to
leukemia/lymphoma. Differential Lin28b expression in fetal and adult human B-cell
precursors showed that human B-cell development may resemble mouse, with
self-reactive "innate-like" B cells generated early in life. It remains to be
determined whether such human B cells have a higher propensity to leukemic
progression. This review describes our recent research with CD5(+) B cells and
presents our perspective on their role in disease.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC4674377 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26339791  [PubMed - in process]


29. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 5;7(1):224-40. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.4399.

Virus-encoded microRNA contributes to the molecular profile of EBV-positive
Burkitt lymphomas.

Piccaluga PP(1), Navari M(1,)(2), De Falco G(2,)(3), Ambrosio MR(2), Lazzi S(2), 
Fuligni F(1), Bellan C(2), Rossi M(1), Sapienza MR(1), Laginestra MA(1), Etebari 
M(1), Rogena EA(4), Tumwine L(5), Tripodo C(6), Gibellini D(7), Consiglio J(8),
Croce CM(8), Pileri SA(9), Leoncini L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Section, Department of Experimental, Diagnostic, and
Experimental Medicine, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna University School of 
Medicine, Bologna, Italy. (2)Department of Medical Biotechnology, University of
Siena, Siena, Italy. (3)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK. (4)Department of Pathology, University of
Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya. (5)Department of Pathology, Makerere University,
Kampala, Uganda. (6)Tumour Immunology Unit, Department of Health Science, Human
Pathology Section, Palermo University School of Medicine, Palermo, Italy.
(7)Department of Pathology and Diagnostic, University of Verona, Verona, Italy.
(8)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology, and Medical Genetics,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
(9)Diagnostic Hematopathology Unit, European Institute of Oncology, Milan, Italy.

Burkitt lymphoma (BL) is an aggressive neoplasm characterized by consistent
morphology and phenotype, typical clinical behavior and distinctive molecular
profile. The latter is mostly driven by the MYC over-expression associated with
the characteristic translocation (8;14) (q24; q32) or with variant lesions.
Additional genetic events can contribute to Burkitt Lymphoma pathobiology and
retain clinical significance. A pathogenetic role for Epstein-Barr virus
infection in Burkitt lymphomagenesis has been suggested; however, the exact
function of the virus is largely unknown.In this study, we investigated the
molecular profiles (genes and microRNAs) of Epstein-Barr virus-positive and
-negative BL, to identify specific patterns relying on the differential
expression and role of Epstein-Barr virus-encoded microRNAs.First, we found
significant differences in the expression of viral microRNAs and in selected
target genes. Among others, we identified LIN28B, CGNL1, GCET2, MRAS, PLCD4,
SEL1L, SXX1, and the tyrosine kinases encoding STK10/STK33, all provided with
potential pathogenetic significance. GCET2, also validated by
immunohistochemistry, appeared to be a useful marker for distinguishing
EBV-positive and EBV-negative cases. Further, we provided solid evidences that
the EBV-encoded microRNAs (e.g. BART6) significantly mold the transcriptional
landscape of Burkitt Lymphoma clones.In conclusion, our data indicated
significant differences in the transcriptional profiles of EBV-positive and
EBV-negative BL and highlight the role of virus encoded miRNA.

PMID: 26325594  [PubMed - in process]


30. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 25;10(8):e0136496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136496.
eCollection 2015.

Study of Five Pubertal Transition-Related Gene Polymorphisms as Risk Factors for 
Premature Coronary Artery Disease in a Chinese Han Population.

Chen B(1), Xie F(2), Tang C(3), Ma G(3), Wei L(4), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth
People's Hospital, No. 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai 200233, China. (2)Central
Laboratory, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, No.
600 Yishan Road, Shanghai 200233, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, The
Affiliated Zhongda Hospital of Southeast University, No. 87 Dingjiaqiao, Nanjing 
210009, China. (4)Department of Endocrinology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, No. 600 Yishan Road, Shanghai 200233, China.

BACKGROUND: Recently, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (DLK-rs10144321,
SIX6-rs1254337, MKRN3-rs12148769, LIN28B-rs7759938, and KCNK9-rs1469039) were
found to be strongly associated with age at menarche. Recent studies also
suggested that age at menarche is a heritable trait and is associated with risks 
for obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), cardiovascular disease, and
all-cause mortality. Since an association between these five SNPs and premature
coronary artery disease (CAD) has never been reported, we investigated whether
these SNPs are associated with premature CAD and its severity in a Chinese Han
population.
METHODS: We enrolled 432 consecutive patients including 198 with premature CAD
(<55 years in men and <65 years in women) and 234 controls. All subjects were
genotyped for the five SNPs by the PCR-ligase detection reaction method. The
associations between these SNPs and premature CAD and its severity were analyzed.
RESULTS: The following genotypes were identified: GG, AG, and AA at rs10144321
and rs12148769; TT, AT, and AA at rs1254337; CC, CT, and TT at rs1469039; and TT 
and CT at rs7759938. Significant differences in genotype distribution frequencies
at rs1254337 were found between controls and patients with premature CAD
(P<0.05). No associations were found between the five SNPs and the severity of
coronary lesions (all P>0.05). Compared with controls, patients with premature
CAD had a higher prevalence of T2DM and dyslipidemia, and the proportion of
patients with T2DM rose significantly with an increase in the number of stenosed 
coronary vessels (all P<0.05). After adjustment for the clinical parameters in
multivariable analysis, three factors were identified that significantly
increased the risk of premature CAD: the AA genotype at rs1254337 (OR: 2.388, 95%
CI: 1.190-4.792, P = 0.014), male gender (OR: 1.565, 95% CI: 1.012-2.420, P =
0.044), and T2DM (OR 2.252, 95% CI: 1.233-4.348, P = 0.015).
CONCLUSIONS: Among the five pubertal transition-related gene polymorphisms, we
identified an association between rs1254337 and premature CAD in a Chinese Han
population.

PMCID: PMC4549330
PMID: 26305337  [PubMed - in process]


31. Mol Reprod Dev. 2015 Dec;82(12):967-75. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22575. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

The gga-let-7 family post-transcriptionally regulates TGFBR1 and LIN28B during
the differentiation process in early chick development.

Lee SI(1,)(2), Jeon MH(1), Kim JS(1), Jeon IS(1), Byun SJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biotechnology Division, National Institute of Animal Science, RDA,
1500, Kongjwipatjwi-ro, Iseo-myeon, Wanju-gun, Jeollabuk-do, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Animal Resource and Science, Dankook University, Cheonan,
Choongnam, Republic of Korea.

Early chick embryogenesis is governed by a complex mechanism involving
transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation, although how
post-transcriptional processes influence the balance between pluripotency and
differentiation during early chick development have not been previously
investigated. Here, we characterized the microRNA (miRNA) signature associated
with differentiation in the chick embryo, and found that as expression of the
gga-let-7 family increases through early development, expression of their direct 
targets, TGFBR1 and LIN28B, decreases; indeed, gga-let-7a-5p and gga-let-7b
miRNAs directly bind to TGFBR1 and LIN28B transcripts. Our data further indicate 
that TGFBR1 and LIN28B maintain pluripotency by regulating POUV, NANOG, and
CRIPTO. Therefore, gga-let-7 miRNAs act as post-transcriptional regulators of
differentiation in blastodermal cells by repressing the expression of the TGFBR1 
and LIN28B, which intrinsically controls blastodermal cell differentiation in
early chick development. Mol. Reprod. Dev. 82: 967-975, 2015. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26297836  [PubMed - in process]


32. PLoS Genet. 2015 Aug 5;11(8):e1005408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005408.
eCollection 2015.

Let-7 Represses Carcinogenesis and a Stem Cell Phenotype in the Intestine via
Regulation of Hmga2.

Madison BB(1), Jeganathan AN(2), Mizuno R(3), Winslow MM(4), Castells A(5),
Cuatrecasas M(6), Rustgi AK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, Missouri, United States of America; Department of Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.
(2)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of Surgery, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America. (3)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of
America; Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (4)Department of 
Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, United
States of America. (5)Gastroenterology Department, Hospital Clínic, CIBERehd,
IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. (6)Department of Pathology, Pharmacology
and Microbiology, Hospital Clínic, CDB, University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain. (7)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of
America; Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America; Department of
Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; Abramson Cancer Center, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.

Let-7 miRNAs comprise one of the largest and most highly expressed family of
miRNAs among vertebrates, and is critical for promoting differentiation,
regulating metabolism, inhibiting cellular proliferation, and repressing
carcinogenesis in a variety of tissues. The large size of the Let-7 family of
miRNAs has complicated the development of mutant animal models. Here we describe 
the comprehensive repression of all Let-7 miRNAs in the intestinal epithelium via
low-level tissue-specific expression of the Lin28b RNA-binding protein and a
conditional knockout of the MirLet7c-2/Mirlet7b locus. This ablation of Let-7
triggers the development of intestinal adenocarcinomas concomitant with reduced
survival. Analysis of both mouse and human intestinal cancer specimens reveals
that stem cell markers were significantly associated with loss of Let-7 miRNA
expression, and that a number of Let-7 targets were elevated, including Hmga1 and
Hmga2. Functional studies in 3-D enteroids revealed that Hmga2 is necessary and
sufficient to mediate many characteristics of Let-7 depletion, namely
accelerating cell cycle progression and enhancing a stem cell phenotype. In
addition, inactivation of a single Hmga2 allele in the mouse intestine epithelium
significantly represses tumorigenesis driven by Lin28b. In aggregate, we conclude
that Let-7 depletion drives a stem cell phenotype and the development of
intestinal cancer, primarily via Hmga2.

PMCID: PMC4526516
PMID: 26244988  [PubMed - in process]


33. Oncotarget. 2015 Aug 21;6(24):20485-99.

CCL18-mediated down-regulation of miR98 and miR27b promotes breast cancer
metastasis.

Lin X(1,)(2), Chen L(3), Yao Y(4,)(1), Zhao R(1,)(5), Cui X(4,)(1), Chen J(6),
Hou K(3), Zhang M(4,)(1), Su F(4,)(1), Chen J(3), Song E(4,)(1).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Tumor Center, SunYat-Sen Memorial Hospital, SunYat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (2)Diagnosis and Treatment Center of
Breast Diseases, Shantou Hospital, SunYat-Sen University, Shantou, Guangdong
Province, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, No. 2
Affiliated Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic
of China. (4)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics
and Gene Regulation, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou, People's Republic of China. (5)Department of Oncology and Institute of
Clinical Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou City, Henan Province, People's Republic of China. (6)Department of
Breast Tumor, The Third Hospital of Nanchang, Nanchang City, Jiangxi Province,
People's Republic of China.

Our previous work has indicated that CCL18 secreted by tumor-associated
macrophages (TAMs) promotes breast cancer metastasis, which is associated with
poor patient prognosis. However, it remains unclear whether microRNAs (miRNAs),
which may modulate multiple cellular pathways, are involved in the regulation of 
CCL18 signaling and the ensuing metastasis of breast cancer. In this study, we
demonstrated that CCL18 reduces miR98 and miR27b expression via the
N-Ras/ERK/PI3K/NF<U+03BA>B/Lin28b signaling pathway, while down-regulation of these
mRNAs feedbacks to increase N-Ras and Lin28b levels. This cascade of events forms
a positive feedback loop that sustains the activation of CCL18 signaling. More
importantly, reduction in miR98 and miR27b enhances the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of breast cancer cells, and thus promotes breast cancer
metastasis. These findings suggest that down-regulation of miR98 and miR27b
promotes CCL18-mediated invasion and migration of breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4653020
PMID: 26244871  [PubMed - in process]


34. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jul 28;113(3):414-24. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.254. Epub 2015 Jul 
9.

Overexpression of the RNA-binding proteins Lin28B and IGF2BP3 (IMP3) is
associated with chemoresistance and poor disease outcome in ovarian cancer.

Hsu KF(1), Shen MR(2), Huang YF(1), Cheng YM(1), Lin SH(3), Chow NH(4), Cheng
SW(4), Chou CY(1), Ho CL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng Kung University
Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College
of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (3)Institute of
Clinical Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, 
National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan. (4)Department of Pathology,
National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: RNA-binding proteins have an important role in messenger RNA (mRNA)
regulation during tumour development and carcinogenesis. In the present study, we
examined the insulin-like growth factor 2 mRNA-binding proteins (IGF2BPs;
hereafter refered to as IMPs) and Lin28 family expressions in epithelial ovarian 
carcinoma (EOC) patients and correlated their expression levels with the response
to chemotherapy, hCTR1 expression and patient survival.
METHODS: Patients clinical information, real-time RT-PCR, immunohistochemistry,
western blot, Transwell migration invasion assays, and cytotoxicity assays were
used.
RESULTS: From 140 EOC patients, high expression of IMP3 or Lin28B was associated 
with poor survival, and women diagnosed at advanced stages with elevated IMP3 and
Lin28B were at higher risk of developing chemoresistance. High IMP3 levels
combined with high Lin28B levels significantly correlated with the poorest 5-year
survival rates. Knockdown of IMP3 or Lin28B decreased cell proliferation,
migration, and invasion, and increased the platinum sensitivity, but not taxol
sensitivity, of ovarian cancer cells through increased expression of hCTR1, a
copper transporter involved in platinum uptake. High expression of hCTR1
correlated with low expression of IMP3/Lin28B and better progression-free
survival in advanced-stage EOC patients.
CONCLUSION: Testing for a combination of elevated IMP3 and Lin28B levels could
further facilitate the identification of a patient subgroup with the worst
prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4522643 [Available on 2016-07-28]
PMID: 26158423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 21;112(29):E3864-73. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1501077112. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

The RNA-binding protein LIN28B regulates developmental timing in the mammalian
cochlea.

Golden EJ(1), Benito-Gonzalez A(1), Doetzlhofer A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Solomon H. Snyder Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205; Center for Sensory Biology, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205. (2)Solomon H. Snyder
Department of Neuroscience, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205; Center for Sensory Biology, Johns Hopkins University School 
of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205 adoetzlhofer@jhmi.edu.

Proper tissue development requires strict coordination of proliferation, growth, 
and differentiation. Strict coordination is particularly important for the
auditory sensory epithelium, where deviations from the normal spatial and
temporal pattern of auditory progenitor cell (prosensory cell) proliferation and 
differentiation result in abnormal cellular organization and, thus, auditory
dysfunction. The molecular mechanisms involved in the timing and coordination of 
auditory prosensory proliferation and differentiation are poorly understood. Here
we identify the RNA-binding protein LIN28B as a critical regulator of
developmental timing in the murine cochlea. We show that Lin28b and its opposing 
let-7 miRNAs are differentially expressed in the auditory sensory lineage, with
Lin28b being highly expressed in undifferentiated prosensory cells and let-7
miRNAs being highly expressed in their progeny-hair cells (HCs) and supporting
cells (SCs). Using recently developed transgenic mouse models for LIN28B and
let-7g, we demonstrate that prolonged LIN28B expression delays prosensory cell
cycle withdrawal and differentiation, resulting in HC and SC patterning and
maturation defects. Surprisingly, let-7g overexpression, although capable of
inducing premature prosensory cell cycle exit, failed to induce premature HC
differentiation, suggesting that LIN28B's functional role in the timing of
differentiation uses let-7 independent mechanisms. Finally, we demonstrate that
overexpression of LIN28B or let-7g can significantly alter the postnatal
production of HCs in response to Notch inhibition; LIN28B has a positive effect
on HC production, whereas let-7 antagonizes this process. Together, these results
implicate a key role for the LIN28B/let-7 axis in regulating postnatal SC
plasticity.

PMCID: PMC4517247
PMID: 26139524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Cancer Lett. 2015 Sep 28;366(1):123-32. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.06.015. Epub
2015 Jun 26.

MYCN-driven regulatory mechanisms controlling LIN28B in neuroblastoma.

Beckers A(1), Van Peer G(1), Carter DR(2), Gartlgruber M(3), Herrmann C(4),
Agarwal S(5), Helsmoortel HH(6), Althoff K(7), Molenaar JJ(8), Cheung BB(2),
Schulte JH(9), Benoit Y(10), Shohet JM(5), Westermann F(3), Marshall GM(2),
Vandesompele J(1), De Preter K(1), Speleman F(11).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics (CMGG), Ghent University, Medical Research
Building (MRB1), De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. (2)Children's Cancer
Institute Australia for Medical Research, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, UNSW, PO
Box<U+2009>81, Randwick, NSW 2031, Australia. (3)Division of Neuroblastoma Genomics,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, 
Germany. (4)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany; Institute of Pharmacy
and Molecular Biotechnology, and Bioquant Center, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 267, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (5)Division of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology and Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Department of
Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, 1102 Bates Street, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (6)Center for Medical Genetics (CMGG), Ghent University, Medical Research
Building (MRB1), De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium; Department of Pediatric
Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Ghent University Hospital, De 
Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. (7)Department of Pediatric Oncology and
Hematology, University Children's Hospital Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45147 Essen,
Germany; German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), Partner Site
Essen/Duesseldorf, Essen, Germany. (8)Department of Oncogenomics, Academic
Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (9)Division
of Neuroblastoma Genomics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer
Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany; Department of Pediatric Oncology and
Hematology, University Children's Hospital Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45147 Essen,
Germany; German Consortium for Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), Partner Site
Essen/Duesseldorf, Essen, Germany; Translational Neuro-Oncology, West German
Cancer Center (WTZ), University Hospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen,
Hufelandstr. 55, 45147 Essen, Germany; Centre for Medical Biotechnology,
University Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstr. 55, 45147 Essen, Germany. (10)Department 
of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Ghent University 
Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. (11)Center for Medical Genetics 
(CMGG), Ghent University, Medical Research Building (MRB1), De Pintelaan 185,
9000 Ghent, Belgium. Electronic address: franki.speleman@ugent.be.

LIN28B has been identified as an oncogene in various tumor entities, including
neuroblastoma, a childhood cancer that originates from neural crest-derived
cells, and is characterized by amplification of the MYCN oncogene. Recently,
elevated LIN28B expression levels were shown to contribute to neuroblastoma
tumorigenesis via let-7 dependent de-repression of MYCN. However, additional
insight in the regulation of LIN28B in neuroblastoma is lacking. Therefore, we
have performed a comprehensive analysis of the regulation of LIN28B in
neuroblastoma, with a specific focus on the contribution of miRNAs. We show that 
MYCN regulates LIN28B expression in neuroblastoma tumors via two distinct
parallel mechanisms. First, through an unbiased LIN28B-3'UTR reporter screen, we 
found that miR-26a-5p and miR-26b-5p regulate LIN28B expression. Next, we
demonstrated that MYCN indirectly affects the expression of miR-26a-5p, and hence
regulates LIN28B, therefore establishing an MYCN-miR-26a-5p-LIN28B regulatory
axis. Second, we provide evidence that MYCN regulates LIN28B expression via
interaction with the LIN28B promoter, establishing a direct MYCN-LIN28B
regulatory axis. We believe that these findings mark LIN28B as an important
effector of the MYCN oncogenic phenotype and underline the importance of
MYCN-regulated miRNAs in establishing the MYCN-driven oncogenic process.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26123663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cancer. 2015 Jun 30;14:125. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0402-5.

Aberrant regulation of the LIN28A/LIN28B and let-7 loop in human malignant tumors
and its effects on the hallmarks of cancer.

Wang T(1), Wang G(2), Hao D(3), Liu X(4), Wang D(5), Ning N(6), Li X(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
wtzpath@163.com. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The
Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.
wangguangyu03@163.com. (3)Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Macau, Taipa,
Macau, China. yb47615@umac.mo. (4)Center of Cardiovascular, Inner Mongolia
People's Hospital, Hohhot, Inner Mongolia, China. 13836117714@163.com. (5)College
of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, Harbin,
China. wangdong@ems.hrbmu.edu.cn. (6)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery,
International Hospital of Pecking University, Beijing, China.
ningning301@126.com. (7)Department of Pathology, Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, China. lixiaobo@ems.hrbmu.edu.cn.

RNA binding proteins (RBPs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) are two of the most important 
post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression, and their aberrant expression
contributes to the development of human malignancies. Let-7, one of the most
well-known tumor suppressors, is frequently down-regulated in a variety of human 
cancers. The RBP LIN28A/LIN28B, a direct target of the let-7 family of miRNAs, is
an inhibitor of let-7 biogenesis and is frequently up-regulated in cancers.
Aberrant regulation of the LIN28A/LIN28B and let-7 loop in human malignant tumors
is reportedly involved in cancer development, contributing to cellular
proliferation, cell death resistance, angiogenesis, metastasis, metabolism
reprogramming, tumor-associated inflammation, genome instability, acquiring
immortality and evading immune destruction. In this review, we summarized the
mechanisms of LIN28A/LIN28B and let-7 loop aberrant regulation in human cancer
and discussed the roles and potential mechanisms of the LIN28A/LIN28B and let-7
loop in regulating the hallmarks of cancer. The crosstalk between LIN28A/LIN28B
and let-7 loop and certain oncogenes (such as MYC, RAS, PI3K/AKT, NF-<U+03BA>B and
ß-catenin) in regulating hallmarks of cancer has also been discussed.

PMCID: PMC4512107
PMID: 26123544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Sci. 2015 Sep;106(9):1174-81. doi: 10.1111/cas.12721. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

A role of uridylation pathway for blockade of let-7 microRNA biogenesis by
Lin28B.

Suzuki HI(1,)(2), Katsura A(2), Miyazono K(2).

Author information: 
(1)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Department of
Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

The precise control of microRNA (miRNA) biosynthesis is crucial for gene
regulation. Lin28A and Lin28B are selective inhibitors of biogenesis of let-7
miRNAs involved in development and tumorigenesis. Lin28A selectively inhibits
let-7 biogenesis through cytoplasmic uridylation of precursor let-7 by TUT4
terminal uridyl transferase and subsequent degradation by Dis3l2 exonuclease.
However, a role of this uridylation pathway remains unclear in let-7 blockade by 
Lin28B, a paralog of Lin28A, while Lin28B is reported to engage a distinct
mechanism in the nucleus to suppress let-7. Here we revisit a functional link
between Lin28B and the uridylation pathway with a focus on let-7 metabolism in
cancer cells. Both Lin28A and Lin28B interacted with Dis3l2 in the cytoplasm, and
silencing of Dis3l2 upregulated uridylated pre-let-7 in both Lin28A- and
Lin28B-expressing cancer cell lines. In addition, we found that amounts of let-7 
precursors influenced intracellular localization of Lin28B. Furthermore, we found
that MCPIP1 (Zc3h12a) ribonuclease was also involved in degradation of both
non-uridylated and uridylated pre-let-7. Cancer transcriptome analysis showed
association of expression levels of Lin28B and uridylation pathway components,
TUT4 and Dis3l2, in various human cancer cells and hepatocellular carcinoma.
Collectively, these results suggest that cytoplasmic uridylation pathway actively
participates in blockade of let-7 biogenesis by Lin28B.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4582986
PMID: 26080928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Sep;36(9):937-45. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv085. Epub 2015 Jun 
12.

Lin28B promotes melanoma growth by mediating a microRNA regulatory circuit.

Zhang Z(1), Zhang S(2), Ma P(3), Jing Y(3), Peng H(3), Gao WQ(4), Zhuang G(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem
Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200127, China, State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related
Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200032, China and. (2)School of Biomedical
Engineering & Med-X Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200030, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med 
X Clinical Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem Cell Research Center, Ren 
Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, 
China, School of Biomedical Engineering & Med-X Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China zhuangguanglei@gmail.com
gao.weiqiang@sjtu.edu.cn. (5)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes,
Renji-Med X Clinical Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200127, China,
zhuangguanglei@gmail.com.

It has been increasingly recognized that microRNAs (miRNAs) are often
dysregulated in various human malignancies and can function as oncogenes or
tumor-suppressors. However, the potential roles of miRNAs and components of the
miRNA biogenesis pathway remain poorly defined in melanoma. Here, we
systematically profiled miRNA expression in human melanocytes and melanoma cells,
and identified a prominent function of miR-125a-5p in suppressing melanoma
growth. Mechanistically, we discovered that Lin28B, a well-characterized
inhibitor of let-7 miRNA biogenesis, was a direct target of miR-125a-5p in
melanoma. We showed that the Lin28B was aberrantly expressed in a large
proportion of melanoma patients and was functionally required for melanoma
progression. We further demonstrated the involvement of let-7-dependent mechanism
downstream of Lin28B, resulting in the activation of transforming growth factor-ß
signaling cascade. Collectively, our data implicate Lin28B as a novel oncogene in
melanomagenesis by mediating a miRNA regulatory circuit.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26071398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 10;35(10):1292-301. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.187. Epub 2015 Jun
1.

MacroH2A1 downregulation enhances the stem-like properties of bladder cancer
cells by transactivation of Lin28B.

Park SJ(1,)(2), Shim JW(1), Park HS(1), Eum DY(1), Park MT(1), Mi Yi J(1), Choi
SH(1), Kim SD(1), Son TG(1), Lu W(3), Kim ND(2), Yang K(1,)(4,)(5), Heo K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Center, Dongnam Institute of Radiological and Medical Science
(DIRAMS), Busan, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pharmacy, Pusan National
University, Busan, Republic of Korea. (3)The Eli and Edythe Broad Center for
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, Dongnam Institute of Radiological & Medical 
Sciences, Busan, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Korea
Institute of Radiological & Medical Sciences, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

The histone variant, macroH2A1, has an important role in embryonic stem cell
differentiation and tumor progression in various types of tumors. However, the
regulatory roles of macroH2A1 on bladder cancer progression have not been fully
elucidated. Here, we show that macroH2A1 knockdown promotes stem-like properties 
of bladder cancer cells. The knockdown of macroH2A1 in bladder cancer cells
increased tumorigenicity, radioresistance, degeneration of reactive oxygen
species, increased sphere formation capability and an increase in the proportion 
of side populations. We found that macroH2A1 is required for the suppression of
Lin28B identified as a novel downstream target of macroH2A1 in bladder cancer.
Loss of macroH2A1 expression significantly correlated with the elevated levels of
Lin28B expression and subsequently inhibited the mature let-7 microRNA
expression. Furthermore, the stable overexpression of Lin28B enhances the several
phenotypes, including tumorigenicity and sphere-forming ability, which are
induced by macroH2A1 depletion. Importantly, Lin28B expression was regulated by
macroH2A1-mediated reciprocal binding of p300 and EZH2/SUV39H1. Our results
suggest that Lin28B/let-7 pathway is tightly regulated by macroH2A1 and its
cofactors, and have a pivotal role in the bladder tumor progression and the
regulation of stem-like characteristics of bladder cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4791524
PMID: 26028027  [PubMed - in process]


41. Genes Dev. 2015 May 15;29(10):1074-86. doi: 10.1101/gad.256693.114. Epub 2015 May
8.

LIN28 cooperates with WNT signaling to drive invasive intestinal and colorectal
adenocarcinoma in mice and humans.

Tu HC(1), Schwitalla S(1), Qian Z(2), LaPier GS(1), Yermalovich A(1), Ku YC(3),
Chen SC(3), Viswanathan SR(1), Zhu H(4), Nishihara R(2), Inamura K(2), Kim SA(2),
Morikawa T(2), Mima K(2), Sukawa Y(2), Yang J(2), Meredith G(3), Fuchs CS(2),
Ogino S(5), Daley GQ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA; Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA;
(2)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA; (3)Thermo Fisher Scientific, Incorporated, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA; (4)Children's Medical Center Research
Institute, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA;
(5)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA; Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA; Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02115, USA; (6)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; Dana Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 
02138, USA george.daley@childrens.harvard.edu.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) remains a major contributor to cancer-related mortality. 
LIN28A and LIN28B are highly related RNA-binding protein paralogs that regulate
biogenesis of let-7 microRNAs and influence development, metabolism, tissue
regeneration, and oncogenesis. Here we demonstrate that overexpression of either 
LIN28 paralog cooperates with the Wnt pathway to promote invasive intestinal
adenocarcinoma in murine models. When LIN28 alone is induced genetically, half of
the resulting tumors harbor Ctnnb1 (ß-catenin) mutation. When overexpressed in
Apc(Min/+) mice, LIN28 accelerates tumor formation and enhances proliferation and
invasiveness. In conditional genetic models, enforced expression of a
LIN28-resistant form of the let-7 microRNA reduces LIN28-induced tumor burden,
while silencing of LIN28 expression reduces tumor volume and increases tumor
differentiation, indicating that LIN28 contributes to tumor maintenance. We
detected aberrant expression of LIN28A and/or LIN28B in 38% of a large series of 
human CRC samples (n = 595), where LIN28 expression levels were associated with
invasive tumor growth. Our late-stage CRC murine models and analysis of primary
human tumors demonstrate prominent roles for both LIN28 paralogs in promoting CRC
growth and progression and implicate the LIN28/let-7 pathway as a therapeutic
target.

© 2015 Tu et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4441054
PMID: 25956904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2015 Dec;1362:8-15. doi: 10.1111/nyas.12769. Epub 2015 Apr 30.

A developmental switch between fetal and adult B lymphopoiesis.

Li YS(1), Zhou Y(1), Tang L(1), Shinton SA(1), Hayakawa K(1), Hardy RR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)-purified pro-B cells from fetal liver 
and adult bone marrow generate B cells with distinct phenotypes: fetal cells
generate few IgD(high) B cells and half express CD5, whereas adult cells generate
mostly IgD(high) cells and few express CD5. These results led us to propose a
model of a developmental switch in B lymphopoiesis, similar to the well-known
switch in fetal to adult erythropoiesis. More recent global analysis of mRNA and 
microRNA expression comparing these two types of pro-B cells revealed
differential expression of Lin28b and microRNAs from the Let-7 family, indicating
that this regulatory axis plays a role in the switch. Further analysis has
provided data supporting this model, implicating Arid3a as a key transcription
factor in mediating fetal-type B cell development. Function of this regulatory
axis in human B lineage precursors may also explain the predominance of CD5(+) B 
cells in cord blood. We suggest that Lin28b-promoted B cell development generates
many cells expressing CD5 as a consequence of positively selected
self-reactivity. While such cells serve a useful role in clearance of senescent
cells and in certain immune responses, they also carry the risk of progression to
leukemia/lymphoma later in life.

© 2015 New York Academy of Sciences.

PMID: 25931205  [PubMed - in process]


43. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 May 26;43(10):5182-93. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkv387. Epub 2015
Apr 29.

The ribonuclease DIS3 promotes let-7 miRNA maturation by degrading the
pluripotency factor LIN28B mRNA.

Segalla S(1), Pivetti S(1), Todoerti K(2), Chudzik MA(1), Giuliani EC(1), Lazzaro
F(3), Volta V(4), Lazarevic D(5), Musco G(6), Muzi-Falconi M(3), Neri A(7), Biffo
S(8), Tonon G(9).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics of Cancer Unit, Division of Experimental Oncology,
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) San Raffaele
Scientific Institute, 20133 Milan, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Pre-Clinical and
Translational Research, IRCCS-CROB, Referral Cancer Center of Basilicata, 85028
Rionero in Vulture, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Bioscienze, Università degli Studi 
di Milano, 20132 Milan, Italy. (4)Molecular Histology and Cell Growth Laboratory,
Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), San Raffaele Science
Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy. (5)Center for Translational Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS), San 
Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy. (6)Dulbecco Telethon
Institute, S. Raffaele Hospital, 20132 Milan, Italy. (7)Department of Clinical
Sciences and Community Health, University of Milan, Hematology1 CTMO, Foundation 
IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy. (8)Molecular 
Histology and Cell Growth Laboratory, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico (IRCCS), San Raffaele Science Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy
Dipartimento di Scienze e Innovazione Tecnologica, University of Piemonte
Orientale, 15100 Alessandria, Italy. (9)Functional Genomics of Cancer Unit,
Division of Experimental Oncology, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico (IRCCS) San Raffaele Scientific Institute, 20133 Milan, Italy
Università Vita-Salute San Raffaele, Milan, 20132, Italy tonon.giovanni@hsr.it.

Multiple myeloma, the second most frequent hematologic tumor after lymphomas, is 
an incurable cancer. Recent sequencing efforts have identified the ribonuclease
DIS3 as one of the most frequently mutated genes in this disease. DIS3 represents
the catalytic subunit of the exosome, a macromolecular complex central to the
processing, maturation and surveillance of various RNAs. miRNAs are an
evolutionarily conserved class of small noncoding RNAs, regulating gene
expression at post-transcriptional level. Ribonucleases, including Drosha, Dicer 
and XRN2, are involved in the processing and stability of miRNAs. However, the
role of DIS3 on the regulation of miRNAs remains largely unknown. Here we found
that DIS3 regulates the levels of the tumor suppressor let-7 miRNAs without
affecting other miRNA families. DIS3 facilitates the maturation of let-7 miRNAs
by reducing in the cytoplasm the RNA stability of the pluripotency factor LIN28B,
a inhibitor of let-7 processing. DIS3 inactivation, through the increase of
LIN28B and the reduction of mature let-7, enhances the translation of let-7
targets such as MYC and RAS leading to enhanced tumorigenesis. Our study
establishes that the ribonuclease DIS3, targeting LIN28B, sustains the maturation
of let-7 miRNAs and suggests the increased translation of critical oncogenes as
one of the biological outcomes of DIS3 inactivation.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4446438
PMID: 25925570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Development. 2015 May 1;142(9):1616-27. doi: 10.1242/dev.120543.

Lin28 promotes the proliferative capacity of neural progenitor cells in brain
development.

Yang M(1), Yang SL(1), Herrlinger S(1), Liang C(1), Dzieciatkowska M(2), Hansen
KC(2), Desai R(3), Nagy A(3), Niswander L(4), Moss EG(5), Chen JF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of
Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.
(3)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON M5T 
3L9, Canada. (4)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (5)Department of
Molecular Biology, Rowan University, Stratford, NJ 08084, USA. (6)Department of
Genetics, Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA
30602, USA chen2014@uga.edu.

Neural progenitor cells (NPCs) have distinct proliferation capacities at
different stages of brain development. Lin28 is an RNA-binding protein with two
homologs in mice: Lin28a and Lin28b. Here we show that Lin28a/b are enriched in
early NPCs and their expression declines during neural differentiation. Lin28a
single-knockout mice show reduced NPC proliferation, enhanced cell cycle exit and
a smaller brain, whereas mice lacking both Lin28a alleles and one Lin28b allele
display similar but more severe phenotypes. Ectopic expression of Lin28a in mice 
results in increased NPC proliferation, NPC numbers and brain size.
Mechanistically, Lin28a physically and functionally interacts with Imp1 (Igf2bp1)
and regulates Igf2-mTOR signaling. The function of Lin28a/b in NPCs could be
attributed, at least in part, to the regulation of their mRNA targets that encode
Igf1r and Hmga2. Thus, Lin28a and Lin28b have overlapping functions in temporally
regulating NPC proliferation during early brain development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4419280 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25922525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 15;75(12):2553-65. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2215. Epub 
2015 Apr 9.

Lin28B/Let-7 Regulates Expression of Oct4 and Sox2 and Reprograms Oral Squamous
Cell Carcinoma Cells to a Stem-like State.

Chien CS(1), Wang ML(2), Chu PY(3), Chang YL(4), Liu WH(5), Yu CC(6), Lan YT(7), 
Huang PI(8), Lee YY(8), Chen YW(8), Lo WL(9), Chiou SH(10).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Oral Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Laryngology
and Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Otolaryngology, Taipei Veterans General 
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei, Taiwan. Department of Medical Research, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences,
National Defense Medical Center and Tri-Service General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)Institute of Oral Science, School of Dentistry & Oral Medicine Research
Center, Chung Shan Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Institute of Clinical
Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Department of Medical
Research, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (8)Institute of
Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Cancer Center, 
Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (9)Institute of Oral Biology,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Division of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgery, Department of Stomatology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan. shchiou@vghtpe.gov.tw wllo@vghtpe.gov.tw. (10)Institute of Pharmacology, 
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Institute of Clinical Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. School of Medicine, National
Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan. Department of Medical Research, Taipei
Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. Genomics Research Center, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. shchiou@vghtpe.gov.tw wllo@vghtpe.gov.tw.

Lin28, a key factor for cellular reprogramming and generation of induced
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC), makes a critical contribution to tumorigenicity by 
suppressing Let-7. However, it is unclear whether Lin28 is involved in regulating
cancer stem-like cells (CSC), including in oral squamous carcinoma cells (OSCC). 
In this study, we demonstrate a correlation between high levels of Lin28B, Oct4, 
and Sox2, and a high percentage of CD44(+)ALDH1(+) CSC in OSCC. Ectopic Lin28B
expression in CD44(-)ALDH1(-)/OSCC cells was sufficient to enhance Oct4/Sox2
expression and CSC properties, whereas Let7 co-overexpression effectively
reversed these phenomena. We identified ARID3B and HMGA2 as downstream effectors 
of Lin28B/Let7 signaling in regulating endogenous Oct4 and Sox2 expression. Let7 
targeted the 3' untranslated region of ARID3B and HMGA2 and suppressed their
expression, whereas ARID3B and HMGA2 increased the transcription of Oct4 and
Sox2, respectively, through promoter binding. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays revealed a direct association between ARID3B and a specific ARID3B-binding
sequence in the Oct4 promoter. Notably, by modulating Oct4/Sox2 expression, the
Lin28B-Let7 pathway not only regulated stemness properties in OSCC but also
determined the efficiency by which normal human oral keratinocytes could be
reprogrammed to iPSC. Clinically, a Lin28B(high)-Let7(low) expression pattern was
highly correlated with high levels of ARID3B, HMGA2, OCT4, and SOX2 expression in
OSCC specimens. Taken together, our results show how Lin28B/Let7 regulates key
cancer stem-like properties in oral squamous cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25858147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 30;6(9):6535-43.

Genome-wide 5-hydroxymethylcytosine modification pattern is a novel epigenetic
feature of globozoospermia.

Wang XX(1), Sun BF(2), Jiao J(1), Chong ZC(2), Chen YS(2), Wang XL(2), Zhao Y(3),
Zhou YM(4), Li D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang 110004, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Genomic and Precision
Medicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing
101300, China. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Key Laboratory of Cell Biology,
Ministry of Public Health, and Key Laboratory of Medical Cell Biology, Ministry
of Education, China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China. (4)Department of 
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Discovery of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC) in mammalian genomes has excited the 
field of epigenetics, but information on the genome-wide distribution of 5hmC is 
limited. Globozoospermia is a rare but severe cause of male infertility. To date,
the epigenetic mechanism, especially 5hmC profiles involved in globozoospermia
progression, remains largely unknown. Here, utilizing the chemical labeling and
biotin-enrichment approach followed by Illumina HiSeq sequencing, we showed that 
(i) 6664, 9029 and 6318 genes contain 5hmC in normal, abnormal, and
globozoospermia sperm, respectively; (ii) some 5hmC-containing genes
significantly involves in spermatogenesis, sperm motility and morphology, and
gamete generation; (iii) 5hmC is exclusively localized in sperm intron; (iv)
approximately 40% imprinted genes have 5hmC modification in sperm genomes, but
globozoospermia sperm exhibiting a large portion of imprinted genes lose the 5hmC
modification; (v) six imprinted genes showed different 5hmC patterns in abnormal 
sperm (GDAP1L1, GNAS, KCNK9, LIN28B, RB1, RTL1), and five imprinted genes showed 
different 5hmC patterns in globozoospermia sperm (KCNK9, LIN28B, RB1, SLC22A18,
ZDBF2). These results suggested that differences in genome-wide 5hmC patterns may
in part be responsible for the sperm phenotype. All of this may improve our
understanding of the basic molecular mechanism underlying sperm biology and the
etiology of male infertility.

PMCID: PMC4466632
PMID: 25762640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Exp Med. 2015 Apr 6;212(4):569-80. doi: 10.1084/jem.20141510. Epub 2015 Mar 9.

Lin28b promotes fetal B lymphopoiesis through the transcription factor Arid3a.

Zhou Y(1), Li YS(1), Bandi SR(1), Tang L(1), Shinton SA(1), Hayakawa K(1), Hardy 
RR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111. (2)Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA 19111 richard.hardy@fccc.edu.

Mouse B cell precursors from fetal liver and adult bone marrow (BM) generate
distinctive B cell progeny when transplanted into immunodeficient recipients,
supporting a two-pathway model for B lymphopoiesis, fetal "B-1" and adult "B-2." 
Recently, Lin28b was shown to be important for the switch between fetal and adult
pathways; however, neither the mechanism of Lin28b action nor the importance of B
cell antigen receptor (BCR) signaling in this process was addressed. Here, we
report key advances in our understanding of the regulation of B-1/B-2
development. First, modulation of Let-7 in fetal pro-B cells is sufficient to
alter fetal B-1 development to produce B cells resembling the progeny of adult
B-2 development. Second, intact BCR signaling is required for the generation of
B1a B cells from Lin28b-transduced BM progenitors, supporting a requirement for
ligand-dependent selection, as is the case for normal B1a B cells. Third, the VH 
repertoire of Lin28b-induced BM B1a B cells differs from that of normal B1a,
suggesting persisting differences from fetal progenitors. Finally, we identify
the Arid3a transcription factor as a key target of Let-7, whose ectopic
expression is sufficient to induce B-1 development in adult pro-B cells and whose
silencing by knockdown blocks B-1 development in fetal pro-B cells.

© 2015 Zhou et al.

PMCID: PMC4387290
PMID: 25753579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Am J Ophthalmol. 2015 Jun;159(6):1065-1074.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2015.03.002.
Epub 2015 Mar 5.

Intraocular Medulloepitheliomas and Embryonal Tumors With Multilayered Rosettes
of the Brain: Comparative Roles of LIN28A and C19MC.

Jakobiec FA(1), Kool M(2), Stagner AM(3), Pfister SM(4), Eagle RC(5), Proia
AD(6), Korshunov A(7).

Author information: 
(1)David G. Cogan Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory, Massachusetts Eye & Ear
Infirmary, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address:
Fred_Jakobiec@meei.harvard.edu. (2)Division of Pediatric Neuro-oncology, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (3)David G. Cogan Ophthalmic 
Pathology Laboratory, Massachusetts Eye & Ear Infirmary, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Division of Pediatric Neuro-oncology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany; Department of Pediatric Hematology
and Oncology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Wills Eye
Hospital, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (6)Duke
University Department of Pathology, Durham, North Carolina. (7)Clinical
Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), and
Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.

PURPOSE: To compare immunohistochemical and genetic overlaps and differences
between intraocular medulloepitheliomas and embryonal tumors with multilayered
rosettes of the brain.
DESIGN: Retrospective histopathologic, immunohistochemical, and genetic analysis 
of 20 intraocular medulloepitheliomas.
METHODS: (1) Review of clinical data and hematoxylin-eosin-stained sections with 
(2) immunohistochemical staining of paraffin sections using a polyclonal antibody
against the protein LIN28A, and (3) fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
testing for the amplification of the genetic locus 19q13.42 involving the C19MC
cluster of miRNA. Ten retinoblastomas served as controls and to determine the
specificity of these biomarkers for intraocular medulloepitheliomas.
RESULTS: Nineteen of the 20 intraocular medulloepitheliomas were either diffusely
or focally LIN28A positive (weak, moderate, or strong). The most intense
positivity correlated with aggressive behavior such as intraocular tissue
invasion or extraocular extension. None of the cases studied by FISH harbored an 
amplicon for C19MC. The 10 retinoblastomas were LIN28A and C19MC negative.
CONCLUSION: LIN28A has a putative role in oncogenesis and is found only in
embryonic cells and malignancies. Intraocular medulloepitheliomas and embryonal
tumors with multilayered rosettes of the brain both display LIN28A positivity.
Only the latter, however, display amplification of the 19q13.42 locus involving
C19MC, implying that other causative factors are at play in intraocular
medulloepitheliomas. More aggressive tumor behavior within the eye can be
partially predicted by LIN28A staining intensity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25748578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Cancer Res. 2015 Apr 15;75(8):1725-35. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2111. Epub
2015 Mar 5.

IKKß Enforces a LIN28B/TCF7L2 Positive Feedback Loop That Promotes Cancer Cell
Stemness and Metastasis.

Chen C(1), Cao F(1), Bai L(1), Liu Y(1), Xie J(1), Wang W(1), Si Q(1), Yang J(2),
Chang A(2), Liu D(3), Liu D(3), Chuang TH(4), Xiang R(2), Luo Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Science, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, School of Basic Medical Science, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. (2)Department of Immunology, Nankai University, Tianjin, China. (3)Xuanwu 
Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China. (4)Immunology Research
Center, National Health Research Institutes, Zhunan, Miaoli, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Science, Chinese Academy 
of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
Collaborative Innovation Center for Biotherapy, School of Basic Medical Science, 
Chinese Academy of Medical Science and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing,
China. yunpingluo@hotmail.com.

Considerable evidence suggests that proinflammatory pathways drive self-renewal
of cancer stem-like cells (CSC), but the underlying mechanisms remain mainly
undefined. Here we report that the let7 repressor LIN28B and its regulator IKBKB 
(IKKß) sustain cancer cell stemness by interacting with the Wnt/TCF7L2 (TCF4)
signaling pathway to promote cancer progression. We found that LIN28B expression 
correlated with clinical progression and stemness marker expression in breast
cancer patients. Functional studies demonstrated that the stemness properties of 
LIN28B-expressing human breast and lung cancer cells were enhanced by IKKß,
whereas loss of LIN28B abolished stemness properties in these settings. These
phenomena were driven through interactions with TCF7L2, which enhanced LIN28B
expression by direct binding to intron 1 of the LIN28B gene, which in turn
promoted TCF7L2 mRNA translation through a positive feedback loop. Notably,
RNAi-mediated silencing of LIN28B or pharmacologic inhibition of IKKß was
sufficient to suppress primary and metastatic tumor growth in vivo. Together, our
results establish the LIN28B/TCF7L2 interaction loop as a central mediator of
cancer stemness driven by proinflammatory processes during progression and
metastasis, possibly offering a new therapeutic target for generalized
interventions in advanced cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25744721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Oral Pathol Med. 2015 Nov;44(10):823-30. doi: 10.1111/jop.12314. Epub 2015 Feb 
27.

Elevated Lin28B expression is correlated with lymph node metastasis in oral
squamous cell carcinomas.

Lin WT(1), Shieh TM(2), Yang LC(3,)(4), Wang TY(3), Chou MY(3,)(4,)(5), Yu
CC(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Antai Medical Care Cooperation Antai Tian-Sheng
Memorial Hospital, Pingtung, Taiwan. (2)Department of Dental Hygiene, College of 
Health Care, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (3)School of Dentistry, 
Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)Department of Dentistry,
Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (5)Institute of Oral
Sciences, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Lymph node (LN) metastasis is the most common cause of oral squamous 
cell carcinoma (OSCC)-related death. Searching the detailed molecular mechanisms 
involved LN metastasis in OSCC is still an open question.
METHODS: Paired tissue samples from tumor (T) and adjacent non-cancerous matched 
tissues (NCMT) parts, as well as LN metastatic lesions in patient with OSCC
tissues were subjected to quantitative real-time PCR analysis for the expression 
levels of Lin28B. Arecoline, a major areca nut alkaloid, was to explore whether
expression of Lin28B could be changed dose dependent in oral epithelial cells.
Control and Lin28B-knockdown arecoline-stimulated oral epithelial cells were
subjected to migration/invasion/anchorage-independent growth assay.
RESULTS: Compared with NCMT samples from the same OSCC patient, the expression of
Lin28B was increased in all of the tumor samples. A similar upregulation of
Lin28B was also observed in LN metastatic when compared with local tumors.
Arecoline treatment dose dependently induced Lin28B expression in SG and FaDu
cells. Lentiviral-mediated silencing Lin28B expression significantly attenuated
arecoline-induced oncogenicity including proliferation, migration, invasiveness, 
and anchorage-independent growth in SG and FaDu cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Lin28B may be a useful biomarker and novel molecular target for LN
metastasis OSCC patients' treatment.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25726847  [PubMed - in process]


51. Leukemia. 2015 Jun;29(6):1320-30. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.19. Epub 2015 Feb 6.

The role of Lin28b in myeloid and mast cell differentiation and mast cell
malignancy.

Wang LD(1), Rao TN(2), Rowe RG(3), Nguyen PT(2), Sullivan JL(2), Pearson DS(4),
Doulatov S(3), Wu L(5), Lindsley RC(6), Zhu H(7), DeAngelo DJ(8), Daley GQ(9),
Wagers AJ(10).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Pathology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA [2]
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA [3] Department of Stem Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA [4] Stem Cell
Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Boston, MA, 
USA [5] Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)1] Department of Pathology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA [2]
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA [3] Department of Stem Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)1] Harvard Stem 
Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA [2] Stem Cell Transplantation Program,
Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Center
for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Boston, MA, USA [3] Department of Medicine,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA [4] Manton Center for Orphan Disease 
Research, Boston, MA, USA [5] Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston, MA, USA.
(4)1] Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA [2] Stem Cell
Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology,
Dana-Farber/Boston Children's Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Boston, MA, 
USA [3] Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA [4]
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Boston, MA, USA [5] Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Boston, MA, USA [6] Medical Scientist Training Program,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (5)1] Department of Pediatrics and
Internal Medicine, Children's Research Institute, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA [2] Organ Transplant Center, First
Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. (6)1] Department
of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA [2] Division
of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (7)Department of
Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, Children's Research Institute, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX, USA. (8)Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (9)1] Harvard Stem Cell 
Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA [2] Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA [3] Stem Cell Transplantation
Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Dana-Farber/Boston Children's
Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Boston, MA, USA [4] Department of
Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA [5] Manton Center for
Orphan Disease Research, Boston, MA, USA [6] Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Boston, MA, USA [7] Medical Scientist Training Program, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA [8] Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (10)1] Department of
Pathology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA [2] Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA [3] Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative
Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA [4] Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

Mast cells (MCs) are critical components of the innate immune system and
important for host defense, allergy, autoimmunity, tissue regeneration and tumor 
progression. Dysregulated MC development leads to systemic mastocytosis (SM), a
clinically variable but often devastating family of hematologic disorders. Here
we report that induced expression of Lin28, a heterochronic gene and pluripotency
factor implicated in driving a fetal hematopoietic program, caused MC
accumulation in adult mice in target organs such as the skin and peritoneal
cavity. In vitro assays revealed a skewing of myeloid commitment in
LIN28B-expressing hematopoietic progenitors, with increased levels of LIN28B in
common myeloid and basophil-MC progenitors altering gene expression patterns to
favor cell fate choices that enhanced MC specification. In addition,
LIN28B-induced MCs appeared phenotypically and functionally immature, and in
vitro assays suggested a slowing of MC terminal differentiation in the context of
LIN28B upregulation. Finally, interrogation of human MC leukemia samples revealed
upregulation of LIN28B in abnormal MCs from patients with SM. This work
identifies Lin28 as a novel regulator of innate immune function and a new protein
of interest in MC disease.

PMCID: PMC4456252
PMID: 25655194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 20;6(5):3165-77.

Disrupting LIN28 in atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors reveals the importance of
the mitogen activated protein kinase pathway as a therapeutic target.

Weingart MF(1), Roth JJ(2), Hutt-Cabezas M(1), Busse TM(3), Kaur H(1), Price
A(1), Maynard R(1), Rubens J(1), Taylor I(1), Mao XG(1), Xu J(4), Kuwahara Y(5), 
Allen SJ(6), Erdreich-Epstein A(4,)(7), Weissman BE(5), Orr BA(6), Eberhart
CG(1), Biegel JA(2,)(3,)(8), Raabe EH(1,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuropathology and Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, The
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (3)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA. (4)Division of Hematology, Oncology, and Blood & Bone
Marrow Transplant, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(5)Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC, USA. (6)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN, USA. (7)The Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (8)Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (9)Division of Pediatric
Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT) is among the most fatal of all pediatric
brain tumors. Aside from loss of function mutations in the SMARCB1
(BAF47/INI1/SNF5) chromatin remodeling gene, little is known of other molecular
drivers of AT/RT. LIN28A and LIN28B are stem cell factors that regulate thousands
of RNAs and are expressed in aggressive cancers. We identified high-levels of
LIN28A and LIN28B in AT/RT primary tumors and cell lines, with corresponding low 
levels of the LIN28-regulated microRNAs of the let-7 family. Knockdown of LIN28A 
by lentiviral shRNA in the AT/RT cell lines CHLA-06-ATRT and BT37 inhibited
growth, cell proliferation and colony formation and induced apoptosis.
Suppression of LIN28A in orthotopic xenograft models led to a more than doubling 
of median survival compared to empty vector controls (48 vs 115 days). LIN28A
knockdown led to increased expression of let-7b and let-7g microRNAs and a
down-regulation of KRAS mRNA. AT/RT primary tumors expressed increased mitogen
activated protein (MAP) kinase pathway activity, and the MEK inhibitor
selumetinib (AZD6244) decreased AT/RT growth and increased apoptosis. These data 
implicate LIN28/RAS/MAP kinase as key drivers of AT/RT tumorigenesis and indicate
that targeting this pathway may be a therapeutic option in this aggressive
pediatric malignancy.

PMCID: PMC4413645
PMID: 25638158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Oncol Rep. 2015 Apr;33(4):1723-30. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3757. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Inhibition of c-Myc by let-7b mimic reverses mutidrug resistance in gastric
cancer cells.

Yang X(1), Cai H(1), Liang Y(2), Chen L(3), Wang X(2), Si R(1), Qu K(1), Jiang
Z(1), Ma B(1), Miao C(1), Li J(1), Wang B(1), Gao P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, Gansu
730000, P.R. China. (2)Department of General Surgery, the People's Hospital of
Baoji City, Baoji, Shaanxi 721000, P.R. China. (3)Department of Infectious
Disease, the First Hospital of Lanzhou University, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, P.R.
China.

Chemotherapy is one of the few effective choices for patients with advanced or
recurrent gastric cancer (GC). However, the development of mutidrug resistance
(MDR) to cancer chemotherapy is a major obstacle to the effective treatment of
advanced GC. Additionally, the mechanism of MDR remains to be determined. In the 
present study, we tested IC50 of cisplatin (DDP), vincristine (VCR) and
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) in SGC7901, SGC7901/DDP and SGC7901/VCR gastric cancer
cells using an MTT assay. The expression of let-7b and c-Myc in these cells was
detected by qPCR and western blot analysis. The relationship between let-7b and
c-Myc was explored using a luciferase reporter assay. Transfection of let-7b
mimic or inhibitor was used to confirm the effect of let-7b on drug sensitivity
in chemotherapy via the regulation of c-Myc expression. We found that the
expression of let-7b was lower in chemotherapy-resistant SGC7901/DDP and
SGC7901/VCR gastric cancer cells than that in chemotherapy-sensitive SGC7901
cells. By contrast, the expression of c-Myc was higher in SGC7901/DDP and
SGC7901/VCR cells than that in SGC7901 cells. Furthermore, we confirmed that
let-7b suppresses c-Myc gene expression at the mRNA and protein levels in a
sequence-specific manner, while transfection of let-7b mimic increases drug
sensitivity in chemotherapy-resistant SGC7901/DDP and SGC7901/VCR cells by
targeting downregulation of c-Myc. In SGC7901 drug-sensitive cells, however, the 
sensitivity of chemotherapy was significantly decreased following let-7b
inhibitor transfection. The present study results demonstrated that let-7b
increases drug sensitivity in chemotherapy-resistant SGC7901/DDP and SGC7901/VCR 
gastric cancer cells by targeting the downregulation of c-Myc and that, let-7b
mimic reverses MDR by promoting cancer stem cell differentiation controlled by
double-negative autoregulatory loops (Lin28/let-7 and Myc/let-7) and a
double-positive autoregulatory loop (Lin28/Lin28B/Myc) existing in GC cells,
which remains to be confirmed.

PMID: 25633261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Sci Rep. 2014 Dec 11;4:7434. doi: 10.1038/srep07434.

Genetic variants in let-7/Lin28 modulate the risk of oral cavity cancer in a
Chinese Han population.

Zhang Y(1), Zhu L(1), Wang R(1), Miao L(2), Jiang H(1), Yuan H(2), Ma H(3), Chen 
N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 
China. (2)1] Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, China [2] Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of Cancer Biomarkers, Prevention and Treatment, Cancer Center, School 
of Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (3)Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Cancer Biomarkers,
Prevention and Treatment, Cancer Center, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

Let-7 and Lin28 establish a double-negative feedback loop to affect several
biological processes, such as differentiation of stem cell, invasion and
metastasis, and tumorigenesis. In this study, we systematically investigated the 
associations between 6 potentially functional SNPs of let7 and Lin28 genes and
the risk of oral cavity cancer with a case-control study including 384 oral
cavity cancer cases and 731 controls. We found that the variant allele (T) of
rs221636 of Lin28B was significantly associated with a reduced risk of oral
cavity cancer [odds ratio (OR) = 0.73, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.58-0.92, 
P = 7.55 × 10(-3) in additive model]. Bioinformatics prediction indicated that
rs221636 was located at the binding site of hsa-miR-548p in the 3' UTR of Lin28B.
Luciferase activity assay also showed a lower expression level for rs221636 T
allele compared with A allele. These findings indicated that rs221236 located at 
Lin28B may contribute to the risk of oral cavity cancer through the interruption 
of miRNA binding.

PMID: 25503985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Dec 4;15(6):735-49. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.10.016.

SET7/9 methylation of the pluripotency factor LIN28A is a nucleolar localization 
mechanism that blocks let-7 biogenesis in human ESCs.

Kim SK(1), Lee H(1), Han K(1), Kim SC(2), Choi Y(1), Park SW(1), Bak G(3), Lee
Y(3), Choi JK(4), Kim TK(5), Han YM(6), Lee D(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Samsung Genome Institute,
Samsung Medical Center, Seoul 135-710, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Chemistry, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701,
Republic of Korea. (4)Department of Bio and Brain Engineering, Korea Advanced
Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9111, USA. (6)Department of Biological Sciences, Korea
Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: ymhan@kaist.ac.kr. (7)Department of Biological Sciences,
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: daeyoup@kaist.ac.kr.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Dec 4;15(6):675-6.

LIN28-mediated processing of the microRNA (miRNA) let-7 has emerged as a
multilevel program that controls self-renewal in embryonic stem cells. LIN28A is 
believed to act primarily in the cytoplasm together with TUT4/7 to prevent final 
maturation of let-7 by Dicer, whereas LIN28B has been suggested to preferentially
act on nuclear processing of let-7. Here, we find that SET7/9 monomethylation in 
a putative nucleolar localization region of LIN28A increases its nuclear
retention and protein stability. In the nucleoli of human embryonic stem cells,
methylated LIN28A sequesters pri-let-7 and blocks its processing independently of
TUT4/7. The nuclear form of LIN28A regulates transcriptional changes in
MYC-pathway targets, thereby maintaining stemness programs and inhibiting
expression of early lineage-specific markers. These findings provide insight into
the molecular mechanism underlying the posttranslational methylation of nuclear
LIN28A and its ability to modulate pluripotency by repressing let-7 miRNA
expression in human embryonic stem cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4258232
PMID: 25479749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cell Rep. 2014 Nov 20;9(4):1265-72.

Trim25 Is an RNA-Specific Activator of Lin28a/TuT4-Mediated Uridylation.

Choudhury NR, Nowak JS, Zuo J, Rappsilber J, Spoel SH, Michlewski G.

RNA binding proteins have thousands of cellular RNA targets and often exhibit
opposite or passive molecular functions. Lin28a is a conserved RNA binding
protein involved in pluripotency and tumorigenesis that was previously shown to
trigger TuT4-mediated pre-let-7 uridylation, inhibiting its processing and
targeting it for degradation. Surprisingly, despite binding to other
pre-microRNAs (pre-miRNAs), only pre-let-7 is efficiently uridylated by TuT4.
Thus, we hypothesized the existence of substrate-specific cofactors that
stimulate Lin28a-mediated pre-let-7 uridylation or restrict its functionality on 
non-let-7 pre-miRNAs. Through RNA pull-downs coupled with quantitative mass
spectrometry, we identified the E3 ligase Trim25 as an RNA-specific cofactor for 
Lin28a/TuT4-mediated uridylation. We show that Trim25 binds to the conserved
terminal loop (CTL) of pre-let-7 and activates TuT4, allowing for more efficient 
Lin28a-mediated uridylation. These findings reveal that protein-modifying
enzymes, only recently shown to bind RNA, can guide the function of canonical
ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes in cis, thereby providing an additional level
of specificity.

PMCID: PMC4542301
PMID: 25457611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Nov 11;3(5):743-57. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.09.021.
Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Defining the role of oxygen tension in human neural progenitor fate.

Xie Y(1), Zhang J(2), Lin Y(3), Gaeta X(3), Meng X(3), Wisidagama DR(4),
Cinkornpumin J(1), Koehler CM(5), Malone CS(4), Teitell MA(6), Lowry WE(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Eli and Edythe Center for
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (4)Department of Biology,
California State University, Northridge, Northridge, CA 91330, USA. (5)Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology Institute, University of California,
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (6)Eli and Edythe Center for
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA;
Molecular Biology Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095, USA; Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; California NanoSystems Institute, University
of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. Electronic address:
mteitell@ucla.edu. (7)Department of Molecular Cell and Developmental Biology,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Eli and Edythe
Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology Institute,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095, USA. Electronic address: blowry@ucla.edu.

Hypoxia augments human embryonic stem cell (hESC) self-renewal via
hypoxia-inducible factor 2a-activated OCT4 transcription. Hypoxia also increases 
the efficiency of reprogramming differentiated cells to a pluripotent-like state.
Combined, these findings suggest that low O2 tension would impair the purposeful 
differentiation of pluripotent stem cells. Here, we show that low O2 tension and 
hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) activity instead promote appropriate hESC
differentiation. Through gain- and loss-of-function studies, we implicate O2
tension as a modifier of a key cell fate decision, namely whether neural
progenitors differentiate toward neurons or glia. Furthermore, our data show that
even transient changes in O2 concentration can affect cell fate through HIF by
regulating the activity of MYC, a regulator of LIN28/let-7 that is critical for
fate decisions in the neural lineage. We also identify key small molecules that
can take advantage of this pathway to quickly and efficiently promote the
development of mature cell types.

PMCID: PMC4235163
PMID: 25418722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Oncotarget. 2015 Jan 1;6(1):196-206.

Targeting ornithine decarboxylase reverses the LIN28/Let-7 axis and inhibits
glycolytic metabolism in neuroblastoma.

Lozier AM(1), Rich ME(1), Grawe AP(1), Peck AS(2), Zhao P(1), Chang AT(2), Bond
JP(3), Sholler GS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Oncology Translational Research Program, Helen DeVos Children's
Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI, USA. (2)Small Animal Imaging Facility, Van Andel
Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, USA. (3)University of Vermont, Michigan State
University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA. (4)Pediatric Oncology Translational Research
Program, Helen DeVos Children's Hospital, Grand Rapids, MI, USA. College of Human
Medicine, Michigan State University, Grand Rapids, MI, USA.

LIN28 has emerged as an oncogenic driver in a number of cancers, including
neuroblastoma (NB). Overexpression of LIN28 correlates with poor outcome in NB,
therefore drugs that impact the LIN28/Let-7 pathway could be beneficial in
treating NB patients. The LIN28/Let-7 pathway affects many cellular processes
including the regulation of cancer stem cells and glycolytic metabolism.
Polyamines, regulated by ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) modulate eIF-5A which is a
direct regulator of the LIN28/Let-7 axis. We propose that therapy inhibiting ODC 
will restore balance to the LIN28/Let-7 axis, suppress glycolytic metabolism, and
decrease MYCN protein expression in NB. Difluoromethylornithine (DFMO) is an
inhibitor of ODC in clinical trials for children with NB. In vitro experiments
using NB cell lines, BE(2)-C, SMS-KCNR, and CHLA90 show that DFMO treatment
reduced LIN28B and MYCN protein levels and increased Let-7 miRNA and decreased
neurosphere formation. Glycolytic metabolic activity decreased with DFMO
treatment in vivo. Additionally, sensitivity to DFMO treatment correlated with
LIN28B overexpression (BE(2)-C>SMS-KCNR>CHLA90). This is the first study to
demonstrate that DFMO treatment restores balance to the LIN28/Let-7 axis and
inhibits glycolytic metabolism and neurosphere formation in NB and that PET scans
may be a meaningful imaging tool to evaluate the therapeutic effects of DFMO
treatment.

PMCID: PMC4381588
PMID: 25415050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015 Jan;43(2):e9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1090. Epub 2014 Nov 6.

Short loop-targeting oligoribonucleotides antagonize Lin28 and enable pre-let-7
processing and suppression of cell growth in let-7-deficient cancer cells.

Roos M(1), Rebhan MA(1), Lucic M(1), Pavlicek D(1), Pradere U(1), Towbin H(1),
Civenni G(2), Catapano CV(2), Hall J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich,
Switzerland. (2)Tumor Biology and Experimental Therapeutics Program, Institute of
Oncology Research, Via Vela 6, Bellinzona CH-6500, Switzerland. (3)Department of 
Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zurich, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland
jonathan.hall@pharma.ethz.ch.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) originate from stem-loop-containing precursors (pre-miRNAs,
pri-miRNAs) and mature by means of the Drosha and Dicer endonucleases and their
associated factors. The let-7 miRNAs have prominent roles in developmental
differentiation and in regulating cell proliferation. In cancer, the tumor
suppressor function of let-7 is abrogated by overexpression of Lin28, one of
several RNA-binding proteins that regulate let-7 biogenesis by interacting with
conserved motifs in let-7 precursors close to the Dicer cleavage site. Using in
vitro assays, we have identified a binding site for short modified
oligoribonucleotides ('looptomirs') overlapping that of Lin28 in pre-let-7a-2.
These looptomirs selectively antagonize the docking of Lin28, but still permit
processing of pre-let-7a-2 by Dicer. Looptomirs restored synthesis of mature
let-7 and inhibited growth and clonogenic potential in Lin28 overexpressing
hepatocarcinoma cells, thereby demonstrating a promising new means to rescue
defective miRNA biogenesis in Lin28-dependent cancers.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4333367
PMID: 25378324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cancer Res. 2015 Mar;13(3):449-60. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-14-0363. Epub
2014 Nov 3.

MUC1-C Induces the LIN28B<U+2192>LET-7<U+2192>HMGA2 Axis to Regulate Self-Renewal in NSCLC.

Alam M(1), Ahmad R(1), Rajabi H(1), Kufe D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(2)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts.
donald_kufe@dfci.harvard.edu.

The LIN28B<U+2192>let-7 pathway contributes to regulation of the epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition (EMT) and stem cell self-renewal. The oncogenic MUC1-C transmembrane
protein is aberrantly overexpressed in lung and other carcinomas; however, there 
is no known association between MUC1-C and the LIN28B<U+2192>let-7 pathway. Here in
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC), silencing MUC1-C downregulates the
RNA-binding protein LIN28B and coordinately increases the miRNA let-7. Targeting 
MUC1-C function with a dominant-negative mutant or a peptide inhibitor provided
confirming evidence that MUC1-C induces LIN28B<U+2192>let-7 signaling. Mechanistically, 
MUC1-C promotes NF-<U+03BA>B p65 chromatin occupancy of the LIN28B first intron and
activates LIN28B transcription, which is associated with suppression of let-7.
Consistent with let-7-mediated inhibition of HMGA2 transcripts, targeting of
MUC1-C also decreases HMGA2 expression. HMGA2 has been linked to stemness, and
functions as a competing endogenous RNA (ceRNA) of let-7-mediated regulation of
the TGFß coreceptor TGFBR3. Accordingly, targeting MUC1-C suppresses HMGA2 mRNA
and protein, which is associated with decreases in TGFBR3, reversal of the EMT
phenotype, and inhibition of self-renewal capacity. These findings support a
model in which MUC1-C activates the <U+21D1>LIN28B<U+2192><U+21D3>let-7<U+2192><U+21D1>HMGA2 axis in NSCLC and
thereby promotes EMT traits and stemness.IMPLICATIONS: A novel pathway is defined
in which MUC1-C drives LIN28B<U+2192>let-7<U+2192>HMGA2 signaling, EMT, and self-renewal in
NSCLC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4369171
PMID: 25368430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 31;9(10):e109169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109169.
eCollection 2014.

LIN28B promotes colon cancer migration and recurrence.

Pang M(1), Wu G(1), Hou X(1), Hou N(1), Liang L(1), Jia G(1), Shuai P(2), Luo
B(1), Wang K(1), Li G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Sichuan Academy of Medical Sciences & Sichuan
Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, People's Republic of China. (2)Department 
of Health Management Centre, Sichuan Academy of Medical Sciences & Sichuan
Provincial People's Hospital, Chengdu, People's Republic of China. (3)Department 
of General Surgery, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
People's Republic of China.

LIN28B is involved in "stemness" and tumourigenesis by negatively regulating the 
maturation of let-7 microRNA family members. In this study, we showed that LIN28B
expression promotes migration and recurrence of colon cancer.
Immunohistochemistry and reverse-transcription polymerase chain reactions were
performed to detect LIN28B expression in colon cancer tissue microarrays,
paraffin-embedded surgical resected tissues and cancer cells. Loss-of-function,
migration and proliferation analyses were performed to delineate the potential
roles of LIN28B in colon cancer. LIN28B was upregulated in colon cancer tissue
compared to normal mucosa, and its overexpression correlated with reduced patient
survival and increased tumour recurrence. LIN28B suppression inhibited the
migration of SW480 colon cancer cells and facilitated the cytotoxicity induced by
oxaliplatin in SW480 and HCT116 colon cancer cells. In conclusion, LIN28B
overexpression contributes to colon tumourigenesis, and LIN28B may serve as a
diagnostic tool and therapeutic target for colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC4215835
PMID: 25360631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2014 Dec 15;307(12):F1390-403. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00458.2014. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Repression of let-7 by transforming growth factor-ß1-induced Lin28 upregulates
collagen expression in glomerular mesangial cells under diabetic conditions.

Park JT(1), Kato M(2), Lanting L(2), Castro N(2), Nam BY(3), Wang M(2), Kang
SW(3), Natarajan R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, College of Medicine, Yonsei University,
Seoul, Republic of Korea; and Division of Molecular Diabetes Research, Department
of Diabetes, Beckman Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, California.
(2)Division of Molecular Diabetes Research, Department of Diabetes, Beckman
Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, California. (3)Department of Internal
Medicine, College of Medicine, Yonsei University, Seoul, Republic of Korea; and. 
(4)Division of Molecular Diabetes Research, Department of Diabetes, Beckman
Research Institute of City of Hope, Duarte, California RNatarajan@coh.org.

Accumulation of mesangial extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins such as collagen
type 1-a2 (Col1a2) and collagen type 4-a1 (Col4a1) is a key feature of diabetic
nephropathy (DN). Transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß1 plays important roles in
ECM accumulation in DN, and evidence shows a mediatory role for microRNAs. In the
present study, we found that microRNA let-7 family members (let-7b/c/d/g/i) were 
downregulated in TGF-ß-treated mouse mesangial cells (MMCs) along with
upregulation of Col1a2 and Col4a1. Ectopic expression of let-7b in TGF-ß-treated 
MMCs attenuated Col1a2 and Col4a1 upregulation. Conversely, let-7b inhibitors
increased Col1a2 and Col4a1 levels. Cotransfection of MMCs with mouse Col1a2 or
Col4a1 3'-untranslated region luciferase constructs and let-7b inhibitors
increased luciferase activity. However, constructs with let-7 target site
mutations were unresponsive to TGF-ß. TGF-ß-induced 3'-untranslated region
activity was attenuated by let-7b mimics, suggesting that Col1a2 and Col4a1 are
direct targets of let-7b. In addition, Lin28b, a negative regulator of let-7
biogenesis, was upregulated in TGF-ß-treated MMCs. Luciferase assays showed that 
the Lin28b promoter containing the Smad-binding element (SBE) responded to TGF-ß,
which was abolished in constructs without SBE. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays showed TGF-ß-induced enrichment of Smad2/3 at the Lin28b promoter,
together suggesting that Lin28b is transcriptionally induced by TGF-ß through
SBE. Furthermore, let-7b levels were decreased, whereas Lin28b, Col1a2, and
Col4a1 levels were increased, in glomeruli of diabetic mice compared with
nondiabetic control mice, demonstrating the in vivo relevance of this
Lin28/let-7/collagen axis. These results identify Lin28 as a new TGF-ß target
gene and suggest a novel role for the Lin28/let-7 pathway in controlling
TGF-ß-induced collagen accumulation in DN.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4269695
PMID: 25354942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2015 Jan;10(1):53-62. doi: 10.1517/17460441.2015.974544.
Epub 2014 Oct 25.

Neuroblastoma models for insights into tumorigenesis and new therapies.

Kiyonari S(1), Kadomatsu K.

Author information: 
(1)Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry ,
Nagoya , Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Neuroblastoma is the most common extracranial solid tumor in
children. It occurs in the adrenosympathetic lineage, which is derived from the
neural crest. MYCN amplification is found in about 20% of cases and is the most
powerful prognostic factor. Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) mutation is also
found in 7% of sporadic neuroblastomas and 50% of familial neuroblastomas.
Although several mutations other than ALK are also found, about 70% of
neuroblastomas show no mutations. Another important feature of neuroblastoma is
that it sometimes spontaneously regresses. These features collectively suggest
that neuroblastoma is caused by aberrations in the normal development processes
of the neural crest.
AREAS COVERED: This review highlights a number of models of neuroblastoma
including genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs). The main GEMMs described
here are: tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-MYCN, TH-MYCN/Trp53(+/-),
TH-MYCN/TH-Cre/Casp8(flox/flox), TH-MYCN/TH-ALK(F1174L) and
DBH-iCre/CAG-LSL-Lin28b.
EXPERT OPINION: The current mouse models available are very useful for
investigating the mechanisms of tumorigenesis and for developing therapeutics.
However, many aspects have not yet been addressed. These include immediate early 
events after tumor initiation, epigenetic changes, spontaneous regression and
metastasis. On the other hand, the current models do not perfectly recapitulate
features of human neuroblastoma. Therefore, humanized mice and new GEMMs should
be also considered for future research.

PMID: 25345447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Nov 11;3(5):758-73. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.08.015.
Epub 2014 Oct 3.

let-7 miRNAs can act through notch to regulate human gliogenesis.

Patterson M(1), Gaeta X(2), Loo K(3), Edwards M(4), Smale S(4), Cinkornpumin
J(1), Xie Y(1), Listgarten J(5), Azghadi S(3), Douglass SM(1), Pellegrini M(1),
Lowry WE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine, UCLA, Box 957357, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, 
UCLA, 621 Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (2)Eli and
Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine, UCLA, Box 957357, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA; Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, UCLA, 621
Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology
Institute, UCLA, 611 Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, UCLA, 621 Charles E. 
Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (4)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for 
Regenerative Medicine, UCLA, Box 957357, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (5)Microsoft
Research, 1100 Glendon Avenue Suite PH1, Los Angeles, CA 90024, USA. (6)Eli and
Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine, UCLA, Box 957357, Los Angeles, CA 
90095, USA; Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, UCLA, 621
Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA; Molecular Biology
Institute, UCLA, 611 Charles E. Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
Electronic address: blowry@ucla.edu.

It is clear that neural differentiation from human pluripotent stem cells
generates cells that are developmentally immature. Here, we show that the let-7
plays a functional role in the developmental decision making of human neural
progenitors, controlling whether these cells make neurons or glia. Through gain- 
and loss-of-function studies on both tissue and pluripotent derived cells, our
data show that let-7 specifically regulates decision making in this context by
regulation of a key chromatin-associated protein, HMGA2. Furthermore, we provide 
evidence that the let-7/HMGA2 circuit acts on HES5, a NOTCH effector and
well-established node that regulates fate decisions in the nervous system. These 
data link the let-7 circuit to NOTCH signaling and suggest that this interaction 
serves to regulate human developmental progression.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4235151
PMID: 25316189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 1;74(23):6913-24. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0431. Epub
2014 Oct 13.

Common genetic variants in NEFL influence gene expression and neuroblastoma risk.

Capasso M(1), Diskin S(2), Cimmino F(3), Acierno G(3), Totaro F(4), Petrosino
G(4), Pezone L(5), Diamond M(6), McDaniel L(7), Hakonarson H(8), Iolascon A(3),
Devoto M(9), Maris JM(10).

Author information: 
(1)Università degli Studi di Napoli Federico II, Dipartimento di Medicina
Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Naples, Italy. CEINGE Biotecnolgie Avanzate, 
Naples, Italy. mario.capasso@unina.it. (2)Division of Oncology, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Center for Childhood Cancer
Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Genomics and Computational Biology,
Biomedical Graduate Studies, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Università degli Studi di Napoli
Federico II, Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Naples,
Italy. CEINGE Biotecnolgie Avanzate, Naples, Italy. (4)Università degli Studi di 
Napoli Federico II, Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, 
Naples, Italy. (5)CEINGE Biotecnolgie Avanzate, Naples, Italy. (6)Division of
Oncology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Center
for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (7)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Genomics 
and Computational Biology, Biomedical Graduate Studies, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (8)Department
of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital 
of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Division of Genetics, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (9)Department of
Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Division of Genetics, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of Molecular Medicine,
University of Rome "La Sapienza," Rome, Italy. Department of Biostatistics and
Epidemiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (10)Division of Oncology, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Center for Childhood Cancer Research,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Department of
Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman
School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Genomics and Computational Biology, Biomedical Graduate Studies, Perelman School 
of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

The genetic etiology of sporadic neuroblastoma is still largely obscure. In a
genome-wide association study, we identified single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNP) associated with neuroblastoma at the CASC15, BARD1, LMO1, DUSP12, HSD17B12,
HACE1, and LIN28B gene loci, but these explain only a small fraction of
neuroblastoma heritability. Other neuroblastoma susceptibility genes are likely
hidden among signals discarded by the multiple testing corrections. In this
study, we evaluated eight additional genes selected as candidates for further
study based on proven involvement in neuroblastoma differentiation. SNPs at these
candidate genes were tested for association with disease susceptibility in 2,101 
cases and 4,202 controls, with the associations found replicated in an
independent cohort of 459 cases and 809 controls. Replicated associations were
further studied for cis-effect using gene expression, transient overexpression,
silencing, and cellular differentiation assays. The neurofilament gene NEFL
harbored three SNPs associated with neuroblastoma (rs11994014: Pcombined =
0.0050; OR, 0.88; rs2979704: Pcombined = 0.0072; OR, 0.87; rs1059111: Pcombined =
0.0049; OR, 0.86). The protective allele of rs1059111 correlated with increased
NEFL expression. Biologic investigations showed that ectopic overexpression of
NEFL inhibited cell growth specifically in neuroblastoma cells carrying the
protective allele. NEFL overexpression also enhanced differentiation and impaired
the proliferation and anchorage-independent growth of cells with protective
allele and basal NEFL expression, while impairing invasiveness and proliferation 
of cells homozygous for the risk genotype. Clinically, high levels of NEFL
expression in primary neuroblastoma specimens were associated with better overall
survival (P = 0.03; HR, 0.68). Our results show that common variants of NEFL
influence neuroblastoma susceptibility and they establish that NEFL expression
influences disease initiation and progression.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4253722
PMID: 25312269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 10;5:5212. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6212.

Lin28/let-7 axis regulates aerobic glycolysis and cancer progression via PDK1.

Ma X(1), Li C(1), Sun L(1), Huang D(1), Li T(1), He X(1), Wu G(1), Yang Z(1),
Zhong X(1), Song L(2), Gao P(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research and CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and
Chronic Disease, Innovation Center for Cell Biology, School of Life Science,
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230027, China. (2)State Key 
Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China and Department of Experimental Research,
Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou 510060, China.

Aberrant expression of Lin28 and let-7 has been observed in many human
malignancies. However, its functions and underlying mechanisms remain largely
elusive. Here we show that aberrant expression of Lin28 and let-7 facilitates
aerobic glycolysis, or Warburg effect, in cancer cells. Mechanistically, we
discover that Lin28A and Lin28B enhance, whereas let-7 suppresses, aerobic
glycolysis via targeting pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 1, or PDK1, in a hypoxia- 
or hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)-independent manner, illustrating a novel
pathway to mediate aerobic glycolysis of cancer cells even in ambient oxygen
levels. Importantly, we further demonstrate that PDK1 is critical for Lin28A- and
Lin28B-mediated cancer proliferation both in vitro and in vivo, establishing a
previously unappreciated mechanism by which Lin28/let-7 axis facilitates Warburg 
effect to promote cancer progression. Our findings suggest a potential rationale 
to target PDK1 for cancer therapy in malignancies with aberrant expression of
Lin28 and let-7.

PMID: 25301052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(4):1166-74. doi: 10.1159/000366329. Epub 2014 Sep
22.

Down-regulation of miR-4500 promoted non-small cell lung cancer growth.

Zhang L(1), Qian J, Qiang Y, Huang H, Wang C, Li D, Xu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Jinling Hospital, School of Clinical
Medicine, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the lead cause of cancer-related mortality around the 
world. Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) accounts for nearly 85% of all case of 
lung cancer. Accumulating evidence revealed the importance of miRNAs in the
pathogenesis of NSCLC. Whether miR-4500 promotes NSCLC or not is still unknown.
The potential targeted genes needed to be investigated.
METHODS: The level of miR-4500 was measured by qRT-PCR. The role of miR-4500 in
patient survival was revealed by the Kaplan-Meier plot of overall survival of
NSCLC patients. miR-4500 was up or down regulated by miRNAs mimics or ASO
transfection. Cell proliferation and apoptosis were assayed by the MTT assay and 
FACS analysis separately. Targeted genes were predicted by a bioinformatic
algorithm and confirmed by the Dual Luciferase reporter assay system.
RESULTS: NSCLC cell lines and tissues showed lower level of miR-4500. High
miR-4500 expression was correlated with high patient survival rate. MiR-4500
overexpression inhibited NSCLC proliferation and induced apoptosis and vice
versa. LIN28B and NRAS were targeted by miR-4500.
CONCLUSIONS: Low expression of miR-4500 in NSCLC promoted tumor growth by
targeting LIN28B and NRAS. MiR-4500 may be a prognosis predictor and potential
target for NSCLC therapy.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25277326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Exp Mol Med. 2014 Oct 3;46:e116. doi: 10.1038/emm.2014.63.

miR-98 suppresses melanoma metastasis through a negative feedback loop with its
target gene IL-6.

Li F(1), Li XJ(2), Qiao L(1), Shi F(1), Liu W(1), Li Y(1), Dang YP(1), Gu WJ(1), 
Wang XG(3), Liu W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, The Air Force General Hospital of PLA, Beijing,
China. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, The Air Force General Hospital of
PLA, Beijing, China. (3)1] Department of Cell Biology and Institute of
Biomedicine, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou,
China [2] Jinan University and Hong Kong Baptist University Joint Laboratory of
Innovative Drug Development, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.

Dysregulated microRNA (miRNA) expression has a critical role in tumor development
and metastasis. However, the mechanism by which miRNAs control melanoma
metastasis is unknown. Here, we report reduced miR-98 expression in melanoma
tissues with increasing tumor stage as well as metastasis; its expression is also
negatively associated with melanoma patient survival. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that miR-98 inhibits melanoma cell migration in vitro as well as metastatic tumor
size in vivo. We also found that IL-6 is a target gene of miR-98, and IL-6
represses miR-98 levels via the Stat3-NF-<U+03BA>B-lin28B pathway. In an in vivo
melanoma model, we demonstrate that miR-98 reduces melanoma metastasis and
increases survival in part by reducing IL-6 levels; it also decreases Stat3 and
p65 phosphorylation as well as lin28B mRNA levels. These results suggest that
miR-98 inhibits melanoma metastasis in part through a novel miR-98-IL-6-negative 
feedback loop.

PMCID: PMC4221693
PMID: 25277211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. BMC Cancer. 2014 Sep 27;14:722. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-722.

Cancer stem-like sphere cells induced from de-differentiated hepatocellular
carcinoma-derived cell lines possess the resistance to anti-cancer drugs.

Hashimoto N, Tsunedomi R(1), Yoshimura K, Watanabe Y, Hazama S, Oka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Digestive Surgery and Surgical Oncology, Yamaguchi University
Graduate School of Medicine, 1-1-1 Minami-Kogushi, Ube, Yamaguchi 755-8505,
Japan. tsune-r@yamaguchi-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are thought to play important roles in
therapy-resistance. In this study, we induced cancer stem-like cells from
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines using a unique medium, and examined
their potential for resistance to anti-cancer drugs.
METHODS: The human HCC cell lines SK-HEP-1 (SK), HLE, Hep 3B, and HuH-7 were used
to induce cancer stem-like cells with our sphere induction medium supplemented
with neural survival factor-1. NANOG and LIN28A were examined as stemness
markers. Several surface markers for CSC such as CD24, CD44, CD44 variant, and
CD90 were analyzed by flow-cytometry. To assess the resistance to anti-cancer
drugs, the MTS assay, cell cycle analysis, and reactive oxygen species (ROS)
activity assay were performed.
RESULTS: Poorly differentiated HCC derived SK and undifferentiated HCC derived
HLE cell lines efficiently formed spheres of cells (SK-sphere and HLE-sphere),
but well-differentiated HCC-derived HuH-7 and Hep 3B cells did not. SK-spheres
showed increased NANOG, LIN28A, and ALDH1A1 mRNA levels compared to parental
cells. We observed more CD44 variant-positive cells in SK-spheres than in
parental cells. The cell viability of SK-spheres was significantly higher than
that of SK cells in the presence of several anti-cancer drugs except sorafenib
(1.7- to 7.3-fold, each P < 0.05). The cell cycle of SK-spheres was arrested at
the G0/G1 phase compared to SK cells. SK-spheres showed higher ABCG2 and HIF1A
mRNA expression and lower ROS production compared to parental cells.
CONCLUSION: Our novel method successfully induced cancer stem-like cells, which
possessed chemoresistance that was related to the cell cycle, drug efflux, and
ROS.

PMCID: PMC4190290
PMID: 25260650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Oncol. 2014 Dec;45(6):2421-9. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2647. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

A potential regulatory loop between Lin28B:miR-212 in androgen-independent
prostate cancer.

Borrego-Diaz E(1), Powers BC(1), Azizov V(1), Lovell S(2), Reyes R(1), Chapman
B(1), Tawfik O(3), McGregor D(4), Diaz FJ(3), Wang X(5), Veldhuizen PV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, University
of Kansas Medical Center, Westwood, KS 66205, USA. (2)Protein Structure
Laboratory, Del Shankel Structural Biology Center, University of Kansas, Main
Campus, Lawrence, KS 66047, USA. (3)University of Kansas Cancer Center, Kansas
City, KS 66160, USA. (4)Veterans Administration Medical Center, Kansas City, MO
64128, USA. (5)Genomic Facility, University of Kansas, Main Campus, Lawrence, KS 
66047, USA.

Lin28 is a family of RNA binding proteins and microRNA regulators. Two members of
this family have been identified: Lin28A and Lin28B, which are encoded by genes
localized in different chromosomes but share a high degree of sequence identity. 
The role of Lin28B in androgen-independent prostate cancer (AIPC) is not well
understood. Lin28B is expressed in all grades of prostatic carcinomas and
prostate cancer cell lines, but not in normal prostate tissue. In this study we
found that Lin28B co-localized in the nucleus and cytoplasm of the DU145 AIPC.
The expression of Lin28B protein positively correlated with the expression of the
c-Myc protein in the prostate cancer cell lines and silencing of Lin28B also
correlated with a lower expression of the c-Myc protein, but not with the
downregulation of c-Myc messenger RNA (mRNA) in the DU145 AIPC cells. We
hypothesized that Lin28B regul-ates the expression of c-Myc protein by altering
intermediate c-Myc suppressors. Therefore, a microRNA profile of DU145 cells was 
performed after Lin28B siRNA silencing. Nineteen microRNAs were upregulated and
eleven microRNAs were downregulated. The most upregulated microRNAs were miR-212 
and miR-2278. Prior reports have found that miR-212 is suppressed in prostate
cancer. We then ran TargetScan software to find potential target mRNAs of miR-212
and miR-2278, and it predicted Lin28B mRNA as a potential target of miR-212, but 
not miR-2278. TargetScan also predicted that c-Myc mRNA is not a potential target
of miR-212 or miR-2278. These observations suggest that Lin28B:miR-212 may work
as a regulatory loop in androgen-independent prostate cancer. Furthermore, we
report a predictive 2-fold symmetric model generated by the superposition of the 
Lin28A structure onto the I-TASSER model of Lin28B. This structural model of
Lin28B suggests that it shows unique microRNA binding characteristics. Thus, if
Lin28B were to bind miRNAs in a manner similar to Lin28A, conformational changes 
would be necessary to prevent steric clashes in the C-terminal and linker regions
between the CSD and ZNF domains.

PMCID: PMC4215582
PMID: 25201220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 Apr;82(4):481-8. doi: 10.1111/cen.12607. Epub 2014
Nov 3.

Expression of LIN28 and its regulatory microRNAs in adult adrenocortical cancer.

Faria AM(1), Sbiera S, Ribeiro TC, Soares IC, Mariani BM, Freire DS, de Sousa GR,
Lerario AM, Ronchi CL, Deutschbein T, Wakamatsu A, Alves VA, Zerbini MC, Mendonca
BB, Fragoso MC, Latronico AC, Fassnacht M, Almeida MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Suprarrenal & Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento,
Laboratório de Hormônios e Genética Molecular LIM42, Hospital das Clínicas da
Faculdade de Medicina da Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brasil.

OBJECTIVE: LIN28 control cells reprogramming and pluripotency mainly through
miRNA regulation and has been overexpressed in many advanced cancers. In this
study, we evaluated the prognostic role of LIN28 and its regulatory miRNAs in a
large cohort of adrenocortical tumours (ACTs).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: LIN28 protein expression was assessed in 266 adults ACTs
(78 adenomas and 188 carcinomas) from Brazil and Germany. LIN28A and LIN28B gene 
expression was analysed in 59 ACTs (31 adenomas and 28 carcinomas) and copy
number variation in 39 ACTs. In addition, we determined the expression of let-7
family, mir-9, mir-30 and mir-125 in 28 carcinomas.
RESULTS: LIN28A gene was overexpressed in aggressive ACCs when compared with
adenomas and nonaggressive ACCs, but no LIN28A copy number variation was found in
ACTs. Unexpectedly, weak LIN28 protein expression was significantly associated
with reduced disease-free survival in ACC patients (P = 0·01), but for overall
survival only a trend was detectable (P = 0·117). In the multivariate analysis,
only Ki67 index =10% (HR 4·6, P = 0·000) and weak LIN28 protein expression (HR
2·0, P = 0·03) were independent predictors of recurrence in ACC patients.
Interestingly, mir-9 expression, a negative LIN28A/B regulator, was significantly
higher in aggressive than in nonaggressive ACCs [2076 (from 36 to 9307) vs 133·4 
(from 2·4 to 5193); P = 0·011] and was highly associated with reduced overall (P 
= 0·01) and disease-free survival (P = 0·01). However, mir-9 prognostic role
should be further evaluated in a larger cohort.
CONCLUSION: Weak LIN28 protein expression was associated with recurrence in ACCs.
Additionally, overexpression of mir-9, a negative LIN28A regulator, was
associated with poor outcome.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25200669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jul 15;7(8):5083-92. eCollection 2014.

Lin28B is a novel prognostic marker in gastric adenocarcinoma.

Hu Q(1), Peng J(1), Liu W(2), He X(3), Cui L(4), Chen X(1), Yang M(1), Liu H(1), 
Liu S(5), Wang H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, West China Institute of Women and Children's Health,
West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University Chengdu 610041, China ;
Laboratory of Cell and Gene Therapy, West China Institute of Women and Children's
Health, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University Chengdu 610041,
China ; Department of Obstetric and Gynecologic, West China Second University
Hospital, Sichuan University Chengdu 610041, China ; Key Laboratory of Obstetric,
Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of Ministry of Education
Chengdu 610041, China. (2)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital of Sichuan
University 37 Guoxue Street, Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China. (3)Department of
Obstetric and Gynecologic, Henan Provincial People's Hospital Zhengzhou, Henan
450003, China. (4)Department of Gynecological Oncology, Second People's Hospital 
of Sichuan (Sichuan Cancer Hospital) Chengdu, Sichuan 610041, China.
(5)Laboratory of Cell and Gene Therapy, West China Institute of Women and
Children's Health, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University
Chengdu 610041, China ; Department of Obstetric and Gynecologic, West China
Second University Hospital, Sichuan University Chengdu 610041, China ; Key
Laboratory of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases and Birth Defects of 
Ministry of Education Chengdu 610041, China. (6)Laboratory of Genetics, West
China Institute of Women and Children's Health, West China Second University
Hospital, Sichuan University Chengdu 610041, China ; Department of Obstetric and 
Gynecologic, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University Chengdu
610041, China ; Key Laboratory of Obstetric, Gynecologic and Pediatric Diseases
and Birth Defects of Ministry of Education Chengdu 610041, China.

Lin28B, a homologue of Lin28, represses biogenesis of let-7 microRNAs with a role
in tumorigenesis and is considered a potential therapeutic target for various
human cancers. The aim of the study was to identify the clinical significance of 
Lin28B in gastric adenocarcinoma (GAC). We examined the expression of Lin28B in
97 human gastric cancer samples with 32 samples of non-dysplastic tissues by
immunohistochemistry. In the 97 GAC cases, 42 were with high Lin28B expression.
The expression levels of Lin28B proteins in GAC were higher than in corresponding
adjacent normal tissues (P=0.001). Significant correlations were noted between
Lin28B expression and lymph node status (P=0.005), TNM stage (P < 0.001), tumor
invasion (P=0.036), and differentiation (P=0.001) of GAC patients. The
Kaplan-Meier estimates showed a negative correlation of overall 5-year survival
rate with Lin28B expression where higher expression resulted in poorer prognosis 
in GAC. In univariate analysis, lymph node metastasis, TNM stage, serosal
invasion, Lin28B expression as well as differentiation grade could predict the
prognosis of GAC patients (P=0.002, P < 0.001, P=0.003, P < 0.001, P=0.001,
respectively). Multivariate analysis revealed that the expression level of Lin28B
(P < 0.001), TNM stage (P < 0.001) as well as differentiation grade (P < 0.001)
were the three potential independent prognostic factors in our study [Hazard
ratio (HR)=2.108 and P=0.017, HR=1.994 and P=0.018, HR=1.939 and P=0.046,
respectively]. Our findings point to the prognostic role of Lin28B in GAC, and
indicate Lin28B as a potential therapeutic target of GAC patients.

PMCID: PMC4152071
PMID: 25197381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Sep 4;5:e1407. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.374.

PSP94, an upstream signaling mediator of prostasin found highly elevated in
ovarian cancer.

Ma JX(1), Yan BX(2), Zhang J(3), Jiang BH(4), Guo Y(5), Riedel H(5), Mueller
MD(5), Remick SC(5), Yu JJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Department of Basic
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, and Mary Babb Randolph Cancer
Center, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, West Virginia, USA [2] Department of Molecular Microbiology and
Immunology, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (2)1] Department of Biochemistry, School of
Medicine, Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, and
Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, West
Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA [2] IcesnowYanyan Bioscience 
Association, Beijing, China. (3)1] IcesnowYanyan Bioscience Association, Beijing,
China [2] Beijing Animal Science Institute, Beijing, China. (4)Department of
Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. (5)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Department 
of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, and Mary Babb Randolph
Cancer Center, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University,
Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.

Ovarian cancer is a leading cause of cancer death as diagnosis is frequently
delayed to an advanced stage. Effective biomarkers and screening strategies for
early detection are urgently needed. In the current study, we identify PSP94 as a
key upstream factor in mediating prostasin (a protein previously reported to be
overexpressed in ovarian cancer) signaling that regulates prostasin expression
and action in ovarian cancer cells. PSP94 is overexpressed in ovarian cancer cell
lines and patients, and is significantly correlated with prostasin levels.
Signaling pathway analysis demonstrated that both PSP94 and prostasin, as
potential upstream regulators of the Lin28b/Let-7 pathway, regulate Lin28b and
its downstream partner Let-7 in ovarian cancer cells. Expression of PSP94 and
prostasin show a strong correlation with the expression levels of Lin28b/Let-7 in
ovarian cancer patients. Thus, PSP94/prostasin axis appears to be linked to the
Lin28b/Let-7 loop, a well-known signaling mechanism in oncogenesis in general
that is also altered in ovarian cancer. The findings suggest that PSP94 and
PSP94/prostasin axis are key factors and potential therapeutic targets or early
biomarkers for ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4540204
PMID: 25188517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 4;9(9):e106924. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106924. eCollection
2014.

LIN28A expression reduces sickling of cultured human erythrocytes.

de Vasconcellos JF(1), Fasano RM(2), Lee YT(1), Kaushal M(3), Byrnes C(1), Meier 
ER(3), Anderson M(1), Rabel A(1), Braylan R(4), Stroncek DF(5), Miller JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genomics and Therapeutics Section, Molecular Medicine Branch,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. (2)Center for
Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's National Medical Center, Washington,
District of Columbia, United States of America. (3)Molecular Genomics and
Therapeutics Section, Molecular Medicine Branch, National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland, United States of America; Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders,
Children's National Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia, United
States of America. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Clinical Center,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
(5)Cell Processing Section, Department of Transfusion Medicine, Clinical Center, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.

Induction of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) has therapeutic importance for patients with 
sickle cell disease (SCD) and the beta-thalassemias. It was recently reported
that increased expression of LIN28 proteins or decreased expression of its target
let-7 miRNAs enhances HbF levels in cultured primary human erythroblasts from
adult healthy donors. Here LIN28A effects were studied further using erythrocytes
cultured from peripheral blood progenitor cells of pediatric subjects with SCD.
Transgenic expression of LIN28A was accomplished by lentiviral transduction in
CD34(+) sickle cells cultivated ex vivo in serum-free medium. LIN28A
over-expression (LIN28A-OE) increased HbF, reduced beta (sickle)-globin, and
strongly suppressed all members of the let-7 family of miRNAs. LIN28A-OE did not 
affect erythroblast differentiation or prevent enucleation, but it significantly 
reduced or ameliorated the sickling morphologies of the enucleated erythrocytes.

PMCID: PMC4154803
PMID: 25188417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Cancer. 2014 Nov 15;135(10):2249-61. doi: 10.1002/ijc.29077. Epub 2014 Aug 
14.

Recent insights into the biology of neuroblastoma.

Schleiermacher G(1), Janoueix-Lerosey I, Delattre O.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe SIRIC Recherche Translationnelle en Oncologie Pédiatrique, Département 
de Recherche Translationnelle et Inserm U830, Centre de Recherche, Paris Cedex,
05, France; Département de pédiatrie, Institut Curie, Paris Cedex, 05, France;
Unité Génétique et Biologie des Cancers, Inserm U830, Centre de Recherche,
Institut Curie, Paris Cedex, 05, France.

Neuroblastoma (NB) is an embryonal tumor of the sympathetic nervous system which 
accounts for 8-10% of pediatric cancers. It is characterized by a broad spectrum 
of clinical behaviors from spontaneous regression to fatal outcome despite
aggressive therapies. Considerable progress has been made recently in the
germline and somatic genetic characterization of patients and tumors. Indeed,
predisposition genes that account for a significant proportion of familial and
syndromic cases have been identified and genome-wide association studies have
retrieved a number of susceptibility loci. In addition, genome-wide sequencing,
copy-number and expression studies have been conducted on tumors and have
detected important gene modifications, profiles and signatures that have strong
implications for the therapeutic stratification of patients. The identification
of major players in NB oncogenesis, including MYCN, ALK, PHOX2B and LIN28B, has
enabled the development of new animal models. Our review focuses on these recent 
advances, on the insights they provide on the mechanisms involved in NB
development and their applications for the clinical management of patients.

© 2014 UICC.

PMID: 25124476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Cancer Cell. 2014 Aug 11;26(2):248-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.06.018.

Lin28b is sufficient to drive liver cancer and necessary for its maintenance in
murine models.

Nguyen LH(1), Robinton DA(2), Seligson MT(2), Wu L(3), Li L(1), Rakheja D(4),
Comerford SA(5), Ramezani S(6), Sun X(6), Parikh MS(1), Yang EH(1), Powers JT(2),
Shinoda G(2), Shah SP(2), Hammer RE(7), Daley GQ(8), Zhu H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Research Institute, Departments of Pediatrics and Internal
Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(2)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston,
Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Children's Research Institute, Departments of
Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA; Organ Transplant Center, First Affiliated Hospital
of Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China. (4)Departments of Pathology 
and Pediatrics, Children's Medical Center and University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (5)Department of Molecular Genetics,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(6)Department of Radiology and Advanced Imaging Research Center, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (7)Department of
Biochemistry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA. (8)Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital Boston,
Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
george.daley@childrens.harvard.edu. (9)Children's Research Institute, Departments
of Pediatrics and Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Electronic address: hao.zhu@utsouthwestern.edu.

Lin28a/b are RNA-binding proteins that influence stem cell maintenance,
metabolism, and oncogenesis. Poorly differentiated, aggressive cancers often
overexpress Lin28, but its role in tumor initiation or maintenance has not been
definitively addressed. We report that LIN28B overexpression is sufficient to
initiate hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma in murine models. We also
detected Lin28b overexpression in MYC-driven hepatoblastomas, and liver-specific 
deletion of Lin28a/b reduced tumor burden, extended latency, and prolonged
survival. Both intravenous siRNA against Lin28b and conditional Lin28b deletion
reduced tumor burden and prolonged survival. Igf2bp proteins are upregulated, and
Igf2bp3 is required in the context of LIN28B overexpression to promote growth.
Therefore, multiple murine models demonstrate that Lin28b is both sufficient to
initiate liver cancer and necessary for its maintenance.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4145706
PMID: 25117712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;74(17):4720-30. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0960. Epub
2014 Jun 23.

IL-1ß-mediated repression of microRNA-101 is crucial for inflammation-promoted
lung tumorigenesis.

Wang L(1), Zhang LF(2), Wu J(3), Xu SJ(3), Xu YY(3), Li D(4), Lou JT(5), Liu
MF(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. Center for RNA Research, State Key Laboratory of
Molecular Biology-University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(2)Center for RNA Research, State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology-University 
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Molecular Andrology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai
Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.
(3)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. (4)Shanghai Information Center for Life Sciences,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China. (5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Shanghai Chest Hospital,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. loujiatao@126.com
mfliu@sibcb.ac.cn. (6)Center for RNA Research, State Key Laboratory of Molecular 
Biology-University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China. Shanghai Key 
Laboratory of Molecular Andrology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology,
Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai, China. loujiatao@126.com mfliu@sibcb.ac.cn.

Inflammatory stimuli clearly contribute to lung cancer development and
progression, but the underlying pathogenic mechanisms are not fully understood.
We found that the proinflammatory cytokine IL-1ß is dramatically elevated in the 
serum of patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). In vitro studies
showed that IL-1ß promoted the proliferation and migration of NSCLC cells.
Mechanistically, IL-1ß acted through the COX2-HIF1a pathway to repress the
expression of microRNA-101 (miR-101), a microRNA with an established role in
tumor suppression. Lin28B was identified as critical effector target of miR-101
with its repression of Lin28B, a critical aspect of tumor suppression. Overall,
IL-1ß upregulated Lin28B by downregulating miR-101. Interestingly,
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition by aspirin or celecoxib abrogated IL-1ß-mediated
repression of miR-101 and IL-1ß-mediated activation of Lin28B along with their
stimulatory effects on NSCLC cell proliferation and migration. Together, our
findings defined an IL-1ß-miR-101-Lin28B pathway as a novel regulatory axis of
pathogenic inflammatory signaling in NSCLC.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24958470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Nat Commun. 2014 Jun 19;5:4187. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5187.

Interferon controls SUMO availability via the Lin28 and let-7 axis to impede
virus replication.

Sahin U(1), Ferhi O(1), Carnec X(1), Zamborlini A(2), Peres L(1), Jollivet F(1), 
Vitaliano-Prunier A(1), de Thé H(3), Lallemand-Breitenbach V(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital St Louis, 1 Avenue
Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France [2] INSERM U944, Equipe labellisée
par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie,
Hôpital St Louis, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France [3]
CNRS UMR 7212, Hôpital St Louis, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10,
France. (2)1] Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Hôpital St Louis, 1 
Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France [2] INSERM U944, Equipe
labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer, Institut Universitaire
d'Hématologie, Hôpital St Louis, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10,
France [3] CNRS UMR 7212, Hôpital St Louis, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475
Paris Cedex 10, France [4] Department CASER, Conservatoire National des Arts et
Métiers, Paris 75003, France. (3)1] Université Paris Diderot, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Hôpital St Louis, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France
[2] INSERM U944, Equipe labellisée par la Ligue Nationale contre le Cancer,
Institut Universitaire d'Hématologie, Hôpital St Louis, 1 Avenue Claude
Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France [3] CNRS UMR 7212, Hôpital St Louis, 1
Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75475 Paris Cedex 10, France [4].

Small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO) protein conjugation onto target proteins 
regulates multiple cellular functions, including defence against pathogens,
stemness and senescence. SUMO1 peptides are limiting in quantity and are thus
mainly conjugated to high-affinity targets. Conjugation of SUMO2/3 paralogues is 
primarily stress inducible and may initiate target degradation. Here we
demonstrate that the expression of SUMO1/2/3 is dramatically enhanced by
interferons through an miRNA-based mechanism involving the Lin28/let-7 axis, a
master regulator of stemness. Normal haematopoietic progenitors indeed display
much higher SUMO contents than their differentiated progeny. Critically, SUMOs
contribute to the antiviral effects of interferons against HSV1 or HIV.
Promyelocytic leukemia (PML) nuclear bodies are interferon-induced domains, which
facilitate sumoylation of a subset of targets. Our findings thus identify an
integrated interferon-responsive PML/SUMO pathway that impedes viral replication 
by enhancing SUMO conjugation and possibly also modifying the repertoire of
targets. Interferon-enhanced post-translational modifications may be essential
for senescence or stem cell self-renewal, and initiate SUMO-dependent
proteolysis.

PMID: 24942926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2014 Jun;29(5):215-20. doi: 10.1089/cbr.2014.1610.
Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Lin28B expression correlates with aggressive clinicopathological characteristics 
in breast invasive ductal carcinoma.

Xie R(1), Wang Y, Nie W, Huang W, Song W, Wang Z, Guan X.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, Southern Medical
University , Guangzhou, China .

Lin28B is a RNA-binding protein that inhibits the let-7 microRNA family and acts 
as an oncogene in various human malignant diseases. Conversely, the members of
let-7 family function as tumor suppressers and are often inactivated in cancers. 
The interaction of Lin28B/let-7 plays a crucial part of tumorigenesis. In this
study, the authors examined the Lin28B expression using immunohistochemistry in
190 breast cancers and analyzed the correlation of Lin28B immunostaining and
clinicopathological characteristics. Breast cancer patients previously diagnosed 
with invasive ductal carcinomas were enrolled in this study. All cases went
through surgical procedures as the initial treatment. The characteristics of
every case were collected, including tumor size, pathologic grade, metastatic
lymphoid nodes, and estrogen receptor a (ERa), progesterone receptor (PR), and
HER2 status. The immunostaining was scored by two independent investigators.
Eighty-three (43.7%) of 190 cases showed positive expression of Lin28B. Lin28B
immunostaining was increased in tumors compared with the adjacent tissues.
Overexpression of Lin28B was linked to poor differentiation, advanced-stage
disease, and Ki67-positive status (all p<0.05). Besides, Lin28B expression was
significantly different among breast cancer subtypes. This study addresses the
role of Lin28B in breast cancers and provides insight of its predictive effects
in disease development.

PMCID: PMC4050713
PMID: 24885919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cancer Lett. 2014 Aug 28;351(1):151-61. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2014.05.011. Epub
2014 May 28.

XMD8-92 inhibits pancreatic tumor xenograft growth via a DCLK1-dependent
mechanism.

Sureban SM(1), May R(2), Weygant N(3), Qu D(3), Chandrakesan P(3),
Bannerman-Menson E(4), Ali N(5), Pantazis P(4), Westphalen CB(6), Wang TC(6),
Houchen CW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States; The Peggy and Charles Stephenson 
Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States. (2)Department of Medicine,
The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104,
United States; Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK
73104, United States. (3)Department of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States. (4)COARE
Biotechnology Inc., Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States. (5)Department of
Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK
73104, United States; The Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma
City, OK 73104, United States. (6)Division of Digestive and Liver Diseases,
Department of Medicine, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032,
United States. (7)Department of Medicine, The University of Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States; Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States; The Peggy and
Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, United States.
Electronic address: courtney-houchen@ouhsc.edu.

XMD8-92 is a kinase inhibitor with anti-cancer activity against lung and cervical
cancers, but its effect on pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) remains
unknown. Doublecortin-like kinase1 (DCLK1) is upregulated in various cancers
including PDAC. In this study, we showed that XMD8-92 inhibits AsPC-1 cancer cell
proliferation and tumor xenograft growth. XMD8-92 treated tumors demonstrated
significant downregulation of DCLK1 and several of its downstream targets
(including c-MYC, KRAS, NOTCH1, ZEB1, ZEB2, SNAIL, SLUG, OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, KLF4,
LIN28, VEGFR1, and VEGFR2) via upregulation of tumor suppressor miRNAs let-7a,
miR-144, miR-200a-c, and miR-143/145; it did not however affect BMK1 downstream
genes p21 and p53. These data taken together suggest that XMD8-92 treatment
results in inhibition of DCLK1 and downstream oncogenic pathways (EMT,
pluripotency, angiogenesis and anti-apoptotic), and is a promising
chemotherapeutic agent against PDAC.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 24880079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nature. 2014 Jun 26;510(7506):537-41. doi: 10.1038/nature13268. Epub 2014 May 18.

Decoding the regulatory landscape of medulloblastoma using DNA methylation
sequencing.

Hovestadt V(1), Jones DT(2), Picelli S(3), Wang W(3), Kool M(4), Northcott PA(4),
Sultan M(5), Stachurski K(6), Ryzhova M(7), Warnatz HJ(5), Ralser M(5), Brun
S(8), Bunt J(9), Jäger N(10), Kleinheinz K(11), Erkek S(12), Weber UD(3),
Bartholomae CC(13), von Kalle C(13), Lawerenz C(14), Eils J(14), Koster J(15),
Versteeg R(15), Milde T(16), Witt O(16), Schmidt S(17), Wolf S(17), Pietsch
T(18), Rutkowski S(19), Scheurlen W(20), Taylor MD(21), Brors B(10), Felsberg
J(22), Reifenberger G(22), Borkhardt A(6), Lehrach H(5), Wechsler-Reya RJ(8),
Eils R(23), Yaspo ML(5), Landgraf P(6), Korshunov A(24), Zapatka M(3), Radlwimmer
B(3), Pfister SM(25), Lichter P(26).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2]. (2)1] Division of Pediatric 
Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2]. (3)Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany.
(4)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im 
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (5)Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-73, Berlin 14195, Germany. (6)Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Hematology and Clinical Immunology, Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Moorenstrasse 5, Düsseldorf 40225, Germany. (7)Department of
Neuropathology, NN Burdenko Neurosurgical Institute, 4th Tverskaya-Yamskaya 16,
Moscow 125047, Russia. (8)Tumor Initiation and Maintenance Program, National
Cancer Institute (NCI)-Designated Cancer Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, 2880 Torrey Pines Scenic Drive, La Jolla, California 92037, USA. (9)1]
Queensland Brain Institute, University of Queensland, QBI Building, St Lucia,
Queensland 4072, Australia [2] Department of Oncogenomics, AMC, University of
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, the Netherlands. (10)Division of
Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer 
Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (11)1] Division of Molecular Genetics,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, 
Germany [2] Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (12)1] Division of
Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer
Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] European Molecular Biology Laboratory
(EMBL), Meyerhofstrasse 1, Heidelberg 69117, Germany. (13)1] Division of
Translational Oncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld
280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 460, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (14)Data Management Facility,
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, 
Germany. (15)Department of Oncogenomics, AMC, University of Amsterdam,
Meibergdreef 9, Amsterdam 1105 AZ, the Netherlands. (16)1] Department of
Pediatric Oncology, Hematology & Immunology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 430, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] Clinical Cooperation Unit
Pediatric Oncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld
280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (17)Genomics and Proteomics Core Facility, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120,
Germany. (18)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center,
Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 25, Bonn 53105, Germany. (19)Department of Paediatric
Haematology and Oncology, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Martinistrasse 52, Hamburg 20246, Germany. (20)Cnopf'sche Kinderklinik, Nürnberg 
Children's Hospital, St.-Johannis-Mühlgasse 19, Nürnberg 90419, Germany. (21)1]
Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain
Tumour Research Centre, Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue,
Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada [2] Division of Neurosurgery, Hospital for Sick 
Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada [3] Department 
of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario 
M5S 1A8, Canada. (22)1] Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich Heine University
Düsseldorf, Moorenstrasse 5, Düsseldorf 40225, Germany [2] German Consortium for 
Translational Cancer Research (DKTK), German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (23)1] Division of Theoretical
Bioinformatics, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology
(IPMB), University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [3] Bioquant Center, 
University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 267, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [4] 
Heidelberg Center for Personalised Oncology (DKFZ-HIPO), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (24)1] Department of Neuropathology, University of
Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 220, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] Clinical
Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im
Neuenheimer Feld 220-221, Heidelberg, 69120 Germany. (25)1] Division of Pediatric
Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280,
Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] Department of Pediatric Oncology, Hematology &
Immunology, Heidelberg University Hospital, Im Neuenheimer Feld 430, Heidelberg
69120, Germany. (26)1] Division of Molecular Genetics, German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg 69120, Germany [2] Heidelberg 
Center for Personalised Oncology (DKFZ-HIPO), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, Heidelberg
69120, Germany.

Epigenetic alterations, that is, disruption of DNA methylation and chromatin
architecture, are now acknowledged as a universal feature of tumorigenesis.
Medulloblastoma, a clinically challenging, malignant childhood brain tumour, is
no exception. Despite much progress from recent genomics studies, with recurrent 
changes identified in each of the four distinct tumour subgroups
(WNT-pathway-activated, SHH-pathway-activated, and the less-well-characterized
Group 3 and Group 4), many cases still lack an obvious genetic driver. Here we
present whole-genome bisulphite-sequencing data from thirty-four human and five
murine tumours plus eight human and three murine normal controls, augmented with 
matched whole-genome, RNA and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing data. This
comprehensive data set allowed us to decipher several features underlying the
interplay between the genome, epigenome and transcriptome, and its effects on
medulloblastoma pathophysiology. Most notable were highly prevalent regions of
hypomethylation correlating with increased gene expression, extending tens of
kilobases downstream of transcription start sites. Focal regions of low
methylation linked to transcription-factor-binding sites shed light on
differential transcriptional networks between subgroups, whereas increased
methylation due to re-normalization of repressed chromatin in DNA methylation
valleys was positively correlated with gene expression. Large, partially
methylated domains affecting up to one-third of the genome showed increased
mutation rates and gene silencing in a subgroup-specific fashion. Epigenetic
alterations also affected novel medulloblastoma candidate genes (for example,
LIN28B), resulting in alternative promoter usage and/or differential messenger
RNA/microRNA expression. Analysis of mouse medulloblastoma and precursor-cell
methylation demonstrated a somatic origin for many alterations. Our data provide 
insights into the epigenetic regulation of transcription and genome organization 
in medulloblastoma pathogenesis, which are probably also of importance in a wider
developmental and disease context.

PMID: 24847876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Acta Neuropathol. 2014 Aug;128(2):291-303. doi: 10.1007/s00401-014-1291-1. Epub
2014 May 20.

CNS-PNETs with C19MC amplification and/or LIN28 expression comprise a distinct
histogenetic diagnostic and therapeutic entity.

Spence T(1), Sin-Chan P, Picard D, Barszczyk M, Hoss K, Lu M, Kim SK, Ra YS,
Nakamura H, Fangusaro J, Hwang E, Kiehna E, Toledano H, Wang Y, Shi Q, Johnston
D, Michaud J, La Spina M, Buccoliero AM, Adamek D, Camelo-Piragua S, Peter
Collins V, Jones C, Kabbara N, Jurdi N, Varlet P, Perry A, Scharnhorst D, Fan X, 
Muraszko KM, Eberhart CG, Ng HK, Gururangan S, Van Meter T, Remke M, Lafay-Cousin
L, Chan JA, Sirachainan N, Pomeroy SL, Clifford SC, Gajjar A, Shago M, Halliday
W, Taylor MD, Grundy R, Lau CC, Phillips J, Bouffet E, Dirks PB, Hawkins CE,
Huang A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, The Hospital for
Sick Children, Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumor Research Centre, Peter Gilgan 
CRL,686 Bay Street, 17th Floor, 179712, Toronto, ON, M5G0A4, Canada.

Comment in
    Acta Neuropathol. 2014 Aug;128(2):305-8.

Amplification of the C19MC oncogenic miRNA cluster and high LIN28 expression has 
been linked to a distinctly aggressive group of cerebral CNS-PNETs (group 1
CNS-PNETs) arising in young children. In this study, we sought to evaluate the
diagnostic specificity of C19MC and LIN28, and the clinical and biological
spectra of C19MC amplified and/or LIN28+ CNS-PNETs. We interrogated 450 pediatric
brain tumors using FISH and IHC analyses and demonstrate that C19MC alteration is
restricted to a sub-group of CNS-PNETs with high LIN28 expression; however, LIN28
immunopositivity was not exclusive to CNS-PNETs but was also detected in a
proportion of other malignant pediatric brain tumors including rhabdoid brain
tumors and malignant gliomas. C19MC amplified/LIN28+ group 1 CNS-PNETs arose
predominantly in children <4 years old; a majority arose in the cerebrum but 24 %
(13/54) of tumors had extra-cerebral origins. Notably, group 1 CNS-PNETs
encompassed several histologic classes including embryonal tumor with abundant
neuropil and true rosettes (ETANTR), medulloepithelioma, ependymoblastoma and
CNS-PNETs with variable differentiation. Strikingly, gene expression and
methylation profiling analyses revealed a common molecular signature enriched for
primitive neural features, high LIN28/LIN28B and DNMT3B expression for all group 
1 CNS-PNETs regardless of location or tumor histology. Our collective findings
suggest that current known histologic categories of CNS-PNETs which include
ETANTRs, medulloepitheliomas, ependymoblastomas in various CNS locations,
comprise a common molecular and diagnostic entity and identify inhibitors of the 
LIN28/let7/PI3K/mTOR axis and DNMT3B as promising therapeutics for this distinct 
histogenetic entity.

PMCID: PMC4159569
PMID: 24839957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Biol Reprod. 2014 Jun;90(6):131. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.118703. Epub 2014
May 14.

Lin28a is dormant, functional, and dispensable during mouse oocyte-to-embryo
transition.

Flemr M(1), Moravec M(1), Libova V(1), Sedlacek R(1), Svoboda P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech
Republic, Prague, Czech Republic. (2)Institute of Molecular Genetics of the
Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic
svobodap@img.cas.cz.

The oocyte-to-embryo transition (OET) denotes transformation of a highly
differentiated oocyte into totipotent blastomeres of the early mammalian embryo. 
OET depends exclusively on maternal RNAs and proteins accumulated during oocyte
growth, which implies importance of post-transcriptional control of gene
expression. OET includes replacement of abundant maternal microRNAs (miRNAs),
enriched also in differentiated cells and exemplified by the Let-7 family, with
embryonic miRNAs common in pluripotent stem cells (the miR-290 family in the
mouse). Lin28a and its homolog Lin28b encode RNA-binding proteins, which
interfere with Let-7 maturation and facilitate reprogramming of induced
pluripotent stem cells. Both Lin28a and Lin28b transcripts are abundant in mouse 
oocytes. To test the role of maternal expression of Lin28a and Lin28b during
oocyte-to-zygote reprogramming, we generated mice with oocyte-specific knockdown 
of both genes by using transgenic RNA interference. Lin28a and Lin28b are
dispensable during oocyte growth because their knockdown has no effect on Let-7a 
levels in fully grown germinal vesicle (GV)-intact oocytes. Furthermore,
transgenic females were fertile and produced healthy offspring, and their overall
breeding performance was comparable to that of wild-type mice. At the same time, 
2-cell embryos derived from transgenic females showed up-regulation of mature
Let-7, suggesting that maternally provided LIN28A and LIN28B function during
zygotic genome activation. Consistent with this conclusion is increased
translation of Lin28a transcripts upon resumption of meiosis. Our data imply dual
repression of Let-7 during OET in the mouse model, the selective suppression of
Let-7 biogenesis by Lin28 homologs superimposed on previously reported global
suppression of miRNA activity.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 24829024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Eur J Cancer. 2014 Jul;50(10):1706-16. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.03.008. Epub 2014
Apr 26.

Genetic variants of the LIN28B gene predict severe radiation pneumonitis in
patients with non-small cell lung cancer treated with definitive radiation
therapy.

Wen J(1), Liu H(2), Wang Q(3), Liu Z(2), Li Y(2), Xiong H(3), Xu T(4), Li P(3),
Wang LE(3), Gomez DR(4), Mohan R(4), Komaki R(4), Liao Z(5), Wei Q(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Navy General Hospital, Beijing, China;
Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA. (3)Department of Epidemiology, The University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address: zliao@mdanderson.org. 
(6)Duke Cancer Institute, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. 
Electronic address: qingyi.wei@duke.edu.

BACKGROUND: LIN28 is an RNA-binding protein that not only plays key roles in
multiple cellular developmental processes and tumourigenesis, but also is
involved in tissue inflammatory response. However, no published study has
investigated associations between genetic variants in LIN28 and radiation-induced
pneumonitis (RP) in patients with non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) treated with
definitive radiation therapy.
METHODS: We genotyped eight potentially functional single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of LIN28A (rs11247946 T>C, rs3811464 C>T, rs11581746 T>C,
and rs12728900 G>A) and LIN28B (rs314280 G>A, rs12194974 G>A, rs17065417 A>C and 
rs314276 C>A) in 362 patients with NSCLC, who received definitive
radio(chemo)therapy. The associations between RP risk and genotypes were assessed
by hazards ratio (HR) in Cox proportional hazards regression analysis with time
to event considered with and without adjustment for potential confounders.
RESULTS: Multivariate analyses found that patients carrying LIN28B rs314280 AG
and AA/AG or rs314276 AC and AA/AC genotypes had a higher risk of grade <U+2A7E>3 RP
(for rs314280 AG and AA/AG versus GG, adjusted HR=2.97 and 2.23, 95% confidence
interval (CI)=1.32-6.72 and 1.01-4.94, P=0.009 and 0.048, respectively; for
rs314276 AC and AA/AC versus CC, adjusted HR=2.30 and 2.00, 95% CI=1.24-4.28 and 
1.11-3.62, and P=0.008 and 0.022, respectively). Further stratified analyses
showed a more consistent and profound risk in the subgroups of age <65years,
males, stage III/IV, ever smokers, having radio-chemotherapy and mean lung dose
(MLD) <U+2A7E>19.0Gy.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variants of LIN28B, but not LIN28A, may be biomarkers for
susceptibility to severe RP in NSCLC patients. Large, prospective studies are
needed to confirm our findings.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4155498
PMID: 24780874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Genes Dev. 2014 May 1;28(9):971-82. doi: 10.1101/gad.237149.113. Epub 2014 Apr
14.

Lin28 sustains early renal progenitors and induces Wilms tumor.

Urbach A(1), Yermalovich A, Zhang J, Spina CS, Zhu H, Perez-Atayde AR, Shukrun R,
Charlton J, Sebire N, Mifsud W, Dekel B, Pritchard-Jones K, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 
Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA;

Comment in
    Genes Dev. 2014 May 1;28(9):923-5.
    J Urol. 2015 Feb;193(2):730-1.

Wilms Tumor, the most common pediatric kidney cancer, evolves from the failure of
terminal differentiation of the embryonic kidney. Here we show that
overexpression of the heterochronic regulator Lin28 during kidney development in 
mice markedly expands nephrogenic progenitors by blocking their final wave of
differentiation, ultimately resulting in a pathology highly reminiscent of Wilms 
tumor. Using lineage-specific promoters to target Lin28 to specific cell types,
we observed Wilms tumor only when Lin28 is aberrantly expressed in multiple
derivatives of the intermediate mesoderm, implicating the cell of origin as a
multipotential renal progenitor. We show that withdrawal of Lin28 expression
reverts tumorigenesis and markedly expands the numbers of glomerulus-like
structures and that tumor formation is suppressed by enforced expression of Let-7
microRNA. Finally, we demonstrate overexpression of the LIN28B paralog in a
significant percentage of human Wilms tumor. Our data thus implicate the
Lin28/Let-7 pathway in kidney development and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4018495
PMID: 24732380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 9;9(4):e94231. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094231. eCollection 
2014.

Rapid and efficient conversion of integration-free human induced pluripotent stem
cells to GMP-grade culture conditions.

Durruthy-Durruthy J(1), Briggs SF(1), Awe J(2), Ramathal CY(1), Karumbayaram
S(3), Lee PC(2), Heidmann JD(4), Clark A(5), Karakikes I(6), Loh KM(7), Wu JC(6),
Hoffman AR(4), Byrne J(2), Reijo Pera RA(1), Sebastiano V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Department of Genetics, Stanford University,
Stanford, California, United States of America. (2)Eli and Edythe Broad Center
for Regenerative Medicine & Stem Cell Research, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of America; Department of
Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America. (3)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for
Regenerative Medicine & Stem Cell Research, University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, United States of America; Department of Microbiology,
Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America. (4)Veterans Affairs Palo Alto
Health Care System, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, United States of 
America. (5)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine & Stem Cell
Research, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America; Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, 
Molecular Biology Institute, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, United States of America. (6)Stanford Cardiovascular Institute,
Stanford University, Stanford, California, United States of America; Department
of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California,
United States of America. (7)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, United States of America.

Data suggest that clinical applications of human induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSCs) will be realized. Nonetheless, clinical applications will require hiPSCs
that are free of exogenous DNA and that can be manufactured through Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP). Optimally, derivation of hiPSCs should be rapid and
efficient in order to minimize manipulations, reduce potential for accumulation
of mutations and minimize financial costs. Previous studies reported the use of
modified synthetic mRNAs to reprogram fibroblasts to a pluripotent state. Here,
we provide an optimized, fully chemically defined and feeder-free protocol for
the derivation of hiPSCs using synthetic mRNAs. The protocol results in
derivation of fully reprogrammed hiPSC lines from adult dermal fibroblasts in
less than two weeks. The hiPSC lines were successfully tested for their identity,
purity, stability and safety at a GMP facility and cryopreserved. To our
knowledge, as a proof of principle, these are the first integration-free iPSCs
lines that were reproducibly generated through synthetic mRNA reprogramming that 
could be putatively used for clinical purposes.

PMCID: PMC3981795
PMID: 24718618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Rep. 2014 Apr 24;7(2):539-51. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.015. Epub 2014
Apr 3.

IMP3 RNP safe houses prevent miRNA-directed HMGA2 mRNA decay in cancer and
development.

Jønson L(1), Christiansen J(2), Hansen TV(1), Vikeså J(1), Yamamoto Y(3), Nielsen
FC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, 2100
Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Center for Computational and Applied Transcriptomics,
Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.
(3)Department of Molecular Pathology and Tumor Pathology, Akita University, 1-1-1
Hondo, Japan. (4)Center for Genomic Medicine, Rigshospitalet, University of
Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: fcn@rh.dk.

The IMP3 RNA-binding protein is associated with metastasis and poor outcome in
human cancer. Using solid cancer transcriptome data, we found that IMP3
correlates with HMGA2 mRNA expression. Cytoplasmic IMP3 granules contain HMGA2,
and IMP3 dose-dependently increases HMGA2 mRNA. HMGA2 is regulated by let-7, and 
let-7 antagomiRs make HMGA2 refractory to IMP3. Removal of let-7 target sites
eliminates IMP3-dependent stabilization, and IMP3-containing bodies are depleted 
of Ago1-4 and miRNAs. The relationship between Hmga2 mRNA and IMPs also exists in
the developing limb bud, where IMP1-deficient embryos show dose-dependent Hmga2
mRNA downregulation. Finally, IMP3 ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) contain other let-7 
target mRNAs, including LIN28B, and a global gene set enrichment analysis
demonstrates that miRNA-regulated transcripts in general are upregulated
following IMP3 induction. We conclude that IMP3 RNPs may function as cytoplasmic 
safe houses and prevent miRNA-directed mRNA decay of oncogenes during tumor
progression.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Oncogene. 2015 Feb 26;34(9):1094-104. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.46. Epub 2014 Mar 24.

A mutant p53/let-7i-axis-regulated gene network drives cell migration, invasion
and metastasis.

Subramanian M(1), Francis P(1), Bilke S(1), Li XL(1), Hara T(1), Lu X(2), Jones
MF(1), Walker RL(1), Zhu Y(1), Pineda M(1), Lee C(3), Varanasi L(4), Yang Y(5),
Martinez LA(4), Luo J(3), Ambs S(6), Sharma S(2), Wakefield LM(5), Meltzer PS(1),
Lal A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College
of Medicine, Howard University, Washington, DC, USA. (3)Medical Oncology Branch, 
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, University of Mississippi Cancer Institute,
University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS, USA. (5)Laboratory of
Cancer Biology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. (6)Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Most p53 mutations in human cancers are missense mutations resulting in a
full-length mutant p53 protein. Besides losing tumor suppressor activity, some
hotspot p53 mutants gain oncogenic functions. This effect is mediated in part,
through gene expression changes due to inhibition of p63 and p73 by mutant p53 at
their target gene promoters. Here, we report that the tumor suppressor microRNA
let-7i is downregulated by mutant p53 in multiple cell lines expressing
endogenous mutant p53. In breast cancer patients, significantly decreased let-7i 
levels were associated with missense mutations in p53. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and promoter luciferase assays established let-7i as a
transcriptional target of mutant p53 through p63. Introduction of let-7i to
mutant p53 cells significantly inhibited migration, invasion and metastasis by
repressing a network of oncogenes including E2F5, LIN28B, MYC and NRAS. Our
findings demonstrate that repression of let-7i expression by mutant p53 has a key
role in enhancing migration, invasion and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC4391367
PMID: 24662829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 May;1839(5):374-86. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.02.017.
Epub 2014 Mar 3.

The ubiquitin ligase human TRIM71 regulates let-7 microRNA biogenesis via
modulation of Lin28B protein.

Lee SH(1), Cho S(2), Kim MS(1), Choi K(2), Cho JY(3), Gwak HS(4), Kim YJ(4), Yoo 
H(5), Lee SH(5), Park JB(5), Kim JH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology Branch, Research Institute, National Cancer 
Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi 410-769, Republic of Korea. (2)Targeted Medicine
Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Ochang
685-1, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Genetic Engineering, Sungkyunkwan
University, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. (4)Specific Organs Cancer Branch,
Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi 410-769, Republic of
Korea. (5)Specific Organs Cancer Branch, Research Institute, National Cancer
Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi 410-769, Republic of Korea; Department of System Cancer 
Science, Graduate School of Cancer Science and Policy, National Cancer Center,
Goyang, Gyeonggi 410-769, Republic of Korea. (6)Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology
Branch, Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi 410-769,
Republic of Korea; Department of System Cancer Science, Graduate School of Cancer
Science and Policy, National Cancer Center, Goyang, Gyeonggi 410-769, Republic of
Korea. Electronic address: jhkim@ncc.re.kr.

let-7 microRNA (miRNA) is implicated in various biological processes, and its
downregulation essentially linked to human malignancy. Regulation of gene
expression of the let-7 family is critically linked to RNA-binding proteins. For 
instance, Lin28B and its paralog, Lin28A, inhibit the pre-let-7 precursor from
being processed to mature miRNA by recruiting terminal uridyltransferase, TUT4,
which adds oligomeric U at the 3' end, suggesting that deregulation of Lin28B,
together with Lin28A, may alter various biological processes through modulation
of let-7 expression. Here, we showed that the Lin28B protein level is regulated
via ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation, and identified the ubiquitin
ligase as human TRIM-NHL domain-containing TRIM71. In cells, TRIM71 negatively
regulates Lin28B protein stability by catalyzing polyubiquitination. Compared
with its paralog, Lin28A, a C-terminal unique ~50 amino acid stretch of Lin28B is
essential for TRIM71 interactions and subsequent polyubiquitination. Moreover,
the N-terminal RING finger motif of TRIM71 is critical for protein-protein
interactions and polyubiquitination of Lin28B, and consequent let-7 expression.
Consistent with the let-7 stimulatory role of TRIM71 via Lin28B
polyubiquitination, specific knockdown of TRIM71 led to downregulation of let-7
expression. Expression of one of the known let-7 targets, HMGA2, was derepressed 
after knockdown of TRIM71. We additionally showed that enhanced expression of
let-7 is part of a feedback loop that targets TRIM71 3'UTR, which contains two
conserved let-7 target sites. Our findings collectively reveal critical aspects
of regulatory complexity of let-7 biogenesis at the posttranscriptional level.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24602972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Oncol. 2014 May;8(3):656-68. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.01.008. Epub 2014 Jan
24.

Molecular correlates of platinum response in human high-grade serous ovarian
cancer patient-derived xenografts.

Topp MD(1), Hartley L(2), Cook M(2), Heong V(3), Boehm E(2), McShane L(2), Pyman 
J(4), McNally O(4), Ananda S(4), Harrell M(5), Etemadmoghadam D(6), Galletta
L(7), Alsop K(7), Mitchell G(7), Fox SB(8), Kerr JB(9), Hutt KJ(10), Kaufmann
SH(11), Australian Ovarian Cancer Study(12), Swisher EM(5), Bowtell DD(13),
Wakefield MJ(14), Scott CL(15).

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria
3052, Australia; Department of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. (2)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (3)The Walter and Eliza
Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Royal
Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical
Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (4)Royal
Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. (5)University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. (6)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne,
Victoria 8006, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of Oncology, University 
of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia; Department of Pathology,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. (7)Peter MacCallum 
Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria 8006, Australia. (8)Peter MacCallum
Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria 8006, Australia; Department of Pathology,
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. (9)Department of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168,
Australia. (10)Department of Medicine and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia; Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, 
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. (11)Mayo Clinic Cancer Centre, Rochester, MN, 
USA. (12)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, Victoria 8006, Australia;
Westmead Institute for Cancer Research, University of Sydney at Westmead
Millennium Institute, Westmead Hospital, NSW, Australia; Department of
Gynaecological Oncology, Westmead Hospital, NSW, Australia; Queensland Institute 
of Medical Research, Brisbane, QLD, Australia. (13)Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre,
East Melbourne, Victoria 8006, Australia; Sir Peter MacCallum Department of
Oncology, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria 8006, Australia. (14)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of Medical
Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department
of Genetics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria 8006, Australia.
(15)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Parkville, Victoria 
3052, Australia; Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia;
Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
Australia. Electronic address: scottc@wehi.edu.au.

INTRODUCTION: Improvement in the ability to target underlying drivers and
vulnerabilities of high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HG-SOC) requires the
development of molecularly annotated pre-clinical models reflective of clinical
responses.
METHODS: We generated patient-derived xenografts (PDXs) from consecutive,
chemotherapy-naïve, human HG-SOC by transplanting fresh human HG-SOC fragments
into subcutaneous and intra-ovarian bursal sites of NOD/SCID IL2R<U+03B3>(null)
recipient mice, completed molecular annotation and assessed platinum sensitivity.
RESULTS: The success rate of xenografting was 83%. Of ten HG-SOC PDXs, all
contained mutations in TP53, two were mutated for BRCA1, three for BRCA2, and in 
two, BRCA1 was methylated. In vivo cisplatin response, determined as platinum
sensitive (progression-free interval = 100 d, n = 4), resistant (progression-free
interval <100 d, n = 3) or refractory (n = 3), was largely consistent with
patient outcome. Three of four platinum sensitive HG-SOC PDXs contained DNA
repair gene mutations, and the fourth was methylated for BRCA1. In contrast, all 
three platinum refractory PDXs overexpressed dominant oncogenes (CCNE1, LIN28B
and/or BCL2).
CONCLUSIONS: Because PDX platinum response reflected clinical outcome, these
annotated PDXs will provide a unique model system for preclinical testing of
novel therapies for HG-SOC.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4400120
PMID: 24560445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Zh Vopr Neirokhir Im N N Burdenko. 2013;77(6):51-5.

[Are the medulloepithelioma, ependymoblastoma and embryonal tumor with
multilayered rosettes the same entity?].

[Article in Russian]

Ryzhova MV, Kushel' IuV, Zheludkova OG, Shishkina LV, Panina TN, Melikian AG,
Zemlianskii MIu, Lemeneva NV.

Medulloepithelioma is a rare malignant tumor arising in cerebral hemispheres.
Microscopically, medulloepithelioma is characterized by epithelial structures
that mimic the embryonic neural tube. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that 
tumor cells are immunopositive for LIN28A and fluorescence in situ hybridization 
showed an amplification of a miRNA cluster at 19q13.42. Presence of these both
aberrations suggesting that medulloepithelioma, ependymoblastoma and embryonal
tumor with multilayered rosettes are the same entity.

PMID: 24558755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e87698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087698. eCollection
2014.

The Lin28/Let-7 system in early human embryonic tissue and ectopic pregnancy.

Lozoya T(1), Domínguez F(2), Romero-Ruiz A(3), Steffani L(3), Martínez S(4),
Monterde M(1), Ferri B(1), Núñez MJ(1), AinhoaRomero-Espinós(1), Zamora O(1),
Gurrea M(1), Sangiao-Alvarellos S(3), Vega O(1), Simón C(5), Pellicer A(1),
Tena-Sempere M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia, Spain. (2)INCLIVA Biomedical Research 
Institute, Valencia, Spain. (3)Universidad de Córdoba; CIBER Obesidad y Nutrición
(CIBERobn) & IMIBIC/HURS, Córdoba, Spain. (4)Fundación Instituto Valenciano de
Infertilidad (FIVI) and Instituto Universitario IVI/INCLIVA, Valencia University,
Valencia, Spain. (5)Fundación Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (FIVI) and
Instituto Universitario IVI/INCLIVA, Valencia University, Valencia, Spain and
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Stanford University,
California, United States of America.

Our objective was to determine the expression of the elements of the Lin28/Let-7 
system, and related microRNAs (miRNAs), in early stages of human placentation and
ectopic pregnancy, as a means to assess the potential role of this molecular hub 
in the pathogenesis of ectopic gestation. Seventeen patients suffering from tubal
ectopic pregnancy (cases) and forty-three women with normal on-going gestation
that desired voluntary termination of pregnancy (VTOP; controls) were recruited
for the study. Embryonic tissues were subjected to RNA extraction and
quantitative PCR analyses for LIN28B, Let-7a, miR-132, miR-145 and mir-323-3p
were performed. Our results demonstrate that the expression of LIN28B mRNA was
barely detectable in embryonic tissue from early stages of gestation and sharply 
increased thereafter to plateau between gestational weeks 7-9. In contrast,
expression levels of Let-7, mir-132 and mir-145 were high in embryonic tissue
from early gestations (= 6-weeks) and abruptly declined thereafter, especially
for Let-7. Opposite trends were detected for mir-323-3p. Embryonic expression of 
LIN28B mRNA was higher in early stages (= 6-weeks) of ectopic pregnancy than in
normal gestation. In contrast, Let-7a expression was significantly lower in early
ectopic pregnancies, while miR-132 and miR-145 levels were not altered.
Expression of mir-323-3p was also suppressed in ectopic embryonic tissue. We are 
the first to document reciprocal changes in the expression profiles of the gene
encoding the RNA-binding protein, LIN28B, and the related miRNAs, Let-7a, mir-132
and mir-145, in early stages of human placentation. This finding suggests the
potential involvement of LIN28B/Let-7 (de)regulated pathways in the
pathophysiology of ectopic pregnancy in humans.

PMCID: PMC3909210
PMID: 24498170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 30;8(12):e83869. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083869.
eCollection 2013.

Increased expression of Lin28B associates with poor prognosis in patients with
oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Wu T(1), Jia J(1), Xiong X(2), He H(2), Bu L(2), Zhao Z(1), Huang C(2), Zhang
W(2).

Author information: 
(1)The State key Laboratory Breeding Base of Basic Science of Stomatology
(Hubei-MOST) & Key Laboratory of Oral Biomedicine Ministry of Education, School &
Hospital of Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Oral Maxillofacial-Head Neck Oncology, School and Hospital of
Stomatology, Wuhan University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

Recent studies showed that incomplete cell reprogramming can transform cells into
tumour-like cells. Lin28A is associated with fibroblast and sarcoma cell
reprogramming, whereas its homologue Lin28B is associated with hematopoietic cell
reprogramming. This study aimed to investigate the expression and prognostic
difference between Lin28A and Lin28B in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC).
Expression level was assessed by immunohistochemistry and staining location was
confirmed by immunofluorescence. Prognostic values were analysed and compared by 
the Kaplan-Meier analysis and uni and multivariate Cox regression models.
Besides, in vitro cell assays and in vivo nude mice xenograft were used to
demonstrate the influence of increased Lin28B expression in OSCC. Lin28A and
Lin28B expression increased in OSCC, and co-expression of Lin28A and Lin28B
showed no significant association with patient prognosis. Kaplan-Meier analysis
showed that patients with high Lin28B but not Lin28A expression had lower overall
survival (OS) rates than those with low Lin28B expression. Further Univariate
analysis showed that patients with increased Lin28B expression had shorter
disease-free survival (DFS) and shorter OS, while multivariate analysis showed
Lin28B overexpression with TNM stage predicted poor prognosis in patients with
OSCC. Besides, stable expressing Lin28B in oral cancer cells promoted cell
migration, invasion, colony formation, in vivo proliferation and increased the
expression of cancer suppressor miRNA let-7 targeted genes IL-6, HMGA2, the EMT
markers Snail and Twist, the angiogenesis inducer VEGF, and the apoptosis
inhibitor Survivin. These combined results indicate that Lin28B is a novel marker
for predicting prognosis in patients with OSCC and may be a therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3875533
PMID: 24386298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Oncogene. 2014 Nov 27;33(48):5491-500. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.495. Epub 2013 Nov
25.

SALL4, a novel marker for human gastric carcinogenesis and metastasis.

Zhang L(1), Xu Z(1), Xu X(1), Zhang B(1), Wu H(2), Wang M(1), Zhang X(1), Yang
T(1), Cai J(1), Yan Y(1), Mao F(1), Zhu W(1), Shao Q(1), Qian H(1), Xu W(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science and Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University,
Zhenjiang, China. (2)Department of Central Laboratory, the First People's
Hospital of Lianyungang, Lianyungang, China. (3)1] School of Medical Science and 
Laboratory Medicine, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China [2] The Affiliated
Hospital, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, China.

SALL4, a zinc-finger transcriptional factor for embryonic stem cell self-renewal 
and pluripotency, has been suggested to be involved in tumorigenesis. The role of
SALL4 in human gastric cancer, however, remains largely unknown. In this study,
we demonstrated that SALL4 was aberrantly expressed at both mRNA and protein
levels in human gastric cancer tissues, and SALL4 level was highly correlated
with lymph node metastasis. Enforced expression of SALL4 enhanced the
proliferation and migration of human gastric cancer cells, whereas knockdown of
SALL4 by siRNA led to the opposite effects. In addition, SALL4 overexpression
promoted the growth and metastasis of gastric xenograft tumor in vivo. SALL4
overexpression induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in gastric cancer 
cells, with increased expression of Twist1, N-cadherin and decreased expression
of E-cadherin. Moreover, SALL4 promoted the acquirement of stemness in gastric
cancer cells through the induction of Bmi-1 and Lin28B. Taken together, our
findings indicate that SALL4 has oncogenic roles in gastric cancer through the
modulation of EMT and cell stemness, suggesting SALL4 as a novel target for human
gastric cancer diagnosis and therapy.

PMID: 24276240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Leukemia. 2014 May;28(5):1022-32. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.357. Epub 2013 Nov 25.

miR-9 is a tumor suppressor in pediatric AML with t(8;21).

Emmrich S(1), Katsman-Kuipers JE(2), Henke K(1), Khatib ME(1), Jammal R(1),
Engeland F(1), Dasci F(1), Zwaan CM(2), den Boer ML(2), Verboon L(2), Stary J(3),
Baruchel A(4), de Haas V(5), Danen-van Oorschot AA(2), Fornerod M(2), Pieters
R(2), Reinhardt D(1), Klusmann JH(1), van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany. (2)Pediatric Oncology/Hematology/Biochemistry, Erasmus
MC/Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Charles University and University Hospital Motol, Prague,
Czech Republic. (4)Hematology, St. Louis Hospital, Paris, France. (5)Dutch
Childhood Oncology Group (DCOG), The Hague, The Netherlands.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play a pivotal role in the regulation of hematopoiesis and
development of leukemia. Great interest emerged in modulating miRNA expression
for therapeutic purposes. In order to identify miRNAs, which specifically
suppress leukemic growth of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with t(8;21), inv(16) or
mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) rearrangement by inducing differentiation, we
conducted a miRNA expression profiling in a cohort of 90 cytogenetically
characterized, de novo pediatric AML cases. Four miRNAs, specifically
downregulated in MLL-rearranged, t(8;21) or inv(16) AMLs, were characterized by
their tumor-suppressive properties in cell lines representing those respective
cytogenetic groups. Among those, forced expression of miR-9 reduced leukemic
growth and induced monocytic differentiation of t(8;21) AML cell lines in vitro
and in vivo. The tumor-suppressive functions of miR-9 were specifically
restricted to AML cell lines and primary leukemic blasts with t(8;21). On the
other hand, these functions were not evident in AML blasts from patients with MLL
rearrangements. We showed that miR-9 exerts its effects through the cooperation
with let-7 to repress the oncogenic LIN28B/HMGA2 axis. Thus, miR-9 is a tumor
suppressor-miR which acts in a stringent cell context-dependent manner.

PMID: 24270738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 14;8(11):e80053. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080053.
eCollection 2013.

Lin28B is an oncofetal circulating cancer stem cell-like marker associated with
recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Cheng SW(1), Tsai HW, Lin YJ, Cheng PN, Chang YC, Yen CJ, Huang HP, Chuang YP,
Chang TT, Lee CT, Chao A, Chou CY, Chan SH, Chow NH, Ho CL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung 
University, Tainan, Taiwan.

By using an expressed sequence tag bioinformatic algorithm, we identified that
Lin28 homolog B (Lin28B) may have an oncofetal expression pattern which may
facilitate detecting cancer cells in adults. It is also reported to be a
potential marker for cancer stem cells. Therefore, we sought to verify
oncofetal-stemness characters of Lin28B and test its potential as a circulating
cancer stem cell-like marker in adult HCC patients. Lin28B mRNA was examined in a
panel of fetal tissue, adult tissue and tumors. Lin28B was over-expressed or
knocked down in HepG2 cells to evaluate its potential as a stem cell-like marker.
RT-qPCR for Lin28B was performed in the peripheral blood mononuclear cells from
patients with HCC receiving surgery (n=96) and non-HCC controls (n=60) and
analyzed its clinical significance. Lin28B showed an oncofetal expression
pattern. Its overexpression could upregulate stemness markers (OCT4, Nanog and
SOX2) and enhance tumorsphere formation in vitro. Lin28B knockdown had opposite
effects. Circulating Lin28B was detected in peripheral blood mononuclear cells in
3 cases (5%) of non-HCC controls and 32 cases (33.3%) of HCC patients. In HCC
patients, circulating Lin28B was associated with high tumor grade (P=0.046),
large size (P=0.005), high AJCC stage (P=0.044) and BCLC stage (P=0.017).
Circulating Lin28B was significantly associated with decreased recurrence-free
survival (P<0.001). Circulating Lin28B separated early stage HCC into 2
recurrence-free survival curves (P=0.003). In multivariate analysis, circulating 
Lin28B was an independent variable associated with early recurrence (P=0.045) and
recurrence in early stage HCC (P=0.006). In conclusion, the oncofetal gene Lin28B
is a potential oncofetal cancer-stem-cell-like circulating tumor cell marker that
correlates with HCC recurrence after hepatectomy. Circulating Lin28B could refine
early AJCC stages. Our finding supports the possible use of a TNMC (C for
circulating tumor cells) staging system in HCC.

PMCID: PMC3828221
PMID: 24244607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Exp Mol Med. 2013 Nov 15;45:e55. doi: 10.1038/emm.2013.98.

Developmental changes in hematopoietic stem cell properties.

Copley MR(1), Eaves CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) comprise a rare population of cells that can
regenerate and maintain lifelong blood cell production. This functionality is
achieved through their ability to undergo many divisions without activating a
poised, but latent, capacity for differentiation into multiple blood cell types. 
Throughout life, HSCs undergo sequential changes in several key properties. These
affect mechanisms that regulate the self-renewal, turnover and differentiation of
HSCs as well as the properties of the committed progenitors and terminally
differentiated cells derived from them. Recent findings point to the Lin28b-let-7
pathway as a master regulator of many of these changes with important
implications for the clinical use of HSCs for marrow rescue and gene therapy, as 
well as furthering our understanding of the different pathogenesis of childhood
and adult-onset leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3849580
PMID: 24232254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Oncogene. 2014 Nov 6;33(45):5288-94. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.466. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

PSP94 contributes to chemoresistance and its peptide derivative PCK3145 represses
tumor growth in ovarian cancer.

Yan BX(1), Ma JX(2), Zhang J(3), Guo Y(4), Riedel H(4), Mueller MD(4), Remick
SC(4), Yu JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Department of Basic
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center,
Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West
Virginia, USA [2] IcesnowYanyan Bioscience Association, Beijing, China. (2)1]
Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Department of Basic
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center,
Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West
Virginia, USA [2] Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Department of 
Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA. (3)1] IcesnowYanyan Bioscience Association, Beijing, China [2]
Beijing Animal Science Institute, Beijing, China. (4)Department of Biochemistry, 
School of Medicine, Department of Basic Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of
Pharmacy and Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center, Robert C. Byrd Health Sciences
Center, West Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA.

Tumor drug resistance remains a major challenge in the treatment of cancer. Here,
we show that Prostatic secretory protein 94 (PSP94) levels are reduced in ovarian
cancer patients with high levels of excision repair cross-complementing 1
(ERCC1), a marker for chemoresistance. We find that PSP94 is decreased in an
ovarian cancer drug-resistant cell line, and plays an important role in the
development of drug resistance in vitro. Our studies indicate that PSP94 can
partially reverse drug resistance in mouse tumor models in vivo and that a PSP94 
peptide derivative PCK3145 suppresses chemoresistant cancer cell and tumor growth
in vitro and in vivo. Our investigation of the involved molecular mechanisms
suggests that PSP94 may confer drug resistance by modulating the Lin28b/Let-7
signaling pathway. We introduce PSP94 and its peptide derivative PCK3145 as
potential target to reverse chemoresistance in ovarian cancer and have begun to
identify their relevant molecular targets in specific signaling pathways.

PMID: 24186202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Genes Dev. 2013 Oct 15;27(20):2233-45. doi: 10.1101/gad.224659.113.

LIN28B promotes growth and tumorigenesis of the intestinal epithelium via Let-7.

Madison BB(1), Liu Q, Zhong X, Hahn CM, Lin N, Emmett MJ, Stanger BZ, Lee JS,
Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA;

The RNA-binding proteins LIN28A and LIN28B have diverse functions in embryonic
stem cells, cellular reprogramming, growth, and oncogenesis. Many of these
effects occur via direct inhibition of Let-7 microRNAs (miRNAs), although
Let-7-independent effects have been surmised. We report that intestine targeted
expression of LIN28B causes intestinal hypertrophy, crypt expansion, and Paneth
cell loss. Furthermore, LIN28B fosters intestinal polyp and adenocarcinoma
formation. To examine potential Let-7-independent functions of LIN28B, we pursued
ribonucleoprotein cross-linking, immunoprecipitation, and high-throughput
sequencing (CLIP-seq) to identify direct RNA targets. This revealed that LIN28B
bound a substantial number of mRNAs and modestly augmented protein levels of
these target mRNAs in vivo. Conversely, Let-7 had a profound effect; modulation
of Let-7 levels via deletion of the mirLet7c2/mirLet7b genes recapitulated
effects of Lin28b overexpression. Furthermore, intestine-specific Let-7
expression could reverse hypertrophy and Paneth cell depletion caused by Lin28b. 
This was independent of effects on insulin-PI3K-mTOR signaling. Our study reveals
that Let-7 miRNAs are critical for repressing intestinal tissue growth and
promoting Paneth cell differentiation. Let-7-dependent effects of LIN28B may
supersede Let-7-independent effects on intestinal tissue growth. In summary,
LIN28B can definitively act as an oncogene in the absence of canonical genetic
alterations.

PMCID: PMC3814644
PMID: 24142874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Gastroenterology. 2014 Jan;146(1):278-90. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.10.009. Epub
2013 Oct 9.

Nuclear death receptor TRAIL-R2 inhibits maturation of let-7 and promotes
proliferation of pancreatic and other tumor cells.

Haselmann V(1), Kurz A(1), Bertsch U(2), Hübner S(1), Olempska-Müller M(1),
Fritsch J(2), Häsler R(3), Pickl A(1), Fritsche H(1), Annewanter F(1), Engler
C(1), Fleig B(1), Bernt A(1), Röder C(1), Schmidt H(2), Gelhaus C(4), Hauser
C(5), Egberts JH(6), Heneweer C(7), Rohde AM(8), Böger C(9), Knippschild U(10),
Röcken C(9), Adam D(2), Walczak H(11), Schütze S(2), Janssen O(2), Wulczyn FG(8),
Wajant H(12), Kalthoff H(1), Trauzold A(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Experimental Cancer Research,
University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (2)Institute of Immunology, University of
Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (3)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, University of
Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (4)Zoological Institute, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany. 
(5)Division of Molecular Oncology, Institute for Experimental Cancer Research,
University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany; Clinic for General Surgery, Visceral,
Thoracic, Transplantation and Pediatric Surgery, University of Kiel, Kiel,
Germany. (6)Clinic for General Surgery, Visceral, Thoracic, Transplantation and
Pediatric Surgery, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (7)Clinic for Diagnostic
Radiology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (8)Center for Anatomy, Institute of
Cell Biology and Neurobiology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. (9)Institute of Pathology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
(10)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Centre of
Surgery, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. (11)Centre for Cell Death, Cancer and
Inflammation, University College London Cancer Institute, London, United Kingdom.
(12)Division of Molecular Internal Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine II, 
University Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. (13)Division of Molecular
Oncology, Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, University of Kiel, Kiel,
Germany. Electronic address: atrauzold@email.uni-kiel.de.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis inducing ligand
(TRAIL-R1) (TNFRSF10A) and TRAIL-R2 (TNFRSF10B) on the plasma membrane bind
ligands that activate apoptotic and other signaling pathways. Cancer cells also
might have TRAIL-R2 in the cytoplasm or nucleus, although little is known about
its activities in these locations. We investigated the functions of nuclear
TRAIL-R2 in cancer cell lines.
METHODS: Proteins that interact with TRAIL-R2 initially were identified in
pancreatic cancer cells by immunoprecipitation, mass spectrometry, and
immunofluorescence analyses. Findings were validated in colon, renal, lung, and
breast cancer cells. Functions of TRAIL-R2 were determined from small interfering
RNA knockdown, real-time polymerase chain reaction, Drosha-activity, microRNA
array, proliferation, differentiation, and immunoblot experiments. We assessed
the effects of TRAIL-R2 overexpression or knockdown in human pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells and their ability to form tumors in mice. We also
analyzed levels of TRAIL-R2 in sections of PDACs and non-neoplastic peritumoral
ducts from patients.
RESULTS: TRAIL-R2 was found to interact with the core microprocessor components
Drosha and DGCR8 and the associated regulatory proteins p68, hnRNPA1, NF45, and
NF90 in nuclei of PDAC and other tumor cells. Knockdown of TRAIL-R2 increased
Drosha-mediated processing of the let-7 microRNA precursor primary let-7
(resulting in increased levels of mature let-7), reduced levels of the let-7
targets (LIN28B and HMGA2), and inhibited cell proliferation. PDAC tissues from
patients had higher levels of nuclear TRAIL-R2 than non-neoplastic pancreatic
tissue, which correlated with increased nuclear levels of HMGA2 and poor
outcomes. Knockdown of TRAIL-R2 in PDAC cells slowed their growth as orthotopic
tumors in mice. Reduced nuclear levels of TRAIL-R2 in cultured pancreatic
epithelial cells promoted their differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Nuclear TRAIL-R2 inhibits maturation of the microRNA let-7 in
pancreatic cancer cell lines and increases their proliferation. Pancreatic tumor 
samples have increased levels of nuclear TRAIL-R2, which correlate with poor
outcome of patients. These findings indicate that in the nucleus, death receptors
can function as tumor promoters and might be therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24120475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Oncogene. 2014 Aug 21;33(34):4296-306. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.385. Epub 2013 Sep
23.

miR-26a enhances miRNA biogenesis by targeting Lin28B and Zcchc11 to suppress
tumor growth and metastasis.

Fu X(1), Meng Z(2), Liang W(3), Tian Y(3), Wang X(1), Han W(1), Lou G(1), Wang
X(1), Lou F(1), Yen Y(4), Yu H(5), Jove R(6), Huang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Diabetes Research, Department of Diabetes and Metabolic 
Diseases Research, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical
Center, Duarte, CA, USA. (2)1] Division of Molecular Diabetes Research,
Department of Diabetes and Metabolic Diseases Research, Beckman Research
Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA, USA [2] Irell &
Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute, City 
of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA, USA. (3)Department of Molecular
Medicine, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center,
Duarte, CA, USA. (4)1] Irell & Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences,
Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA, USA
[2] Department of Molecular Pharmacology, Beckman Research Institute, City of
Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA, USA. (5)1] Irell & Manella Graduate
School of Biological Sciences, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National 
Medical Center, Duarte, CA, USA [2] Department of Cancer Immunotherapy and Tumor 
Immunology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center,
Duarte, CA, USA. (6)1] Irell & Manella Graduate School of Biological Sciences,
Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA, USA
[2] Department of Molecular Medicine, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope
National Medical Center, Duarte, CA, USA.

Human cancers often exhibit attenuated microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis and global
underexpression of miRNAs; thus, targeting the miRNA biogenesis pathway
represents a novel strategy for cancer therapy. Here, we report that miR-26a
enhances miRNA biogenesis, which acts as a common mechanism partially accounting 
for miR-26a function in diverse cancers including melanoma, prostate and liver
cancer. miR-26a was broadly reduced in multiple cancers, and overexpression of
miR-26a significantly suppressed tumor growth and metastasis both in vitro and in
vivo, including melanoma, prostate and liver cancers. Notably, miR-26a
overexpression was accompanied by global upregulation of miRNAs, especially
let-7, and let-7 expression was concordant with miR-26a expression in cancer cell
lines, xenograft tumors and normal human tissues, underscoring their biological
relevance. We showed that miR-26a directly targeted Lin28B and Zcchc11-two
critical repressors of let-7 maturation. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that
Zcchc11 promoted tumor growth and metastasis, and it was prominently
overexpressed in human cancers. Our findings thus provide a novel mechanism by
which a miRNA acts as a modulator of miRNA biogenesis. These results also define 
a role of the miR-26a and Zcchc11 in tumorigenesis and metastasis and have
implications to develop new strategies for cancer therapy.

PMID: 24056962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e74556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074556. eCollection 
2013.

Chromatin changes in dicer-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells in response to
retinoic acid induced differentiation.

Tennakoon JB(1), Wang H, Coarfa C, Cooney AJ, Gunaratne PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas,
United States of America.

Loss of Dicer, an enzyme critical for microRNA biogenesis, results in lethality
due to a block in mouse embryonic stem cell (mES) differentiation. Using ChIP-Seq
we found increased H3K9me2 at over 900 CpG islands in the Dicer(-/-)ES epigenome.
Gene ontology analysis revealed that promoters of chromatin regulators to be
among the most impacted by increased CpG island H3K9me2 in ES (Dicer(-/-)). We
therefore, extended the study to include H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks for selected 
genes. We found that the ES (Dicer(-/-)) mutant epigenome was characterized by a 
shift in the overall balance between transcriptionally favorable (H3K4me3) and
unfavorable (H3K27me3) marks at key genes regulating ES cell differentiation.
Pluripotency genes Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog were not impacted in relation to patterns
of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 and showed no changes in the rates of transcript
down-regulation in response to RA. The most striking changes were observed in
regards to genes regulating differentiation and the transition from self-renewal 
to differentiation. An increase in H3K4me3 at the promoter of Lin28b was
associated with the down-regulation of this gene at a lower rate in Dicer(-/-)ES 
as compared to wild type ES. An increase in H3K27me3 in the promoters of
differentiation genes Hoxa1 and Cdx2 in Dicer(-/-)ES cells was coincident with an
inability to up-regulate these genes at the same rate as ES upon retinoic acid
(RA)-induced differentiation. We found that siRNAs Ezh2 and post-transcriptional 
silencing of Ezh2 by let-7 g rescued this effect suggesting that Ezh2
up-regulation is in part responsible for increased H3K27me3 and decreased rates
of up-regulation of differentiation genes in Dicer(-/-)ES.

PMCID: PMC3767645
PMID: 24040281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e73940. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073940. eCollection 
2013.

DCLK1 regulates pluripotency and angiogenic factors via microRNA-dependent
mechanisms in pancreatic cancer.

Sureban SM(1), May R, Qu D, Weygant N, Chandrakesan P, Ali N, Lightfoot SA,
Pantazis P, Rao CV, Postier RG, Houchen CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, the University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America ; Department of Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America ; The
Peggy and Charles Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United
States of America.

Stem cell pluripotency, angiogenesis and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) 
have been shown to be significantly upregulated in pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma (PDAC) and many other aggressive cancers. The dysregulation of
these processes is believed to play key roles in tumor initiation, progression,
and metastasis, and is contributory to PDAC being the fourth leading cause of
cancer-related deaths in the US. The tumor suppressor miRNA miR-145 downregulates
critical pluripotency factors and oncogenes and results in repressed metastatic
potential in PDAC. Additionally, the miR-200 family regulates several angiogenic 
factors which have been linked to metastasis in many solid tumors. We have
previously demonstrated that downregulation of DCLK1 can upregulate critical
miRNAs in both in vitro and in vivo cancer models and results in downregulation
of c-MYC, KRAS, NOTCH1 and EMT-related transcription factors. A recent report has
also shown that Dclk1 can distinguish between normal and tumor stem cells in Apc 
(min/+) mice and that ablation of Dclk1(+) cells resulted in regression of
intestinal polyps without affecting homeostasis. Here we demonstrate that the
knockdown of DCLK1 using poly(lactide-co-glycolide)-encapsulated-DCLK1-siRNA
results in AsPC1 tumor growth arrest. Examination of xenograft tumors revealed,
(a) increased miR-145 which results in decreased pluripotency maintenance factors
OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, KLF4 as well as KRAS and RREB1; (b) increased let-7a which
results in decreased pluripotency factor LIN28B; and (c) increased miR-200 which 
results in decreased VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and EMT-related transcription factors ZEB1,
ZEB2, SNAIL and SLUG. Specificity of DCLK1 post-transcriptional regulation of the
downstream targets of miR-145, miR-200 and let-7a was accomplished utilizing a
luciferase-based reporter assay. We conclude that DCLK1 plays a significant
master regulatory role in pancreatic tumorigenesis through the regulation of
multiple tumor suppressor miRNAs and their downstream pro-tumorigenic pathways.
This novel concept of targeting DCLK1 alone has several advantages over targeting
single pathway or miRNA-based therapies for PDAC.

PMCID: PMC3767662
PMID: 24040120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Biol Reprod. 2013 Oct 24;89(4):95. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.109868. Print 2013
Oct.

Role of LIN28A in mouse and human trophoblast cell differentiation.

Seabrook JL(1), Cantlon JD, Cooney AJ, McWhorter EE, Fromme BA, Bouma GJ, Anthony
RV, Winger QA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine and
Biomedical Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, Colorado.

Proper regulation of trophoblast proliferation, differentiation, and function are
critical for placenta development and function. The RNA-binding protein, LIN28A, 
has been well characterized as a potent regulator of differentiation in embryonic
stem cells; however, little is known about the function of LIN28A in the
placenta. We assessed LIN28A in vitro using mouse trophoblast stem (mTS) cells
and human trophoblast cells (ACH-3P). We observed that LIN28A decreased and let-7
miRNA increased when mTS cells were induced to differentiate into mouse
trophoblast giant cells (mTGCs) upon the removal of FGF4, heparin and conditioned
medium. Similarly, we observed that LIN28A decreased in ACH-3P cells induced to
syncytialize with forskolin treatment. To assess LIN28A in vivo we examined
Embryonic Day 11.5 mouse placenta and observed abundant LIN28A in the
chorioallantoic interface and labyrinth layer, with little LIN28A staining in
spongiotrophoblast or differentiated mTGCs. Additionally, shRNA-mediated LIN28A
knockdown in ACH-3P cells resulted in increased spontaneous syncytialization, and
increased levels of syncytiotrophoblast markers hCG, LGALS13, and ERVW-1 mRNA.
Additionally, targeted degradation of LIN28A mRNA increased responsiveness to
forskolin-induced differentiation. In contrast, targeted degradation of Lin28a
mRNA in mTS cells did not alter cell phenotype when maintained under
proliferative culture conditions. Together, these data establish that LIN28A has 
a functional role in regulating trophoblast differentiation and function, and
that loss of LIN28A in human trophoblast is sufficient to induce differentiation,
but does not induce differentiation in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC4076397
PMID: 24006280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;15(8):885-7. doi: 10.1038/ncb2817.

Linking HSCs to their youth.

Pietras EM, Passegué E.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;15(9):1131.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;15(8):916-25.

Fetal haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) self-renew extensively to build the blood 
system from scratch. The protein Lin28b negatively regulates the microRNA let-7
to keep levels of its target Hmga2 high, hence conferring high self-renewal
potential to fetal HSCs. This regulatory circuit can be experimentally modulated 
to boost the lower self-renewal activity of quiescent adult HSCs.

PMID: 23907190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Leukoc Biol. 2013 Nov;94(5):991-1001. doi: 10.1189/jlb.0113048. Epub 2013 Jul
30.

The human fetal lymphocyte lineage: identification by CD27 and LIN28B expression 
in B cell progenitors.

McWilliams L(1), Su KY, Liang X, Liao D, Floyd S, Amos J, Moody MA, Kelsoe G,
Kuraoka M.

Author information: 
(1)2.DUMC, Durham, NC 27710; ghkelsoe@duke.edu; M.K., E-mail:
masayuki.kuraoka@duke.edu.

CD27, a member of the TNFR superfamily, is used to identify human memory B cells.
Nonetheless, CD27(+) B cells are present in patients with HIGM1 syndrome who are 
unable to generate GCs or memory B cells. CD27(+)IgD(+) fetal B cells are present
in umbilical cord blood, and CD27 may also be a marker of the human B1-like B
cells. To define the origin of naïve CD27(+)IgD(+) human B cells, we studied B
cell development in both fetal and adult tissues. In human FL, most CD19(+) cells
coexpressed CD10, a marker of human developing B cells. Some CD19(+)CD10(+) B
cells expressed CD27, and these fetal CD27(+) cells were present in the pro-B,
pre-B, and immature/transitional B cell compartments. Lower frequencies of
phenotypically identical cells were also identified in adult BM. CD27(+) pro-B,
pre-B, and immature/transitional B cells expressed recombination activating
gene-1, terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase and Vpre-B mRNA comparably to their
CD27(-) counterparts. CD27(+) and CD27(-) developing B cells showed similar Ig
heavy chain gene usage with low levels of mutations, suggesting that CD27(+)
developing B cells are distinct from mutated memory B cells. Despite these
similarities, CD27(+) developing B cells differed from CD27(-) developing B cells
by their increased expression of LIN28B, a transcription factor associated with
the fetal lymphoid lineages of mice. Furthermore, CD27(+) pro-B cells efficiently
generated IgM(+)IgD(+) immature/transitional B cells in vitro. Our observations
suggest that CD27 expression during B cell development identifies a physiologic
state or lineage for human B cell development distinct from the memory B cell
compartment.

PMCID: PMC3800071
PMID: 23901121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(11):1857-65.

Epigenetic interventions increase the radiation sensitivity of cancer cells.

Ren J, Chu Y, Ma H, Zhang Y, Zhang X, Zhao D, Li Z, Wang J, Gao YE, Xiao L, Liu
R, Qian J, Liu Y, Wei H, Jiang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 
Shaanxi Province, China, 710061. renjuan88@aliyun.com.

Epigenetic changes including DNA methylation, histone modifications, chromatin
remodeling and microRNAs play critical roles in tumorigenesis and tumor
development. Reversal of epigenetic changes sensitizes some tumor cells to
radiation. DNMT-I enhances the response of tumor cells to radiotherapy. AZA
demethylated promoters of genes related to ionizing radiation response, such as
p16 and hMLH1. The genes expression of the p53, RASSF1, and DAPK gene families
was increased by 5-aza-CdR, which induces G2-M phase arrest and increased
apoptosis. HDAC-I has both anti-tumor activity and radiation sensitization
activity. HDAC-I disrupts both DNA damage sensing and repair processes: HDAC-I
disrupts the association between HDAC enzyme and DNA sensor proteins 53BP1 and
ATM. HDAC-I changes the acetylation status of both proteins involved in
homologous recombination (HR) repair pathway which include BRCA1, Rad51, and
Rad50, and proteins involved in non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) repair pathway 
which include Ku70, and DNA-PK. HDACs are also implicated as essential components
in the DNA repair process itself. Besides the radiosensitizing mechanism of
intervention of DNA repair, other possible mechanisms including cell cycle
redistribution, acetylation of Hsp90, increased apoptosis, and decreased survival
signals are also suggested. Some miRNAs also regulate the radiosensitivity of
tumor cells. Inhibition of miR-34 expression or function, downregulation of
miR-155, upregulation of miR-18a, Overexpression let-7g or knocking down LIN28B, 
and ectopically overexpressed miR-10 in cells with low endogenous miR-101 level
increase the response of cells to irradiation. For radiation-resistant cancer
cells, miR-7 sensitizes the radiation for cells which activated EGFR-PI3K-AKT
signaling pathway.

PMID: 23888958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Clin Neuropathol. 2014 Jan-Feb;33(1):15-22. doi: 10.5414/NP300636.

Embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes: diagnostic tools update and review of
the literature.

Ceccom J, Bourdeaut F, Loukh N, Rigau V, Milin S, Takin R, Richer W, Uro-Coste E,
Couturier J, Bertozzi AI, Delattre O, Delisle MB.

Embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes (ETMR), including embryonal tumor with
abundant neuropil and true rosettes (ETANTR), and ependymoblastoma (EBL)
constitute a distinct entity of the primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET)
family. The presence of a focal amplification at chromosome region 19q13.42
associated with an up-regulation of the oncogenic miRNA cluster C19MC suggests
that they may represent a histological spectrum of a single biological entity.
Their histopathological spectrum is wide, including medulloepithelioma, their
location may be supra- or infra-tentorial, their prognosis is poor. Recent data
on molecular subgroups of PNETs have led to new insights on diagnosis and
treatment of these tumors. Subsequently, LIN28A immunoexpression was identified
as a highly specific marker for ETMR. In this study, we report 4 cases diagnosed 
initially as ETANTR with CGH-array data, including 19q13.42 gain with absence of 
other amplicons, particularly of the MYC gene family, and inconstant gain of
whole chromosome 2. Immunohistochemical positive expression of LIN28A and absence
of Olig2 expression were observed. We summarize the literature on ETMR, pointing 
out on the nosological evolution of this entity and the findings on genetic
hallmarks of this particular tumor. Our results emphasize the usefulness of
immunohistochemistry as a highly sensitive and fast diagnostic tool for ETMR and 
for genetic data, especially for 19q13.42 locus. Biological features may offer
new therapeutic options for these embryonal tumors that do not usually respond to
conventional treatments of PNETs.

PMID: 23863344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Oncotarget. 2013 Jul;4(7):1050-64.

LIN28A facilitates the transformation of human neural stem cells and promotes
glioblastoma tumorigenesis through a pro-invasive genetic program.

Mao XG(1), Hütt-Cabezas M, Orr BA, Weingart M, Taylor I, Rajan AK, Odia Y,
Kahlert U, Maciaczyk J, Nikkhah G, Eberhart CG, Raabe EH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, USA.

The cellular reprogramming factor LIN28A promotes tumorigenicity in cancers
arising outside the central nervous system, but its role in brain tumors is
unknown. We detected LIN28A protein in a subset of human gliomas observed higher 
expression in glioblastoma (GBM) than in lower grade tumors. Knockdown of LIN28A 
using lentiviral shRNA in GBM cell lines inhibited their invasion, growth and
clonogenicity. Expression of LIN28A in GBM cell lines increased the number and
size of orthotopic xenograft tumors. LIN28A expression also enhanced the
invasiveness of GBM cells in vitro and in vivo. Increasing LIN28A was associated 
with down-regulation of tumor suppressing microRNAs let-7b and let-7g and
up-regulation of the chromatin modifying protein HMGA2. The increase in tumor
cell aggressiveness in vivo and in vitro was accompanied by an upregulation of
pro-invasive gene expression, including SNAI1. To further investigate the
oncogenic potential of LIN28A, we infected hNSC with lentiviruses encoding LIN28A
together with dominant negative R248W-TP53, constitutively active KRAS and hTERT.
Resulting subclones proliferated at an increased rate and formed invasive
GBM-like tumors in orthotopic xenografts in immunodeficient mice. Similar to
LIN28A-transduced GBM neurosphere lines, hNSC-derived tumor cells showed
increased expression of HMGA2. Taken together, these data suggest a role for
LIN28A in high grade gliomas and illustrate an HMGA2-associated, pro-invasive
program that can be activated in GBM by LIN28A-mediated suppression of let-7
microRNAs.

PMCID: PMC3759665
PMID: 23846349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;15(8):916-25. doi: 10.1038/ncb2783. Epub 2013 Jun 30.

The Lin28b-let-7-Hmga2 axis determines the higher self-renewal potential of fetal
haematopoietic stem cells.

Copley MR(1), Babovic S, Benz C, Knapp DJ, Beer PA, Kent DG, Wohrer S, Treloar
DQ, Day C, Rowe K, Mader H, Kuchenbauer F, Humphries RK, Eaves CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 1L3,
Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;15(8):885-7.

Mouse haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) undergo a postnatal transition in several 
properties, including a marked reduction in their self-renewal activity. We now
show that the developmentally timed change in this key function of HSCs is
associated with their decreased expression of Lin28b and an accompanying increase
in their let-7 microRNA levels. Lentivirus-mediated overexpression of Lin28 in
adult HSCs elevates their self-renewal activity in transplanted irradiated hosts,
as does overexpression of Hmga2, a well-established let-7 target that is
upregulated in fetal HSCs. Conversely, HSCs from fetal Hmga2(-/-) mice do not
exhibit the heightened self-renewal activity that is characteristic of wild-type 
fetal HSCs. Interestingly, overexpression of Hmga2 in adult HSCs does not mimic
the ability of elevated Lin28 to activate a fetal lymphoid differentiation
program. Thus, Lin28b may act as a master regulator of developmentally timed
changes in HSC programs with Hmga2 serving as its specific downstream modulator
of HSC self-renewal potential.

PMID: 23811688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Blood. 2013 Aug 8;122(6):1034-41. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-12-472308. Epub 2013
Jun 24.

LIN28B-mediated expression of fetal hemoglobin and production of fetal-like
erythrocytes from adult human erythroblasts ex vivo.

Lee YT(1), de Vasconcellos JF, Yuan J, Byrnes C, Noh SJ, Meier ER, Kim KS, Rabel 
A, Kaushal M, Muljo SA, Miller JL.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genomics and Therapeutics Section, Molecular Medicine Branch,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases/NIH, 10 Center
Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Reactivation of fetal hemoglobin (HbF) holds therapeutic potential for sickle
cell disease and ß-thalassemias. In human erythroid cells and hematopoietic
organs, LIN28B and its targeted let-7 microRNA family, demonstrate regulated
expression during the fetal-to-adult developmental transition. To explore the
effects of LIN28B in human erythroid cell development, lentiviral transduction
was used to knockdown LIN28B expression in erythroblasts cultured from human
umbilical cord CD34+ cells. The subsequent reduction in LIN28B expression caused 
increased expression of let-7 and significantly reduced HbF expression.
Conversely, LIN28B overexpression in cultured adult erythroblasts reduced the
expression of let-7 and significantly increased HbF expression. Cellular
maturation was maintained including enucleation. LIN28B expression in adult
erythroblasts increased the expression of <U+03B3>-globin, and the HbF content of the
cells rose to levels >30% of their hemoglobin. Expression of carbonic anhydrase
I, glucosaminyl (N-acetyl) transferase 2, and miR-96 (three additional genes
marking the transition from fetal-to-adult erythropoiesis) were reduced by LIN28B
expression. The transcription factor BCL11A, a well-characterized repressor of
<U+03B3>-globin expression, was significantly down-regulated. Independent of LIN28B,
experimental suppression of let-7 also reduced BCL11A expression and
significantly increased HbF expression. LIN28B expression regulates HbF levels
and causes adult human erythroblasts to differentiate with a more fetal-like
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3739030
PMID: 23798711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Sep;11(9):1730-41. doi: 10.1111/jth.12326.

Developmental changes in human megakaryopoiesis.

Bluteau O(1), Langlois T, Rivera-Munoz P, Favale F, Rameau P, Meurice G, Dessen
P, Solary E, Raslova H, Mercher T, Debili N, Vainchenker W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, UMR 1009,
Laboratory of Excellence GR-Ex, Villejuif, France; Université Paris-Sud,
Villejuif, France; Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France.

Comment in
    J Thromb Haemost. 2013 Sep;11(9):1727-9.

BACKGROUND: The molecular bases of the cellular changes that occur during human
megakaryocyte (MK) ontogeny remain unknown, and may be important for
understanding the significance of MK differentiation from human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs)
METHODS: We optimized the differentiation of MKs from hESCs, and compared these
with MKs obtained from primary human hematopoietic tissues at different stages of
development.
RESULTS: Transcriptome analyses revealed a close relationship between
hESC-derived and fetal liver-derived MKs, and between neonate-derived and
adult-derived MKs. Major changes in the expression profiles of cell cycle and
transcription factors (TFs), including MYC and LIN28b, and MK-specific regulators
indicated that MK maturation progresses during ontogeny towards an increase in MK
ploidy and a platelet-forming function. Important genes, including CXCR4, were
regulated by an on-off mechanism during development.
DISCUSSION: Our analysis of the pattern of TF network and signaling pathways was 
consistent with a growing specialization of MKs towards hemostasis during
ontogeny, and support the idea that MKs derived from hESCs reflect primitive
hematopoiesis.

© 2013 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMID: 23782903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. RNA Biol. 2013 Jul;10(7):1146-59. doi: 10.4161/rna.25194. Epub 2013 May 29.

Identification of LIN28B-bound mRNAs reveals features of target recognition and
regulation.

Graf R(1), Munschauer M, Mastrobuoni G, Mayr F, Heinemann U, Kempa S, Rajewsky N,
Landthaler M.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology of Gene Regulatory Elements; Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular
Medicine; Berlin, Germany.

The conserved human LIN28 RNA-binding proteins function in development,
maintenance of pluripotency and oncogenesis. We used PAR-CLIP and a newly
developed variant of this method, iDo-PAR-CLIP, to identify LIN28B targets as
well as sites bound by the individual RNA-binding domains of LIN28B in the human 
transcriptome at nucleotide resolution. The position of target binding sites
reflected the known structural relative orientation of individual LIN28B-binding 
domains, validating iDo-PAR-CLIP. Our data suggest that LIN28B directly interacts
with most expressed mRNAs and members of the let-7 microRNA family. The
Lin28-binding motif detected in pre-let-7 was enriched in mRNA sequences bound by
LIN28B. Upon LIN28B knockdown, cell proliferation and the cell cycle were
strongly impaired. Quantitative shotgun proteomics of LIN28B depleted cells
revealed significant reduction of protein synthesis from its RNA targets.
Computational analyses provided evidence that the strength of protein synthesis
reduction correlated with the location of LIN28B binding sites within target
transcripts.

PMCID: PMC3849162
PMID: 23770886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 25;110(26):E2362-70. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1301837110. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

Conserved microRNA pathway regulates developmental timing of retinal
neurogenesis.

La Torre A(1), Georgi S, Reh TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, Institute for Stem Cells and Regenerative 
Medicine, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Most regions of the vertebrate central nervous system develop by the sequential
addition of different classes of neurons and glia. This phenomenon has been best 
characterized in laminated structures like the retina and the cerebral cortex, in
which the progenitor cells in these structures are thought to change in their
competence as development proceeds to generate different types of neurons in a
stereotypic sequence that is conserved across vertebrates. We previously reported
that conditional deletion of Dicer prevents the change in competence of
progenitors to generate later-born cell types, suggesting that specific microRNAs
(miRNAs) are required for this developmental transition. In this report, we now
show that three miRNAs, let-7, miR-125, and miR-9, are key regulators of the
early to late developmental transition in retinal progenitors: (i) members of
these three miRNA families increase over the relevant developmental period in
normal retinal progenitors; (ii) inhibiting the function of these miRNAs produces
changes in retinal development similar to Dicer CKO; (iii) overexpression of
members of these three miRNA families in Dicer-CKO retinas can rescue the
phenotype, allowing their progression to late progenitors; (iv) overexpression of
these miRNAs can accelerate normal retinal development; (v) microarray and
computational analyses of Dicer-CKO retinal cells identified two potential
targets of the late-progenitor miRNAs: Protogenin (Prtg) and Lin28b; and (vi)
overexpression of either Lin28 or Prtg can maintain the early progenitor state.
Together, these data demonstrate that a conserved miRNA pathway controls a key
step in the progression of temporal identity in retinal progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3696811
PMID: 23754433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Pediatr Obes. 2013 Oct;8(5):e50-3. doi: 10.1111/j.2047-6310.2013.00178.x. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

Replication of LIN28B SNP association with age of menarche in young Filipino
women.

Croteau-Chonka DC(1), Lange LA, Lee NR, Adair LS, Mohlke KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA.

BACKGROUND: Age of menarche, or the timing of first menses in girls, is a
physiological trait that shows substantial genetic heritability. Earlier age of
menarche is associated with increased childhood adiposity and with adult risk of 
obesity and cardiovascular disease.
OBJECTIVES: We sought to further characterize the single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) rs7759938 from the menarche locus LIN28B in 827 young Filipino women from
the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey (CLHNS).
METHODS: We tested rs7759938 for additive association with age of menarche and
also tested whether childhood adiposity, as measured by body mass index (BMI) at 
age 8, mediated this relationship.
RESULTS: We observed nominal association of rs7759938 with age of menarche
(ß<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.118 years, 95% confidence interval<U+2009>=<U+2009>(-0.216, -0.020), P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.019) with an
effect direction consistent with the previous report. We also observed suggestive
evidence that the effect of the SNP on age of menarche was independent of
childhood BMI.
CONCLUSIONS: These data confirm the strongest gene reported in Europeans (LIN28B)
as a contributor to age of menarche in an Asian population.

© 2013 The Authors. Pediatric Obesity © 2013 International Association for the
Study of Obesity.

PMCID: PMC3772980
PMID: 23740805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Hepatology. 2013 Dec;58(6):1977-91. doi: 10.1002/hep.26541. Epub 2013 Oct 30.

Perturbation of MicroRNA-370/Lin-28 homolog A/nuclear factor kappa B regulatory
circuit contributes to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xu WP(1), Yi M, Li QQ, Zhou WP, Cong WM, Yang Y, Ning BF, Yin C, Huang ZW, Wang
J, Qian H, Jiang CF, Chen YX, Xia CY, Wang HY, Zhang X, Xie WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, 200003, China.

MicroRNA 370 (miR-370) is located within the DLK1/DIO3 imprinting region on human
chromosome 14, which has been identified as a cancer-associated genomic region.
However, the role of miR-370 in malignances remains controversial. Here, we
report that miR-370 was repressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tissues
and hepatoma cell lines. Using gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments,
we demonstrated that miR-370 inhibited the malignant phenotype of HCC cells in
vitro. Overexpression of miR-370 inhibited growth and metastasis of HCC cells in 
vivo. Moreover, the RNA-binding protein, LIN28A, was identified as a direct
functional target of miR-370, which, in turn, blocked the biogenesis of miR-370
by binding to its precursor. LIN28A also mediated the suppressive effects of
miR-370 on migration and invasion of HCC cells by post-transcriptionally
regulating RelA/p65, which is an important effector of the canonical nuclear
factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B) pathway. Interleukin-6 (IL-6), a well-known NF-<U+03BA>B
downstream inflammatory molecule, reduced miR-370 but increased LIN28A levels in 
HCC. Furthermore, miR-370 levels were inversely correlated with LIN28A and IL-6
messenger RNA (mRNA) levels, whereas LIN28A mRNA expression was positively
correlated with IL-6 expression in human HCC samples. Interestingly, reduction of
miR-370 expression was associated with the development of HCC in rats, as well as
with aggressive tumor behavior and short survival in HCC patients.CONCLUSIONS:
These data demonstrate the involvement of a novel regulatory circuit consisting
of miR-370, LIN28A, RelA/p65 and IL-6 in HCC progression. Manipulating this
feedback loop may have beneficial effect in HCC treatment.

© 2013 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23728999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. PLoS One. 2013 May 7;8(5):e63821. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063821. Print 2013.

Genome wide association study of age at menarche in the Japanese population.

Tanikawa C(1), Okada Y, Takahashi A, Oda K, Kamatani N, Kubo M, Nakamura Y,
Matsuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Age at menarche (AAM) is a complex trait involving both genetic and environmental
factors. To identify the genetic factors associated with AAM, we conducted a
large-scale meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies using more than
15,000 Japanese female samples. Here, we identified an association between SNP
(single nucleotide polymorphism) rs364663 at the LIN28B locus and AAM, with a
P-value of 5.49×10(-7) and an effect size of 0.089 (year). We also evaluated 33
SNPs that were previously reported to be associated with AAM in women of European
ancestry. Among them, two SNPs rs4452860 and rs7028916 in TMEM38B indicated
significant association with AAM in the same directions as reported in previous
studies (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0013 with an effect size of 0.051) even after Bonferroni
correction for the 33 SNPs. In addition, six loci in or near CCDC85A,
LOC100421670, CA10, ZNF483, ARNTL, and RXRG exhibited suggestive association with
AAM (P<0.05). Our findings elucidated the impact of genetic variations on AAM in 
the Japanese population.

PMCID: PMC3646805
PMID: 23667675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Stem Cells. 2013 Aug;31(8):1563-73. doi: 10.1002/stem.1423.

Fetal deficiency of lin28 programs life-long aberrations in growth and glucose
metabolism.

Shinoda G(1), Shyh-Chang N, Soysa TY, Zhu H, Seligson MT, Shah SP, Abo-Sido N,
Yabuuchi A, Hagan JP, Gregory RI, Asara JM, Cantley LC, Moss EG, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Stem Cell Program, Division of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA;
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

LIN28A/B are RNA binding proteins implicated by genetic association studies in
human growth and glucose metabolism. Mice with ectopic over-expression of Lin28a 
have shown related phenotypes. Here, we describe the first comprehensive analysis
of the physiologic consequences of Lin28a and Lin28b deficiency in knockout (KO) 
mice. Lin28a/b-deficiency led to dwarfism starting at different ages, and
compound gene deletions showed a cumulative dosage effect on organismal growth.
Conditional gene deletion at specific developmental stages revealed that fetal
but neither neonatal nor adult deficiency resulted in growth defects and
aberrations in glucose metabolism. Tissue-specific KO mice implicated skeletal
muscle-deficiency in the abnormal programming of adult growth and metabolism. The
effects of Lin28b KO could be rescued by Tsc1 haplo-insufficiency in skeletal
muscles. Our data implicate fetal expression of Lin28a/b in the regulation of
life-long effects on metabolism and growth, and demonstrate that fetal Lin28b
acts at least in part via mTORC1 signaling.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3775935
PMID: 23666760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Aug;40(8):4675-83. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2562-y. Epub 2013
May 6.

Analysis on cDNA sequence, alternative splicing and polymorphisms associated with
timing of puberty of Lin28B gene in goats.

Cao G(1), Liu Q, Chu M, Di R, Fang L, Feng T, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)College of Agriculture, Liaocheng University, Liaocheng, 252059, Shandong,
People's Republic of China.

Recently, variations in or near Lin28B gene were reported to be associated with
timing of human puberty by genome-wide association studies. There have been no
reports on that in other mammals. In the present study, a fragment of 5,353 bp of
goat Lin28B cDNA, encoding 247 amino acids, was amplified, which contains 744 bp 
coding region and 4,410 bp 3'-untranslated region (UTR). Two alternative
transcripts of Lin28BS (encoding 247 aa) and Lin28BL (encoding 261 aa) were
found. Eight mutations in 3'-UTR were detected in nine goat breeds, and the T
allele frequencies of A2934T and C3053T in the five sexual precocious breeds were
higher than that of the four sexual late-maturing breeds (p<0.05). This may
indicate that both the 2934 and 3053 locus may be associated with the age of goat
puberty. Our results might expand understanding of the biological pathway of
Lin28B gene regulating the timing of mammal puberty.

PMID: 23645087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mech Ageing Dev. 2013 Jul-Aug;134(7-8):346-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2013.04.006.
Epub 2013 Apr 29.

MYCN/LIN28B/Let-7/HMGA2 pathway implicated by meta-analysis of GWAS in
suppression of post-natal proliferation thereby potentially contributing to
aging.

Keane M(1), de Magalhães JP.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Genomics of Ageing Group, Institute of Integrative Biology,
University of Liverpool, Liverpool L69 7ZB, UK.

Mammalian organ and body growth slows and finally terminates because of a
progressive suppression of cell proliferation, however little is known about the 
genetic regulatory mechanisms responsible. A meta-analysis of genome-wide
association studies using growth and development-related traits revealed that two
genes, HMGA2 and LIN28B, had multiple associations. Altered HMGA2 expression has 
been shown to result in both overgrowth and pygmy phenotypes in mice and
overgrowth in humans. These genes are members of the MYCN/LIN28B/Let-7/HMGA2
pathway and homologs of LIN28B and let-7 are known to regulate developmental
timing in Caenorhabditis elegans. Strikingly, expression levels of let-7 and
Hmga2 in murine stem cells continue to increase and decrease, respectively, after
growth terminates, suggesting that this pathway may contribute to regulating the 
pace of both development and age-related degenerative phenotypes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23639551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Apr 4;12(4):395-406. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.03.005.

Lin28: primal regulator of growth and metabolism in stem cells.

Shyh-Chang N(1), Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 
Boston Children's Hospital and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

In recent years, the highly conserved Lin28 RNA-binding proteins have emerged as 
factors that define stemness in several tissue lineages. Lin28 proteins repress
let-7 microRNAs and influence mRNA translation, thereby regulating the
self-renewal of mammalian embryonic stem cells. Subsequent discoveries revealed
that Lin28a and Lin28b are also important in organismal growth and metabolism,
tissue development, somatic reprogramming, and cancer. In this review, we discuss
the Lin28 pathway and its regulation, outline its roles in stem cells, tissue
development, and pathogenesis, and examine the ramifications for re-engineering
mammalian physiology.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3652335
PMID: 23561442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Immunol Rev. 2013 May;253(1):290-303. doi: 10.1111/imr.12048.

Exploring the RNA world in hematopoietic cells through the lens of RNA-binding
proteins.

Yuan J(1), Muljo SA.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Immunobiology Unit, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute
of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892-1892, USA.

The discovery of microRNAs has renewed interest in posttranscriptional modes of
regulation, fueling an emerging view of a rich RNA world within our cells that
deserves further exploration. Much work has gone into elucidating genetic
regulatory networks that orchestrate gene expression programs and direct cell
fate decisions in the hematopoietic system. However, the focus has been to
elucidate signaling pathways and transcriptional programs. To bring us one step
closer to reverse engineering the molecular logic of cellular differentiation, it
will be necessary to map posttranscriptional circuits as well and integrate them 
in the context of existing network models. In this regard, RNA-binding proteins
(RBPs) may rival transcription factors as important regulators of cell fates and 
represent a tractable opportunity to connect the RNA world to the proteome.
ChIP-seq has greatly facilitated genome-wide localization of DNA-binding
proteins, helping us to understand genomic regulation at a systems level.
Similarly, technological advances such as CLIP-seq allow transcriptome-wide
mapping of RBP binding sites, aiding us to unravel posttranscriptional networks. 
Here, we review RBP-mediated posttranscriptional regulation, paying special
attention to findings relevant to the immune system. As a prime example, we
highlight the RBP Lin28B, which acts as a heterochronic switch between fetal and 
adult lymphopoiesis.

Published 2013. This article is a U.S. Government work and is in the public
domain in the USA.

PMCID: PMC3620839
PMID: 23550653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Hum Reprod. 2013 Jun;28(6):1695-706. doi: 10.1093/humrep/det071. Epub 2013 Mar
18.

Replication of genetic loci for ages at menarche and menopause in the
multi-ethnic Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE)
study.

Carty CL(1), Spencer KL, Setiawan VW, Fernandez-Rhodes L, Malinowski J, Buyske S,
Young A, Jorgensen NW, Cheng I, Carlson CS, Brown-Gentry K, Goodloe R, Park A,
Parikh NI, Henderson B, Le Marchand L, Wactawski-Wende J, Fornage M, Matise TC,
Hindorff LA, Arnold AM, Haiman CA, Franceschini N, Peters U, Crawford DC.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA,
USA. ccarty@fhcrc.org

STUDY QUESTION: Do genetic associations identified in genome-wide association
studies (GWAS) of age at menarche (AM) and age at natural menopause (ANM)
replicate in women of diverse race/ancestry from the Population Architecture
using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) Study?
SUMMARY ANSWER: We replicated GWAS reproductive trait single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in our European descent population and found that many SNPs 
were also associated with AM and ANM in populations of diverse ancestry.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Menarche and menopause mark the reproductive lifespan in
women and are important risk factors for chronic diseases including obesity,
cardiovascular disease and cancer. Both events are believed to be influenced by
environmental and genetic factors, and vary in populations differing by genetic
ancestry and geography. Most genetic variants associated with these traits have
been identified in GWAS of European-descent populations.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: A total of 42 251 women of diverse ancestry from
PAGE were included in cross-sectional analyses of AM and ANM.
MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: SNPs previously associated with ANM (n = 5 SNPs) and
AM (n = 3 SNPs) in GWAS were genotyped in American Indians, African Americans,
Asians, European Americans, Hispanics and Native Hawaiians. To test SNP
associations with ANM or AM, we used linear regression models stratified by
race/ethnicity and PAGE sub-study. Results were then combined in race-specific
fixed effect meta-analyses for each outcome. For replication and generalization
analyses, significance was defined at P < 0.01 for ANM analyses and P < 0.017 for
AM analyses.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: We replicated findings for AM SNPs in the
LIN28B locus and an intergenic region on 9q31 in European Americans. The LIN28B
SNPs (rs314277 and rs314280) were also significantly associated with AM in
Asians, but not in other race/ethnicity groups. Linkage disequilibrium (LD)
patterns at this locus varied widely among the ancestral groups. With the
exception of an intergenic SNP at 13q34, all ANM SNPs replicated in European
Americans. Three were significantly associated with ANM in other race/ethnicity
populations: rs2153157 (6p24.2/SYCP2L), rs365132 (5q35/UIMC1) and rs16991615
(20p12.3/MCM8). While rs1172822 (19q13/BRSK1) was not significant in the
populations of non-European descent, effect sizes showed similar trends.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Lack of association for the GWAS SNPs in the
non-European American groups may be due to differences in locus LD patterns
between these groups and the European-descent populations included in the GWAS
discovery studies; and in some cases, lower power may also contribute to
non-significant findings.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The discovery of genetic variants associated 
with the reproductive traits provides an important opportunity to elucidate the
biological mechanisms involved with normal variation and disorders of menarche
and menopause. In this study we replicated most, but not all reported SNPs in
European descent populations and examined the epidemiologic architecture of these
early reported variants, describing their generalizability and effect size across
differing ancestral populations. Such data will be increasingly important for
prioritizing GWAS SNPs for follow-up in fine-mapping and resequencing studies, as
well as in translational research.

PMCID: PMC3657124
PMID: 23508249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Exp Cell Res. 2013 May 1;319(8):1220-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.03.004. Epub
2013 Mar 13.

Lin28a is a putative factor in regulating cancer stem cell-like properties in
side population cells of oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Hayashi S(1), Tanaka J, Okada S, Isobe T, Yamamoto G, Yasuhara R, Irie T, Akiyama
C, Kohno Y, Tachikawa T, Mishima K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Oral Diagnostic Sciences, School of
Dentistry, Showa University, 1-5-8 Hatanodai, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8555,
Japan.

Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are among the target cells of cancer therapy because
they are uniquely involved in both cancer progression and sensitivity to
chemotherapeutic agents. We identified side population (SP) cells, which are
known to be an enriched population of CSC, in five oral squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC) cells (SCC9, SCC25, TOSCC7, TOSCC17, and TOSCC23). The percentages of SP
cells ranged from 0% to 3.3%, with TOSCC23 cells showing the highest percentages 
of SP cells (3.3% of the total cell population). The SP cells isolated from
TOSCC23 cells also showed greater cell proliferation and invasion compared to
non-SP (MP) cells. Therefore, our initial findings suggested that SP cells were
enriched for CSC-like cells. Furthermore, DNA microarray analysis revealed that
the expression of cell proliferation-related and anti-apoptotic genes was greater
in SP cells compared to MP cells. We focused on Lin28a, which showed the highest 
expression (approximately 22-fold) among the upregulated genes. The
overexpression of Lin28a in TOSCC23 cells increased their proliferation, colony
formation, and invasion. These findings suggest that Lin28a is an appropriate CSC
target molecule for OSCC treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23500413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Int J Cancer. 2013 Sep 15;133(6):1310-22. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28154. Epub 2013 Apr
5.

The oncoprotein HBXIP upregulates Lin28B via activating TF II D to promote
proliferation of breast cancer cells.

Liu Q(1), Bai X, Li H, Zhang Y, Zhao Y, Zhang X, Ye L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University,
Tianjin, 300071, People's Republic of China.

Hepatitis B X-interacting protein (HBXIP) is a novel oncoprotein and plays a key 
role in the development of breast cancer. However, its mechanisms of action are
poorly understood. Lin28B functions as an oncogene in a variety of human cancers.
In our study, we report that HBXIP acts with its partner Lin28B to contribute to 
carcinogenesis. Our data showed that the expression levels of HBXIP were
significantly positively correlated with those of Lin28B in clinical breast
cancer tissues. Then, we found that HBXIP was able to upregulate Lin28B in breast
cancer MCF-7 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) revealed that HBXIP occupied the
promoter region (-1199/-1073 nt) of Lin28B. Importantly, co-immunoprecipitation
(Co-IP) and GST pull-down assay validated that HBXIP directly bound to the
TATA-binding protein (TBP), a basal subunit of transcription factor TF II D
complex. In addition, we discovered that Lin28B could block the downregulation of
HBXIP via suppressing miR-520b which directly targeted HBXIP mRNA in the cells.
In function, we demonstrated that HBXIP enhanced the proliferation of breast
cancer cells through Lin28B in vitro and in vivo. Thus, we conclude that the
oncoprotein HBXIP as a co-activator of TF II D transactivates Lin28B promoter via
directly binding to TBP to upregulate the expression of Lin28B in promotion of
proliferation of breast cancer cells, in which Lin28B maintains the high level of
HBXIP through suppressing miR-520b in a feedback manner. Therapeutically, HBXIP
may serve as a target of breast cancer.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23494474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Oncotarget. 2012 Dec;3(12):1641-52.

Lin28b promotes head and neck cancer progression via modulation of the
insulin-like growth factor survival pathway.

Alajez NM(1), Shi W, Wong D, Lenarduzzi M, Waldron J, Weinreb I, Liu FF.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Unit, Department of Anatomy, College of Medicine, King Saud
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Lin28 is a developmentally regulated RNA binding protein which has recently
emerged as key regulator in the biogenesis of the let-7 micro-RNA family. While
the expression of Lin28b has been linked to advanced tumor stage, the precise
molecular mechanism(s) by which Lin28b drives disease progression is still being 
unraveled. Herein, we generated a let-7-resistant Lin28b ORF, stably expressed in
the FaDu head and neck cancer (HNC) cell line. FaDu-Lin28b cells exhibited
enhanced tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. Global gene and micro-RNA expression 
analyses revealed significant enrichment in several pathways involved in cell
migration, chromatin remodeling, and cellular stress response. Direct regulation 
of selected genes (HMGA2, CCND2, IGF1R, and IGF2BP2) via a let-7-Lin28b mechanism
was validated. Notably, up-regulation of several genes in the IGF pathway in
Lin28b-expressing cells was observed. Functional studies revealed significant
increase in the survival of Lin28b-expressing cells when cultured under stress
conditions, which was dependent on the presence of IGF1. Therefore, our data
identified several novel gene targets for Lin28b-let7, and revealed a novel
mechanism by which Lin28b promote tumorigenesis. Concordantly, clinical
examinations of Lin28b, IGF2BP2 and IGF2 revealed a significant association
between the expression of these genes with disease relapse, thereby corroborating
the potential relevance for the Lin28b/IGF axis in HNC progression.

PMCID: PMC3681501
PMID: 23482325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. RNA. 2013 May;19(5):613-26. doi: 10.1261/rna.036491.112. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Identification of mRNAs bound and regulated by human LIN28 proteins and molecular
requirements for RNA recognition.

Hafner M(1), Max KE, Bandaru P, Morozov P, Gerstberger S, Brown M, Molina H,
Tuschl T.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Laboratory for RNA Molecular Biology, The 
Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Human LIN28A and LIN28B are RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) conserved in animals with
important roles during development and stem cell reprogramming. We used
Photoactivatable-Ribonucleoside-Enhanced Crosslinking and Immunoprecipitation
(PAR-CLIP) in HEK293 cells and identified a largely overlapping set of ~3000
mRNAs at ~9500 sites located in the 3' UTR and CDS. In vitro and in vivo, LIN28
preferentially bound single-stranded RNA containing a uridine-rich element and
one or more flanking guanosines and appeared to be able to disrupt base-pairing
to access these elements when embedded in predicted secondary structure. In
HEK293 cells, LIN28 protein binding mildly stabilized target mRNAs and increased 
protein abundance. The top targets were its own mRNAs and those of other RBPs and
cell cycle regulators. Alteration of LIN28 protein levels also negatively
regulated the abundance of some but not all let-7 miRNA family members,
indicating sequence-specific binding of let-7 precursors to LIN28 proteins and
competition with cytoplasmic miRNA biogenesis factors.

PMCID: PMC3677277
PMID: 23481595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Hum Mol Genet. 2013 Jul 1;22(13):2735-47. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt104. Epub 2013 Feb 
27.

Genome-wide association and longitudinal analyses reveal genetic loci linking
pubertal height growth, pubertal timing and childhood adiposity.

Cousminer DL(1), Berry DJ, Timpson NJ, Ang W, Thiering E, Byrne EM, Taal HR,
Huikari V, Bradfield JP, Kerkhof M, Groen-Blokhuis MM, Kreiner-Møller E,
Marinelli M, Holst C, Leinonen JT, Perry JR, Surakka I, Pietiläinen O, Kettunen
J, Anttila V, Kaakinen M, Sovio U, Pouta A, Das S, Lagou V, Power C, Prokopenko
I, Evans DM, Kemp JP, St Pourcain B, Ring S, Palotie A, Kajantie E, Osmond C,
Lehtimäki T, Viikari JS, Kähönen M, Warrington NM, Lye SJ, Palmer LJ, Tiesler CM,
Flexeder C, Montgomery GW, Medland SE, Hofman A, Hakonarson H, Guxens M, Bartels 
M, Salomaa V; ReproGen Consortium, Murabito JM, Kaprio J, Sørensen TI, Ballester 
F, Bisgaard H, Boomsma DI, Koppelman GH, Grant SF, Jaddoe VW, Martin NG, Heinrich
J, Pennell CE, Raitakari OT, Eriksson JG, Smith GD, Hyppönen E, Järvelin MR,
McCarthy MI, Ripatti S, Widén E; Early Growth Genetics (EGG) Consortium.

Collaborators: Adair LS, Ang W, Atalay M, van Beijsterveldt T, Bergen N, Benke K,
Berry DJ, Boomsma DI, Bradfield JP, Charoen P, Coin L, Cooper C, Cousminer DL,
Das S, Davis OS, Dedoussis GV, Elliott P, Estivill X, Evans DM, Feenstra B,
Flexeder C, Frayling T, Freathy RM, Gaillard R, Geller F, Gillman M, Grant SF,
Groen-Blokhuis M, Goh LK, Guxens M, Hakonarson H, Hattersley AT, Haworth CM,
Hadley D, Hedebrand J, Heinrich J, Hinney A, Hirschhorn JN, Hocher B, Holloway
JW, Holst C, Hottenga JJ, Horikoshi M, Huikari V, Hypponen E, Iñiguez C, Jaddoe
VW, Jarvelin MR, Kaakinen M, Kilpeläinen TO, Kirin M, Kowgier M, Lakka HM, Lakka 
TA, Lange LA, Lawlor DA, Lehtimäki T, Lewin A, Lindgren C, Lindi V, Maggi R,
Marsh J, McCarthy MI, Melbye M, Middeldorp C, Millwood I, Mohlke KL,
Mook-Kanamori DO, Murray JC, Nivard M, Nohr EA, Ntalla I, Oken E, Ong KK,
O'Reilly PF, Palmer LJ, Panoutsopoulou K, Pararajasingham J, Pearson ER, Pennell 
CE, Power C, Price TS, Prokopenko I, Raitakari OT, Rodriguez A, Salem RM, Saw SM,
Scherag A, Sebert S, Siitonen N, Simell O, Sørensen TI, Sovio U, Pourcain BS,
Strachan DP, Sunyer J, Taal HR, Teo YY, Thiering E, Tiesler C, Timpson NJ,
Uitterlinden AG, Valcárcel B, Warrington NM, White S, Widén E, Willemsen G,
Wilson JF, Yaghootkar H, Zeggini E, Elks CE, Perry JR, Sulem P, Chasman DI,
Franceschini N, He C, Lunetta KL, Visser JA, Byrne EM, Cousminer DL, Gudbjartsson
DF, Esko T, Feenstra B, Hottenga JJ, Koller DL, Kutalik Z, Lin P, Mangino M,
Marongiu M, McArdle PF, Smith AV, Stolk L, van Wingerden SH, Zhao JH, Albrecht E,
Corre T, Ingelsson E, Hayward C, Magnusson PK, Smith EN, Ulivi S, Warrington M,
Zgaga L, Alavere H, Amin N, Aspelund T, Bandinelli S, Barroso I, Berenson GS,
Bergmann S, Blackburn H, Boerwinkle E, Buring JE, Busonero F, Campbell H, Chanock
SJ, Chen W, Cornelis MC, Couper D, Coviello AD, d'Adamo P, de Faire U, de Geus
EJ, Deloukas P, Döring A, Davey Smith G, Easton DF, Eiriksdottir G, Emilsson V,
Eriksson J, Ferrucci L, Folsom AR, Foroud T, Garcia M, Gasparini P, Geller F,
Gieger C, Gudnason V, Hall P, Hankinson SE, Ferreli L, Heath AC, Hernandez DG,
Hofman A, Hu FB, Illig T, Järvelin MR, Johnson AD, Karasik D, Khaw KT, Kiel DP,
Kilpeläinen TO, Kolcic I, Kraft P, Launer LJ, Laven JS, Li S, Liu J, Levy D,
Martin NG, McArdle WL, Melbye M, Mooser V, Murray JC, Murray SS, Nalls MA,
Navarro P, Nelis M, Ness AR, Northstone K, Oostra BA, Peacock M, Palmer LJ,
Palotie A, Paré G, Parker AN, Pedersen NL, Peltonen L, Pennell CE, Pharoah P,
Polasek O, Plump AS, Pouta A, Porcu E, Rafnar T, Rice JP, Ring SM, Rivadeneira F,
Rudan I, Sala C, Salomaa V, Sanna S, Schlessinger D, Schork NJ, Scuteri A, Segrè 
AV, Shuldiner AR, Soranzo N, Sovio U, Srinivasan SR, Strachan DP, Tammesoo ML,
Tikkanen E, Toniolo D, Tsui K, Tryggvadottir L, Tyrer J, Uda M, van Dam RM, van
Meurs JB, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Wareham NJ, Waterworth DM, Weedon MN,
Wichmann HE, Willemsen G, Wilson JF, Wright AF, Young L, Zhai G, Zhuang WV,
Bierut LJ, Boyd HA, Crisponi L, Demerath EW, van Duijn CM, Econs MJ, Harris TB,
Hunter DJ, Loos RJ, Metspalu A, Montgomery GW, Ridker PM, Spector TD, Streeten
EA, Stefansson K, Thorsteinsdottir U, Uitterlinden AG, Widen E, Murabito JM, Ong 
KK, Murray A.

The pubertal height growth spurt is a distinctive feature of childhood growth
reflecting both the central onset of puberty and local growth factors. Although
little is known about the underlying genetics, growth variability during puberty 
correlates with adult risks for hormone-dependent cancer and adverse
cardiometabolic health. The only gene so far associated with pubertal height
growth, LIN28B, pleiotropically influences childhood growth, puberty and cancer
progression, pointing to shared underlying mechanisms. To discover genetic loci
influencing pubertal height and growth and to place them in context of overall
growth and maturation, we performed genome-wide association meta-analyses in 18
737 European samples utilizing longitudinally collected height measurements. We
found significant associations (P < 1.67 × 10(-8)) at 10 loci, including LIN28B. 
Five loci associated with pubertal timing, all impacting multiple aspects of
growth. In particular, a novel variant correlated with expression of MAPK3, and
associated both with increased prepubertal growth and earlier menarche. Another
variant near ADCY3-POMC associated with increased body mass index, reduced
pubertal growth and earlier puberty. Whereas epidemiological correlations suggest
that early puberty marks a pathway from rapid prepubertal growth to reduced final
height and adult obesity, our study shows that individual loci associating with
pubertal growth have variable longitudinal growth patterns that may differ from
epidemiological observations. Overall, this study uncovers part of the complex
genetic architecture linking pubertal height growth, the timing of puberty and
childhood obesity and provides new information to pinpoint processes linking
these traits.

PMCID: PMC3674797
PMID: 23449627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Adolesc Health. 2013 Mar;52(3):375. doi: 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2012.10.273.

LIN28B polymorphism could modulate the relationship between childhood obesity and
age at menarche.

Grandone A, Cirillo G, Messa F, Coppola R, Festa A, Perrone L, del Giudice EM.

Comment in
    J Adolesc Health. 2013 Mar;52(3):376.

Comment on
    J Adolesc Health. 2012 Jun;50(6):621-6.

PMID: 23427786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055258. Epub 2013 Feb 12.

Genetic variation and reproductive timing: African American women from the
Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) Study.

Spencer KL(1), Malinowski J, Carty CL, Franceschini N, Fernández-Rhodes L, Young 
A, Cheng I, Ritchie MD, Haiman CA, Wilkens L, Chunyuanwu, Matise TC, Carlson CS, 
Brennan K, Park A, Rajkovic A, Hindorff LA, Buyske S, Crawford DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Environmental Science, Heidelberg University,
Tiffin, Ohio, United States of America.

Age at menarche (AM) and age at natural menopause (ANM) define the boundaries of 
the reproductive lifespan in women. Their timing is associated with various
diseases, including cancer and cardiovascular disease. Genome-wide association
studies have identified several genetic variants associated with either AM or ANM
in populations of largely European or Asian descent women. The extent to which
these associations generalize to diverse populations remains unknown. Therefore, 
we sought to replicate previously reported AM and ANM findings and to identify
novel AM and ANM variants using the Metabochip (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>161,098 SNPs) in 4,159 and
1,860 African American women, respectively, in the Women's Health Initiative
(WHI) and Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) studies, as part of the
Population Architecture using Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) Study. We
replicated or generalized one previously identified variant for AM,
rs1361108/CENPW, and two variants for ANM, rs897798/BRSK1 and rs769450/APOE, to
our African American cohort. Overall, generalization of the majority of
previously-identified variants for AM and ANM, including LIN28B and MCM8, was not
observed in this African American sample. We identified three novel loci
associated with ANM that reached significance after multiple testing correction
(LDLR rs189596789, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>5×10<U+207B>°8; KCNQ1 rs79972789, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.9×10<U+207B>°7; COL4A3BP
rs181686584, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.9×10<U+207B>°7). Our most significant AM association was upstream of 
RSF1, a gene implicated in ovarian and breast cancers (rs11604207,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.6×10<U+207B>°6). While most associations were identified in either AM or ANM, we
did identify genes suggestively associated with both: PHACTR1 and ARHGAP42. The
lack of generalization coupled with the potentially novel associations identified
here emphasize the need for additional genetic discovery efforts for AM and ANM
in diverse populations.

PMCID: PMC3570525
PMID: 23424626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 May;45(5):973-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2013.02.006.
Epub 2013 Feb 16.

LIN28/LIN28B: an emerging oncogenic driver in cancer stem cells.

Zhou J(1), Ng SB, Chng WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. csizjb@nus.edu.sg

LIN28 (LIN28A) is a reprogramming factor and conserved RNA-binding protein.
LIN28B is the only homolog of LIN28 in humans, sharing structure and certain
function. LIN28/LIN28B has been identified to be overexpressed in a wide range of
solid tumors and hematological malignancies. Blockage of let-7 miRNA biogensis
and subsequent derepression of let-7 miRNA target genes by LIN28/LIN28B play
important roles in cancer progression and metastasis. We will first provide an
overview of LIN28/LIN28B gene and protein structures, followed by summary of the 
studies that showed their aberrant expression in primary human cancers and
relevant clinical significance with emphasis on their roles in formation of
cancer stem cells. Next, we will highlight the current knowledge of LIN28/LIN28B 
regulators and molecular mechanisms of LIN28/LIN28B-mediated oncogenesis. The
potential medical applications for targeting LIN28/LIN28B will also be discussed 
in this review.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23420006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2013 May 20;38(12):1034-9. doi:
10.1097/BRS.0b013e318287fcfd.

Association between genetic determinants of peak height velocity during puberty
and predisposition to adolescent idiopathic scoliosis.

Mao S(1), Xu L, Zhu Z, Qian B, Qiao J, Yi L, Qiu Y.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Spine Surgery, the Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing
University Medical School, Nanjing, China; and Jiangsu Key Laboratory for
Molecular Medicine, Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, China.

STUDY DESIGN: An association study to comprehensively clarify variations of
genetic determinants of peak height velocity (PHV) during puberty in adolescent
idiopathic scoliosis (AIS).
OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether the genetic determinants of timing and
magnitude of PHV during puberty are associated with the susceptibility or curve
progression of the female patients with AIS.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: An involvement of abnormal pubertal growth pattern in
the etiopathogenesis of AIS has been implicated in previous studies. However,
there is no clear consensus on the anthropometric variations of stature or growth
rate. The recent advance in the longitudinally identified genetic determinants of
PHV offers new opportunities to facilitate analysis of the association of
pubertal growth with the susceptibility or curve severity of AIS.
METHODS: A gene-based association study was conducted using 9 single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near SOCS2, SF3B4/SV2A, C17orf67, CABLES1, DOT1L,
CDK6, C6orf106, and LIN28B with confirmed association with PHV, peak growth age, 
or adult height. A total of 500 patients with AIS and 494 age-matched healthy
controls were genotyped using the PCR-based Invader assay. Case-control study and
case-only study were performed to define the contribution of the 9 SNPs to
predisposition and curve severity of AIS.
RESULTS: Strong associations between rs12459350 in DOT1L, rs4794665 in C17orf67, 
and susceptibility of AIS were found, with the PHV increasing allele G of
rs12459350 and PHV/adult height increasing allele A of rs4794665 both being
significant predisposition alleles of AIS (P = 0.001 for rs12459350, odds ratio =
1.16, 95% confidence interval = 1.06-1.27; P = 0.006 for rs4794665, odd ratio =
1.33, 95% confidence interval = 1.09-1.62). None of the genotyped SNPs was
associated with curve severity in patients with AIS.
CONCLUSION: Polymorphisms of the rs4794665 in C17orf67 and rs12459350 in DOT1L
were associated with combined predisposition to AIS susceptibility and higher
pubertal PHV, which strongly mirrored the anthropometric findings of taller
pubertal stature and accelerated growth rate described in AIS.

PMID: 23354108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Development. 2013 Mar;140(5):976-86. doi: 10.1242/dev.089797. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Lin28 proteins are required for germ layer specification in Xenopus.

Faas L(1), Warrander FC, Maguire R, Ramsbottom SA, Quinn D, Genever P, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Area 11, Department of Biology, University of York, York, YO10 5DD, UK.

Lin28 family proteins share a unique structure, with both zinc knuckle and cold
shock RNA-binding domains, and were originally identified as regulators of
developmental timing in Caenorhabditis elegans. They have since been implicated
as regulators of pluripotency in mammalian stem cells in culture. Using Xenopus
tropicalis, we have undertaken the first analysis of the effects on the early
development of a vertebrate embryo resulting from global inhibition of the Lin28 
family. The Xenopus genome contains two Lin28-related genes, lin28a and lin28b.
lin28a is expressed zygotically, whereas lin28b is expressed both zygotically and
maternally. Both lin28a and lin28b are expressed in pluripotent cells of the
Xenopus embryo and are enriched in cells that respond to mesoderm-inducing
signals. The development of axial and paraxial mesoderm is severely abnormal in
lin28 knockdown (morphant) embryos. In culture, the ability of pluripotent cells 
from the embryo to respond to the FGF and activin/nodal-like mesoderm-inducing
pathways is compromised following inhibition of lin28 function. Furthermore,
there are complex effects on the temporal regulation of, and the responses to,
mesoderm-inducing signals in lin28 morphant embryos. We provide evidence that
Xenopus lin28 proteins play a key role in choreographing the responses of
pluripotent cells in the early embryo to the signals that regulate germ layer
specification, and that this early function is probably independent of the
recognised role of Lin28 proteins in negatively regulating let-7 miRNA
biogenesis.

PMID: 23344711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Endocrinology. 2013 Mar;154(3):1321-36. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1745. Epub 2013 Jan 
21.

Distinct expression patterns predict differential roles of the miRNA-binding
proteins, Lin28 and Lin28b, in the mouse testis: studies during postnatal
development and in a model of hypogonadotropic hypogonadism.

Gaytan F(1), Sangiao-Alvarellos S, Manfredi-Lozano M, García-Galiano D, Ruiz-Pino
F, Romero-Ruiz A, León S, Morales C, Cordido F, Pinilla L, Tena-Sempere M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Córdoba, Avda. Menéndez Pidal s/n, 14004 Córdoba, Spain.

Lin28 (also termed Lin28a) and Lin28b are related RNA-binding proteins, involved 
in the control of microRNA synthesis, especially of the let-7 family, with
putative functions in early (embryo) development. However, their roles during
postnatal maturation remain ill defined. Despite the general assumption that
Lin28 and Lin28b share similar targets and functions, conclusive demonstration of
such redundancy is still missing. In addition, recent observations suggest a role
of Lin28 proteins in mammalian reproduction, which is yet to be defined. We
document herein the patterns of RNA expression and protein distribution of Lin28 
and Lin28b in mouse testis during postnatal development and in a model of
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism as a result of inactivation of the kisspeptin
receptor, Gpr54. Lin28 and Lin28b mRNAs were expressed in mouse testis across
postnatal maturation, but their levels disparately varied between neonatal and
pubertal periods, with peak Lin28 levels in infantile testes and sustained
elevation of Lin28b mRNA in young adult male gonads, where relative levels of
let-7a and let-7b miRNAs were significantly suppressed. In addition, Lin28
peptides displayed totally different patterns of cellular distribution in mouse
testis: Lin28 was located in undifferentiated and type-A1 spermatogonia, whereas 
Lin28b was confined to spermatids and interstitial Leydig cells. These profiles
were perturbed in Gpr54 null mouse testis, which showed preserved but irregular
Lin28 signal and absence of Lin28b peptide, which was rescued by administration
of gonadotropins, mainly hCG (as super-agonist of LH). In addition, increased
relative levels of Lin28, but not Lin28b, mRNA and of let-7a/let-7b miRNAs were
observed in Gpr54 KO mouse testes. Altogether, our data are the first to document
the divergent patterns of cellular distribution and mRNA expression of Lin28 and 
Lin28b in the mouse testis along postnatal maturation and their alteration in a
model of congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Our findings suggest distinct 
functional roles of these two related, but not overlapping, miRNA-binding
proteins in the male gonad.

PMID: 23337528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 23;33(4):449-60. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.618. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

Hepatitis B virus X protein upregulates Lin28A/Lin28B through Sp-1/c-Myc to
enhance the proliferation of hepatoma cells.

You X(1), Liu F(2), Zhang T(1), Lv N(1), Liu Q(2), Shan C(1), Du Y(1), Kong G(1),
Wang T(1), Ye L(2), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Research, Key Laboratory of Molecular Microbiology and
Technology of Ministry of Education, College of Life Sciences, Nankai University,
Tianjin, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Biochemistry, College of
Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

Hepatitis B virus X protein (HBx) plays critical roles in the pathogenesis of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Here, we were interested in knowing whether the
oncogene Lin28A and its homolog Lin28B are involved in the hepatocarcinogenesis
mediated by HBx. We showed that the expression levels of Lin28A and Lin28B were
increased in clinical HCC tissues, HepG2.2.15 cell line and liver tissues of
p21-HBx transgenic mice. Interestingly, the expression levels of HBx were
positively associated with those of Lin28A/Lin28B in clinical HCC tissues.
Moreover, the overexpression of HBx resulted in the upregulation of Lin28A/Lin28B
in hepatoma HepG2/H7402 cell lines by transient transfection, suggesting that HBx
was able to upregulate Lin28A and Lin28B. Then, we examined the mechanism by
which HBx upregulated Lin28A and Lin28B. We identified that the promoter region
of Lin28A regulated by HBx was located at nt -235/-66 that contained Sp-1 binding
element. Co-immunoprecipitation showed that HBx was able to interact with Sp-1 in
HepG2-X cells. Moreover, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) demonstrated that
HBx could bind to the promoter of Lin28A, which failed to work when Sp-1 was
silenced. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) further identified that HBx
was able to interact with Sp-1 element in Lin28A promoter via transcription
factor Sp-1. In addition, we found that c-Myc was involved in the activation of
Lin28B mediated by HBx. In function, Lin28A/Lin28B played important roles in
HBx-enhanced proliferation of hepatoma cells in vitro and in vivo. In conclusion,
HBx activates Lin28A/Lin28B through Sp-1/c-Myc in hepatoma cells. Lin28A/Lin28B
serves as key driver genes in HBx-induced hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMID: 23318446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Endocrinology. 2013 Feb;154(2):942-55. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-2006. Epub 2013 Jan
4.

Changes in hypothalamic expression of the Lin28/let-7 system and related
microRNAs during postnatal maturation and after experimental manipulations of
puberty.

Sangiao-Alvarellos S(1), Manfredi-Lozano M, Ruiz-Pino F, Navarro VM,
Sánchez-Garrido MA, Leon S, Dieguez C, Cordido F, Matagne V, Dissen GA, Ojeda SR,
Pinilla L, Tena-Sempere M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Physiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine,
Avda, Menendez Pidal s/n.14004, University of Córdoba, Córdoba, Spain.
susana.sangiao@udc.es

Lin28 and Lin28b are related RNA-binding proteins that inhibit the maturation of 
miRNAs of the let-7 family and participate in the control of cellular stemness
and early embryonic development. Considerable interest has arisen recently
concerning other physiological roles of the Lin28/let-7 axis, including its
potential involvement in the control of puberty, as suggested by genome-wide
association studies and functional genomics. We report herein the expression
profiles of Lin28 and let-7 members in the rat hypothalamus during postnatal
maturation and in selected models of altered puberty. The expression patterns of 
c-Myc (upstream positive regulator of Lin28), mir-145 (negative regulator of
c-Myc), and mir-132 and mir-9 (putative miRNA repressors of Lin28, predicted by
bioinformatic algorithms) were also explored. In male and female rats, Lin28,
Lin28b, and c-Myc mRNAs displayed very high hypothalamic expression during the
neonatal period, markedly decreased during the infantile-to-juvenile transition
and reached minimal levels before/around puberty. A similar puberty-related
decline was observed for Lin28b in monkey hypothalamus but not in the rat cortex,
suggesting species conservation and tissue specificity. Conversely, let-7a,
let-7b, mir-132, and mir-145, but not mir-9, showed opposite expression profiles.
Perturbation of brain sex differentiation and puberty, by neonatal treatment with
estrogen or androgen, altered the expression ratios of Lin28/let-7 at the time of
puberty. Changes in the c-Myc/Lin28b/let-7 pathway were also detected in models
of delayed puberty linked to early photoperiod manipulation and, to a lesser
extent, postnatal underfeeding or chronic subnutrition. Altogether, our data are 
the first to document dramatic changes in the expression of the Lin28/let-7 axis 
in the rat hypothalamus during the postnatal maturation and after different
manipulations that disturb puberty, thus suggesting the potential involvement of 
developmental changes in hypothalamic Lin28/let-7 expression in the mechanisms
permitting/leading to puberty onset.

PMCID: PMC3548186
PMID: 23291449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jan 15;110(3):972-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1221055110.
Epub 2012 Dec 31.

Metformin inhibits the inflammatory response associated with cellular
transformation and cancer stem cell growth.

Hirsch HA(1), Iliopoulos D, Struhl K.

Author information: 
(1)Department Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Metformin, the first-line drug for treating diabetes, inhibits cellular
transformation and selectively kills cancer stem cells in breast cancer cell
lines. In a Src-inducible model of cellular transformation, metformin inhibits
the earliest known step in the process, activation of the inflammatory
transcription factor NF-<U+03BA>B. Metformin strongly delays cellular transformation in 
a manner similar to that occurring upon a weaker inflammatory stimulus.
Conversely, inhibition of transformation does not occur if metformin is added
after the initial inflammatory stimulus. The antitransformation effect of
metformin can be bypassed by overexpression of Lin28B or IL1ß, downstream targets
of NF-<U+03BA>B. Metformin preferentially inhibits nuclear translocation of NF-<U+03BA>B and
phosphorylation of STAT3 in cancer stem cells compared with non-stem cancer cells
in the same population. The ability of metformin to block tumor growth and
prolong remission in xenografts in combination with doxorubicin is associated
with decreased function of the inflammatory feedback loop. Lastly,
metformin-based combinatorial therapy is effective in xenografts involving
inflammatory prostate and melanoma cell lines, whereas it is ineffective in
noninflammatory cell lines from these lineages. Taken together, our observations 
suggest that metformin inhibits a signal transduction pathway that results in an 
inflammatory response. As metformin alters energy metabolism in diabetics, we
speculate that metformin may block a metabolic stress response that stimulates
the inflammatory pathway associated with a wide variety of cancers.

PMCID: PMC3549132
PMID: 23277563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jan;123(1):285-98. doi: 10.1172/JCI63861. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

MicroRNAs regulate methionine adenosyltransferase 1A expression in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Yang H(1), Cho ME, Li TW, Peng H, Ko KS, Mato JM, Lu SC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Liver Diseases, USC Research Center for Liver
Diseases, Keck School of Medicine of University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California 90033, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2013 May;57(5):2081-4.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and methionine adenosyltransferase 1A (MAT1A) are dysregulated
in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), and reduced MAT1A expression correlates with
worse HCC prognosis. Expression of miR-664, miR-485-3p, and miR-495, potential
regulatory miRNAs of MAT1A, is increased in HCC. Knockdown of these miRNAs
individually in Hep3B and HepG2 cells induced MAT1A expression, reduced growth,
and increased apoptosis, while combined knockdown exerted additional effects on
all parameters. Subcutaneous and intraparenchymal injection of Hep3B cells stably
overexpressing each of this trio of miRNAs promoted tumorigenesis and metastasis 
in mice. Treatment with miRNA-664 (miR-664), miR-485-3p, and miR-495 siRNAs
reduced tumor growth, invasion, and metastasis in an orthotopic liver cancer
model. Blocking MAT1A induction significantly reduced the antitumorigenic effect 
of miR-495 siRNA, whereas maintaining MAT1A expression prevented miRNA-mediated
enhancement of growth and metastasis. Knockdown of these miRNAs increased total
and nuclear level of MAT1A protein, global CpG methylation, lin-28 homolog B
(Caenorhabditis elegans) (LIN28B) promoter methylation, and reduced LIN28B
expression. The opposite occurred with forced expression of these miRNAs. In
conclusion, upregulation of miR-664, miR-485-3p, and miR-495 contributes to lower
MAT1A expression in HCC, and enhanced tumorigenesis may provide potential targets
for HCC therapy.

PMCID: PMC3533284
PMID: 23241961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Mar;34(3):605-11. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs380. Epub 2012 Dec 
7.

Replication of GWAS-identified neuroblastoma risk loci strengthens the role of
BARD1 and affirms the cumulative effect of genetic variations on disease
susceptibility.

Capasso M(1), Diskin SJ, Totaro F, Longo L, De Mariano M, Russo R, Cimmino F,
Hakonarson H, Tonini GP, Devoto M, Maris JM, Iolascon A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Università degli 
Studi di Napoli Federico II, Naples, Italy. capasso@ceinge.unina.it

Erratum in
    Carcinogenesis. 2014 Mar;35(3):737.

Several neuroblastoma (NB) susceptibility loci have been identified within
LINC00340, BARD1, LMO1, DUSP12, HSD17B12, DDX4, IL31RA, HACE1 and LIN28B by
genome-wide association (GWA) studies including European American individuals. To
validate and comprehensively evaluate the impact of the identified NB variants on
disease risk and phenotype, we analyzed 16 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in an Italian population (370 cases and 809 controls). We assessed their
regulatory activity on gene expression in lymphoblastoid (LCLs) and NB cell
lines. We evaluated the cumulative effect of the independent loci on NB risk and 
high-risk phenotype development in Italian and European American (1627 cases and 
2575 controls) populations. All NB susceptibility genes replicated in the Italian
dataset except for DDX4 and IL31RA, and the most significant SNP was rs6435862 in
BARD1 (P = 8.4 × 10(-15)). BARD1 showed an additional and independent SNP
association (rs7585356). This variant influenced BARD1 mRNA expression in LCLs
and NB cell lines. No evidence of epistasis among the NB-associated variants was 
detected, whereas a cumulative effect of risk variants on NB risk (European
Americans: P (trend) = 6.9 × 10(-30), Italians: P (trend) = 8.55 × 10(13)) and
development of high-risk phenotype (European Americans: P (trend) = 6.9 ×
10(-13), Italians: P (trend) = 2.2 × 10(-1)) was observed in a dose-dependent
manner. These results provide further evidence that the risk loci identified in
GWA studies contribute to NB susceptibility in distinct populations and
strengthen the role of BARD1 as major genetic contributor to NB risk. This study 
shows that even in the absence of interaction the combination of several
low-penetrance alleles has potential to distinguish subgroups of patients at
different risks of developing NB.

PMCID: PMC3716226
PMID: 23222812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2013 Feb;20(1):62-8. doi:
10.1097/MED.0b013e32835b7ec7.

Control of puberty: genetics, endocrinology, and environment.

Choi JH(1), Yoo HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Asan Medical Center Children's Hospital, University 
of Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The aim of this review is to summarize recent advances
regarding the genetic components of the complex and coordinated process of
puberty, an update of the genes implicated in disorders of puberty, the
endocrinologic changes of puberty, and influences of environment in the light of 
our current understanding of the mechanism of the onset of puberty.
RECENT FINDINGS: The timing of puberty varies greatly in the general population
among ethnic groups throughout the world, suggesting the genetic control of
puberty. Several studies on the pathological conditions of pubertal onset provide
unique information about the interactions of either the genetic susceptibility of
or environmental influences on hypothalamic control of pubertal onset. However,
these findings suggested that no isolated pathway or external factor is solely
responsible for the neuroendocrine control of puberty.
SUMMARY: Puberty is initiated by gonadotropin-releasing hormone from the
hypothalamus followed by a complex sequence of endocrine changes and is regulated
by both genetic and environmental factors. New attempts to use genetics and
genomics might enhance our understanding of the spectrum of pubertal development.

PMID: 23183357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 Dec;124(6):875-81. doi: 10.1007/s00401-012-1068-3. Epub
2012 Nov 16.

LIN28A immunoreactivity is a potent diagnostic marker of embryonal tumor with
multilayered rosettes (ETMR).

Korshunov A(1), Ryzhova M, Jones DT, Northcott PA, van Sluis P, Volckmann R,
Koster J, Versteeg R, Cowdrey C, Perry A, Picard D, Rosenblum M, Giangaspero F,
Aronica E, Schüller U, Hasselblatt M, Collins VP, von Deimling A, Lichter P,
Huang A, Pfister SM, Kool M.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Cooperation Unit Neuropathology, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.

Embryonal tumor with multilayered rosettes (ETMR, previously known as ETANTR) is 
a highly aggressive embryonal CNS tumor, which almost exclusively affects infants
and is associated with a dismal prognosis. Accurate diagnosis is of critical
clinical importance because of its poor response to current treatment protocols
and its distinct biology. Amplification of the miRNA cluster at 19q13.42 has been
identified previously as a genetic hallmark for ETMR, but an
immunohistochemistry-based assay for clinical routine diagnostics [such as INI-1 
for atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT)] is still lacking. In this study, we
screened for an ETMR-specific marker using a gene-expression profiling dataset of
more than 1,400 brain tumors and identified LIN28A as a highly specific marker
for ETMR. The encoded protein binds small RNA and has been implicated in stem
cell pluripotency, metabolism and tumorigenesis. Using an LIN28A specific
antibody, we carried out immunohistochemical analysis of LIN28A in more than 800 
childhood brain-tumor samples and confirmed its high specificity for ETMR. Strong
LIN28A immunoexpression was found in all 37 ETMR samples tested, whereas focal
reactivity was only present in a small (6/50) proportion of AT/RT samples. All
other pediatric brain tumors were completely LIN28A-negative. In summary, we
established LIN28A immunohistochemistry as a highly sensitive and specific,
rapid, inexpensive diagnostic tool for routine pathological verification of ETMR.

PMCID: PMC3508282
PMID: 23161096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048785. Epub 2012 Nov 13.

Association of LIN28B with adult adiposity-related traits in females.

Leinonen JT(1), Surakka I, Havulinna AS, Kettunen J, Luoto R, Salomaa V, Widén E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland FIMM, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland.

CONTEXT: Pubertal timing is under strong genetic control and its early onset
associates with several adverse health outcomes in adulthood, including obesity, 
type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Recent data indicate strong
association between pubertal timing and genetic variants near LIN28B, but it is
currently unknown whether the gene contributes to the association between puberty
and adult disease.
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the putative genetic link between early puberty and adult
disease risk, we examined the association of two genetic variants near LIN28B
with adult body size and metabolic profiles in randomly ascertained adult Finnish
males and females.
METHODS: Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs7759938, the lead SNP
previously associated with pubertal timing and height, and rs314279, previously
also associated with menarcheal age but only partially correlated with rs7759938 
(r(2)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.30), were genotyped in 26,636 study subjects participating in the
Finnish population survey FINRISK. Marker associations with adult height, weight,
body mass index (BMI), hip and waist circumference, blood glucose, serum insulin 
and lipid/lipoprotein levels were determined by linear regression analyses.
RESULTS: Both rs7759938 and rs314279 associated with adult height in both sexes
(p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2×10(-6) and p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001). Furthermore, rs314279 associated with increased
weight in females (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001). Conditioned analyses including both SNPs in the
regression model verified that rs314279 independently associates with adult
female weight, BMI and hip circumference (p<0.005). Neither SNP associated with
glucose, lipid, or lipoprotein levels.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variants near the puberty-associated gene LIN28B associate
with adult weight and body shape in females, suggesting that the gene may tag
molecular pathways influencing adult adiposity-related traits.

PMCID: PMC3496729
PMID: 23152804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jan 30;365(2):241-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.10.025.
Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Investigation of peripubertal expression of Lin28a and Lin28b in C57BL/6 female
mice.

Grieco A(1), Rzeczkowska P, Alm C, Palmert MR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, The Hospital for Sick Children, University of
Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.

Genome-wide association studies recently identified 32 loci that associate with
the age at menarche (AAM) in humans. Because the locus most robustly associated
with AAM is in/near LIN28B, the goal of this study was to investigate how the
Lin28 pathway might modulate pubertal timing by examining expression of Lin28b,
and its homologue, Lin28a, across the pubertal transition in female mice.
Quantitative reverse-transcriptase PCR data indicate that, prior to the onset of 
puberty, expression of both Lin28b and Lin28a decreases in the ovary, while
expression of only Lin28a decreases in the hypothalamus; the expression of Lin28a
increases after the onset of puberty in the pituitary. Immunohistochemistry in
ovarian tissue verified that Lin28a protein levels decreased in parallel with
gene expression. Although these data do not demonstrate cause and effect, they do
suggest that decreased expression of Lin28a/Lin28b may facilitate the transition 
into puberty, consistent with previous data showing that overexpression of Lin28a
in transgenic mice leads to delayed puberty. In addition, although Lin28b and/or 
Lin28a expression significantly decreased prior to puberty, neither Let-7a nor
Let-7g miRNA levels changed significantly, raising the possibility that some
effects of Lin28b and Lin28a within the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis
may be Let-7 miRNA independent. Subsequent studies, such as tissue and age
specific modulation of Lin28b and Lin28a expression, could determine whether the 
expression patterns observed are responsible for modulating the onset of puberty 
and delineate further the role of this pathway in the HPG axis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3529789
PMID: 23138112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Korean J Pediatr. 2012 Oct;55(10):388-92. doi: 10.3345/kjp.2012.55.10.388. Epub
2012 Oct 29.

LIN28B polymorphisms are associated with central precocious puberty and early
puberty in girls.

Park SW(1), Lee ST, Sohn YB, Cho SY, Kim SH, Kim SJ, Kim CH, Ko AR, Paik KH, Kim 
JW, Jin DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers within LIN28B have been
reported to be related to the timing of pubertal growth. However, no study has
investigated the frequency of genetic markers in girls with precocious puberty
(PP) or early puberty (EP). This study aimed to determine the frequency of
putative genetic markers in girls with PP or EP.
METHODS: Genomic DNAs were obtained from 77 and 109 girls that fulfilled the
criteria for PP and EP, respectively. The controls in this study were 144 healthy
volunteers between 20 and 30 years of age. The haplotypes were reconstructed
using 11 SNPs of LIN28B, and haplotype association analysis was performed. The
haplotype frequencies were compared. Differences in the clinical and laboratory
parameters were analyzed according to the haplotype dosage.
RESULTS: Eleven SNPs in LIN28B were all located in a block that was in linkage
disequilibrium. The haplotype could be reconstructed using 2 representative SNPs,
rs4946651 and rs369065. The AC haplotype was less frequently observed in the PP
group than in the controls (0.069 vs. 0.144, P=0.010). The trend that girls with 
non-AC haplotypes tended to have earlier puberty onset (P=0.037) was illustrated 
even in the EP+PP patient group by Kaplan-Meier analysis.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study showed that non-AC haplotypes of
LIN28B had a significant association with PP in girls.

PMCID: PMC3488615
PMID: 23133486  [PubMed]


145. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Jun;228(6):1189-201. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24272.

Genetic and molecular characterization of the human osteosarcoma 3AB-OS cancer
stem cell line: a possible model for studying osteosarcoma origin and stemness.

Di Fiore R(1), Fanale D, Drago-Ferrante R, Chiaradonna F, Giuliano M, De Blasio
A, Amodeo V, Corsini LR, Bazan V, Tesoriere G, Vento R, Russo A.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemical Sciences, Department of Experimental Biomedicine and
Clinical Neurosciences, Polyclinic, University of Palermo, Palermo, Italy.

Finding new treatments targeting cancer stem cells (CSCs) within a tumor seems to
be critical to halt cancer and improve patient survival. Osteosarcoma is an
aggressive tumor affecting adolescents, for which there is no second-line
chemotherapy. Uncovering new molecular mechanisms underlying the development of
osteosarcoma and origin of CSCs is crucial to identify new possible therapeutic
strategies. Here, we aimed to characterize genetically and molecularly the human 
osteosarcoma 3AB-OS CSC line, previously selected from MG63 cells and which
proved to have both in vitro and in vivo features of CSCs. Classic cytogenetic
studies demonstrated that 3AB-OS cells have hypertriploid karyotype with 71-82
chromosomes. By comparing 3AB-OS CSCs to the parental cells, array CGH,
Affymetrix microarray, and TaqMan® Human MicroRNA array analyses identified 49
copy number variations (CNV), 3,512 dysregulated genes and 189 differentially
expressed miRNAs. Some of the chromosomal abnormalities and mRNA/miRNA expression
profiles appeared to be congruent with those reported in human osteosarcomas.
Bioinformatic analyses selected 196 genes and 46 anticorrelated miRNAs involved
in carcinogenesis and stemness. For the first time, a predictive network is also 
described for two miRNA family (let-7/98 and miR-29a,b,c) and their
anticorrelated mRNAs (MSTN, CCND2, Lin28B, MEST, HMGA2, and GHR), which may
represent new biomarkers for osteosarcoma and may pave the way for the
identification of new potential therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23129384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. FEBS Lett. 2012 Nov 16;586(22):3986-90. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.09.034. Epub 
2012 Oct 11.

Recognition of the let-7g miRNA precursor by human Lin28B.

Ali PS(1), Ghoshdastider U, Hoffmann J, Brutschy B, Filipek S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University, Frankfurt 60438,
Germany. shaikpakeer@gmail.com

Mammalian homologs of lin28: Lin28 and Lin28B block the post-transcriptional
processing of the let-7 family of miRNAs. We report that in vitro the terminal
stem-loop region of the let-7g miRNA precursor (pre-let-7g) required to bind
Lin28B is restricted to 24 nucleotides (nt) including the 3' GGAG motif.
Additionally, full length Lin28B is required for efficient binding to pre-let-7g 
and the stoichiometry of the complex is 1:1. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations 
reveal the interactions of the pre-let-7g stem-loop and the GGAG motif in the
stem region to the cold shock domain (CSD) and to the zinc knuckle domain (ZKD)
of Lin28B, respectively.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cancer Biol Ther. 2012 Dec;13(14):1390-5. doi: 10.4161/cbt.22336. Epub 2012 Oct
10.

A LIN28B polymorphism predicts for colon cancer survival.

Ye Y(1), Madison B, Wu X, Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Division of Cancer Prevention and Population
Sciences, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA.

The pathogenesis of sporadic colorectal cancer involves distinct pathways, with
characteristic genomic alterations. The first pathway, chromosome instability
(CIN), is driven by APC mutations and is typified by Kras mutations, p53
mutation/loss of heterozygosity, and deletions at chromosome 18q. The second
pathway is referred to as microsatellite instability (MSI), a genetic hallmark of
the accumulated mutations that occur as a consequence of derangements in the
mismatch repair genes. Finally, proximal colon cancers may involve methylation of
a number of genes, which is frequently referred to as the CpG island methylator
phenotype (CIMP), and are associated with B-raf mutations. The ability to
stratify colorectal cancers by risk would be facilitated by the identification of
polymorphisms that might be utilized as biomarkers. LIN28B is an RNA binding
protein that is overexpressed in colon cancers. We find that LIN28B rs314277 is
associated with significant recurrence of colorectal cancer in Stage II disease, 
which may have translational therapeutic implications.

PMCID: PMC3542229
PMID: 23052130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nat Genet. 2012 Nov;44(11):1199-206. doi: 10.1038/ng.2436. Epub 2012 Oct 7.

LIN28B induces neuroblastoma and enhances MYCN levels via let-7 suppression.

Molenaar JJ(1), Domingo-Fernández R, Ebus ME, Lindner S, Koster J, Drabek K,
Mestdagh P, van Sluis P, Valentijn LJ, van Nes J, Broekmans M, Haneveld F,
Volckmann R, Bray I, Heukamp L, Sprüssel A, Thor T, Kieckbusch K, Klein-Hitpass
L, Fischer M, Vandesompele J, Schramm A, van Noesel MM, Varesio L, Speleman F,
Eggert A, Stallings RL, Caron HN, Versteeg R, Schulte JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncogenomics, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. j.j.molenaar@amc.uva.nl

LIN28B regulates developmental processes by modulating microRNAs (miRNAs) of the 
let-7 family. A role for LIN28B in cancer has been proposed but has not been
established in vivo. Here, we report that LIN28B showed genomic aberrations and
extensive overexpression in high-risk neuroblastoma compared to several other
tumor entities and normal tissues. High LIN28B expression was an independent risk
factor for adverse outcome in neuroblastoma. LIN28B signaled through repression
of the let-7 miRNAs and consequently resulted in elevated MYCN protein expression
in neuroblastoma cells. LIN28B-let-7-MYCN signaling blocked differentiation of
normal neuroblasts and neuroblastoma cells. These findings were fully
recapitulated in a mouse model in which LIN28B expression in the sympathetic
adrenergic lineage induced development of neuroblastomas marked by low let-7
miRNA levels and high MYCN protein expression. Interference with this pathway
might offer therapeutic perspectives.

PMID: 23042116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 9;287(46):38505-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.400598. Epub 2012
Sep 20.

Fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling during gastrulation negatively modulates
the abundance of microRNAs that regulate proteins required for cell migration and
embryo patterning.

Bobbs AS(1), Saarela AV, Yatskievych TA, Antin PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Arizona, Tucson,
Arizona 85724, USA.

FGF signaling plays a pivotal role in regulating cell movements and lineage
induction during gastrulation. Here we identify 44 microRNAs that are expressed
in the primitive streak region of gastrula stage chicken embryos. We show that
the primary effect of FGF signaling on microRNA abundance is to negatively
regulate the levels of miR-let-7b, -9, -19b, -107, -130b, and -218. LIN28B
inhibits microRNA processing and is positively regulated by FGF signaling. Gain- 
and loss-of-function experiments show that LIN28B negatively regulates the
expression of miR-19b, -130b, and let-7b, whereas negative modulation of miR-9,
-107, and -218 appears to be independent of LIN28B function. Predicted mRNA
targets of the FGF-regulated microRNAs are over-represented in serine/threonine
and tyrosine kinase receptors, including ACVR1, ACVR2B, PDGFRA, TGFBR1, and
TGFBR3. Luciferase assays show that these and other candidates are targeted by
FGF-regulated microRNAs. PDGFRA, a receptor whose activity is required for cell
migration through the primitive streak, is a target of miR-130b and -218 in vivo.
These results identify a novel mechanism by which FGF signaling regulates gene
expression by negatively modulating microRNA abundance through both
LIN28B-dependent and LIN28B-independent pathways.

PMCID: PMC3493895
PMID: 22995917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Blood. 2012 Nov 1;120(18):3764-73. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-03-415349. Epub 2012
Sep 13.

Inactivation of ribosomal protein L22 promotes transformation by induction of the
stemness factor, Lin28B.

Rao S(1), Lee SY, Gutierrez A, Perrigoue J, Thapa RJ, Tu Z, Jeffers JR, Rhodes M,
Anderson S, Oravecz T, Hunger SP, Timakhov RA, Zhang R, Balachandran S, Zambetti 
GP, Testa JR, Look AT, Wiest DL.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Cell Development and Cancer Keystone, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

Ribosomal protein (RP) mutations in diseases such as 5q- syndrome both disrupt
hematopoiesis and increase the risk of developing hematologic malignancy.
However, the mechanism by which RP mutations increase cancer risk has remained an
important unanswered question. We show here that monoallelic, germline
inactivation of the ribosomal protein L22 (Rpl22) predisposes T-lineage
progenitors to transformation. Indeed, RPL22 was found to be inactivated in ~ 10%
of human T-acute lymphoblastic leukemias. Moreover, monoallelic loss of Rpl22
accelerates development of thymic lymphoma in both a mouse model of T-cell
malignancy and in acute transformation assays in vitro. We show that Rpl22
inactivation enhances transformation potential through induction of the stemness 
factor, Lin28B. Our finding that Rpl22 inactivation promotes transformation by
inducing expression of Lin28B provides the first insight into the mechanistic
basis by which mutations in Rpl22, and perhaps some other RP genes, increases
cancer risk.

PMCID: PMC3488889
PMID: 22976955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Hum Pathol. 2013 Feb;44(2):244-54. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2012.05.013. Epub 2012 
Sep 10.

Molecular events in endometrial carcinosarcomas and the role of high mobility
group AT-hook 2 in endometrial carcinogenesis.

Romero-Pérez L(1), Castilla MÁ, López-García MÁ, Díaz-Martín J, Biscuola M,
Ramiro-Fuentes S, Oliva E, Matias-Guiu X, Prat J, Cano A, Moreno-Bueno G,
Palacios J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla (IBiS), Hospital 
Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, 41013 Sevilla, Spain.

The molecular events implicated in the development of endometrial carcinosarcoma 
remain poorly understood. Using complementary DNA microarrays, we analyzed a
group of 15 endometrial carcinosarcomas and compared their gene expression
profiles with those obtained from a group of 23 endometrioid endometrial
carcinomas. We demonstrated changes in the expression of genes modulating
processes such as the epithelial to mesenchymal transition, muscle
differentiation, the expression of cancer/testis antigens, and immune response in
endometrial carcinosarcomas. The high mobility group AT-hook 2 gene is an
embryonic nuclear factor that mediates epithelial to mesenchymal transition in
various tumor models, and it was among the genes overexpressed in endometrial
carcinosarcomas. High mobility group AT-hook 2 overexpression was confirmed in
54% of endometrial carcinosarcomas by quantitative real time-polymerase chain
reaction and immunohistochemistry. Moreover, we found a significant inverse
correlation between the expression of high mobility group AT-hook 2 and let-7b, a
member of the let-7 family of microRNAs that represses high mobility group
AT-hook 2 expression. These changes were also associated with overexpression of
Lin28B, a suppressor of microRNA biogenesis that is implicated in cancer
progression and metastasis. Finally, high mobility group AT-hook 2
overexpression, which was detected in less than 3% of endometrioid endometrial
carcinomas, was observed in many nonendometrioid carcinomas (46% of 28 samples). 
This pattern of expression, restricted to nonendometrioid carcinomas and
endometrial carcinosarcomas, reflects a role for high mobility group AT-hook 2 in
endometrial carcinogenesis that is associated with aggressive phenotypes and
points to its potential use as a marker to distinguish between endometrioid and
nonendometrioid tumors.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22974476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;78(3):144-50. doi: 10.1159/000342212. Epub 2012 Sep 6.

Absence of functional LIN28B mutations in a large cohort of patients with
idiopathic central precocious puberty.

Silveira-Neto AP(1), Leal LF, Emerman AB, Henderson KD, Piskounova E, Henderson
BE, Gregory RI, Silveira LF, Hirschhorn JN, Nguyen TT, Beneduzzi D, Tusset C,
Reis AC, Brito VN, Mendonca BB, Palmert MR, Antonini SR, Latronico AC.

Author information: 
(1)Unidade de Endocrinologia do Desenvolvimento, Laboratório de Hormônios e
Genética Molecular/LIM42, Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

AIM: To investigate LIN28B gene variants in children with idiopathic central
precocious puberty (CPP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied 178 Brazilian children with CPP (171 girls,
16.8% familial cases). A large multiethnic group (1,599 subjects; Multiethnic
Cohort, MEC) was used as control. DNA analysis and biochemical in vitro studies
were performed.
RESULTS: A heterozygous LIN28B variant, p.H199R, was identified in a girl who
developed CPP at 5.2 years. This variant was absent in 310 Brazilian control
individuals, but it was found in the same allele frequency in women from the MEC 
cohort, independent of the age of menarche. Functional studies revealed that when
ectopically expressed in cells, the mutant protein was capable of binding
pre-let-7 microRNA and inhibiting let-7 expression to the same extent as
wild-type Lin28B protein. Other rare LIN28B variants (p.P173P, c.198+ 32_33delCT,
g.9575731A>C and c.-11C>T) were identified in CPP patients and controls.
Therefore, no functional mutation was identified.
CONCLUSION: In vitro studies revealed that the rare LIN28B p.H199R variant
identified in a girl with CPP does not affect the Lin28B function in the
regulation of let-7 expression. Although LIN28B SNPs were associated with normal 
pubertal timing, rare variations in this gene do not seem to be commonly involved
in the molecular pathogenesis of CPP.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3526815
PMID: 22964795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Nat Genet. 2012 Oct;44(10):1126-30. doi: 10.1038/ng.2387. Epub 2012 Sep 2.

Common variation at 6q16 within HACE1 and LIN28B influences susceptibility to
neuroblastoma.

Diskin SJ(1), Capasso M, Schnepp RW, Cole KA, Attiyeh EF, Hou C, Diamond M,
Carpenter EL, Winter C, Lee H, Jagannathan J, Latorre V, Iolascon A, Hakonarson
H, Devoto M, Maris JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Center for Childhood Cancer Research, Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine, 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Neuroblastoma is a cancer of the sympathetic nervous system that accounts for
approximately 10% of all pediatric oncology deaths. Here, we report a genome-wide
association study of 2,817 neuroblastoma cases and 7,473 controls. We identified 
two new associations at 6q16, the first within HACE1 (rs4336470; combined
P=2.7×10(-11); odds ratio 1.26, 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.18-1.35) and the
second within LIN28B (rs17065417; combined P=1.2×10(-8); odds ratio 1.38, 95% CI 
1.23-1.54). Expression of LIN28B and let-7 miRNA correlated with rs17065417
genotype in neuroblastoma cell lines, and we observed significant growth
inhibition upon depletion of LIN28B, specifically in neuroblastoma cells that
were homozygous for the risk allele. Low HACE1 and high LIN28B expression in
diagnostic primary neuroblastomas were associated with worse overall survival
(P=0.008 and 0.014, respectively). Taken together, these data show that common
variants in HACE1 and LIN28B influence neuroblastoma susceptibility and indicate 
that both genes likely have a role in disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3459292
PMID: 22941191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Epigenetics. 2012 Sep;7(9):1079-90. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

A genome-wide approach reveals novel imprinted genes expressed in the human
placenta.

Barbaux S(1), Gascoin-Lachambre G, Buffat C, Monnier P, Mondon F, Tonanny MB,
Pinard A, Auer J, Bessières B, Barlier A, Jacques S, Simeoni U, Dandolo L,
Letourneur F, Jammes H, Vaiman D.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1016, Institut Cochin, Paris, France. sandrine.barbaux@inserm.fr

Genomic imprinting characterizes genes with a monoallelic expression, which is
dependent on the parental origin of each allele. Approximately 150 imprinted
genes are known to date, in humans and mice but, though computational searches
have tried to extract intrinsic characteristics of these genes to identify new
ones, the existing list is probably far from being comprehensive. We used a
high-throughput strategy by diverting the classical use of genotyping microarrays
to compare the genotypes of mRNA/cDNA vs. genomic DNA to identify new genes
presenting monoallelic expression, starting from human placental material. After 
filtering of data, we obtained a list of 1,082 putative candidate monoallelic
SNPs located in more than one hundred candidate genes. Among these, we found
known imprinted genes, such as IPW, GRB10, INPP5F and ZNF597, which contribute to
validate the approach. We also explored some likely candidates of our list and
identified seven new imprinted genes, including ZFAT, ZFAT-AS1, GLIS3, NTM,
MAGI2, ZC3H12Cand LIN28B, four of which encode zinc finger transcription factors.
They are, however, not imprinted in the mouse placenta, except for Magi2. We
analyzed in more details the ZFAT gene, which is paternally expressed in the
placenta (as ZFAT-AS1, a non-coding antisense RNA) but biallelic in other
tissues. The ZFAT protein is expressed in endothelial cells, as well as in
syncytiotrophoblasts. The expression of this gene is, moreover, downregulated in 
placentas from complicated pregnancies. With this work we increase by about 10%
the number of known imprinted genes in humans.

PMCID: PMC3466192
PMID: 22894909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Paediatr Perinat Epidemiol. 2012 Sep;26(5):448-55. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-3016.2012.01310.x. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

Low digit ratio predicts early age at menarche in Colombian schoolgirls.

Oberg AS(1), Villamor E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. oberg@hsph.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The ratio between the lengths of the second and fourth fingers (digit
ratio: 2D : 4D), a purported negative correlate of prenatal androgen exposure,
has been inversely related to age at menarche. However, a recent study found high
digit ratios in carriers of a single variant in the LIN28B gene, which has been
linked to delayed menarche.
METHODS: We investigated the association of digit ratio and age at menarche in
299 pre-menarcheal girls aged 5-12 years who participated in a longitudinal
cohort study in Bogotá, Colombia. Finger lengths were measured at baseline and
the occurrence of menarche was periodically ascertained over a median 32 months
of follow-up. We used time-to-event analysis to estimate median ages at menarche 
as well as hazard ratios for menarche according to tertiles of the digit ratio
for each hand.
RESULTS: Estimated median age at menarche was lower for girls in the lowest digit
ratio tertile of the right hand compared with those in the highest (12.0 vs. 12.3
years; P-value = 0.04). After adjustment for baseline age, height- and body mass 
index-for-age z-scores, the hazard of menarche was 86% higher in girls of the
lowest digit ratio tertile (hazard ratio 1.9 [95% confidence interval 1.2, 2.9]) 
compared with those in the highest digit ratio tertile of the right hand. No
significant associations were found with the left hand.
CONCLUSIONS: Digit ratio was positively associated with age at menarche in this
longitudinal investigation, consistent with results from a recent gene-linkage
study.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22882789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2012;25(5-6):459-66.

Environmental and genetic factors influence age at menarche in women with
polycystic ovary syndrome.

Carroll J(1), Saxena R, Welt CK.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 
02114.

OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that body mass index (BMI) and DNA variants would
predict age at menarche in polycystic ovarian syndrome (PCOS).
SUBJECTS: Subjects aged 18-45 years with PCOS defined by the National Institutes 
of Health criteria (n=522) and controls with regular menstrual cycles and no
hyperandrogenism (n=472) were studied.
METHODS: Age at menarche was compared between PCOS cases and controls and
examined as a function of multiple parameters.
RESULTS: There was a strong inverse relationship between BMI and age at menarche 
in PCOS (r=-0.32, p=5 x lO(-11)). The chromosome 6 rs7759938-T variant was
associated with earlier age at menarche in women with PCOS (12.60 +/- 0.09 vs.
13.41 +/- 0.23 years; genotype TT vs. CC; p = 0.006). Age at menarche was
predicted by PCOS status (beta = 0.512, p < 0.001), reported weight group at
10-14 years (beta = -0.432, p < 0.001), current BMI (beta = -0.0202, p = 0.01),
and genotype (beta = 0.169, p = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Age at menarche in women with PCOS is influenced by BMI and genetic 
variants near LIN28B.

PMCID: PMC3597236
PMID: 22876539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Blood. 2012 Aug 2;120(5):1048-59. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-01-401760. Epub 2012
Jun 21.

Enforced expression of Lin28b leads to impaired T-cell development, release of
inflammatory cytokines, and peripheral T-cell lymphoma.

Beachy SH(1), Onozawa M, Chung YJ, Slape C, Bilke S, Francis P, Pineda M, Walker 
RL, Meltzer P, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

LIN28A and LIN28B, the mammalian homologs of lin-28, are implicated in malignant 
transformation in part because of their ability to promote degradation of the
let-7 family of miRs. In the present study, we show that overexpression of Lin28b
in vivo leads to an aggressive peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) characterized by
widespread infiltration of parenchymal organs with malignant CD4(+) cells.
Similar to patients with PTCL, Lin28b-transgenic mice show signs of inflammation 
such as eosinophilia, increased C-reactive protein, release of inflammatory
cytokines, and pleural effusion. The PTCLs that develop in Lin28b mice are
derived from activated T cells and show decreased let-7 expression, increased Il6
expression, activation of NF-<U+03BA>B, and infiltration of B cells, all resulting in an
inflammatory microenvironment. In addition, LIN28B is overexpressed 7.5-fold in
PTCL patient samples compared with activated CD4(+) cells. The results of the
present study demonstrate for the first time that Lin28b can transform primary
cells in vivo, identify a previously unsuspected link between Lin28b and PTCL,
and provide a unique animal model for the study of PTCL biology and therapy.

PMCID: PMC3412328
PMID: 22723554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cell Cycle. 2012 Jul 1;11(13):2486-94. doi: 10.4161/cc.20893. Epub 2012 Jul 1.

Lin28 regulates HER2 and promotes malignancy through multiple mechanisms.

Feng C(1), Neumeister V, Ma W, Xu J, Lu L, Bordeaux J, Maihle NJ, Rimm DL, Huang 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale Stem Cell
Center, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2012 Aug 1;11(15):2780-1.

The RNA binding protein Lin28 and its paralog Lin28B are associated with advanced
human malignancies. Blocking the biogenesis of let-7 miRNA, a tumor suppressor,
by Lin28/Lin28B has been thought to underlie their roles in cancer. Here we
report that the mRNA for the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2), a
HER-family receptor tyrosine kinase known to play a critical role in cell
proliferation and survival and also a major therapeutic target in breast cancer, 
is among several targets of Lin28 regulation. We show that Lin28 stimulates HER2 
expression at the posttranscriptional level, and that enforced Lin28 expression
promotes cancer cell growth via multiple mechanisms. Consistent with its
pleiotropic role in regulating gene expression, Lin28 overexpression in primary
breast tumors is a powerful predictor of poor prognosis, representing the first
report on the impact of Lin28 expression on clinical outcome in human cancer.
While revealing another layer of regulation of HER2 expression in addition to
gene amplification, our studies also suggest novel mechanistic insights linking
Lin28 expression to disease outcome and imply that targeting multiple pathways is
a common mechanistic theme of Lin28-mediated regulation in cancer.

PMID: 22713243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2012 Aug;56(8):1259-69. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201200117. Epub 2012
May 29.

MicroRNA profiling of carcinogen-induced rat colon tumors and the influence of
dietary spinach.

Parasramka MA(1), Dashwood WM, Wang R, Abdelli A, Bailey GS, Williams DE, Ho E,
Dashwood RH.

Author information: 
(1)Linus Pauling Institute, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

SCOPE: MicroRNA (miRNA) profiles are altered in chronic conditions such as
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, neurological disorders, and cancer. A systems
biology approach was used to examine, for the first time, miRNAs altered in rat
colon tumors induced by 2-amino-1-methyl-6-phenylimidazo[4,5-b]pyridine (PhIP), a
heterocyclic amine carcinogen from cooked meat.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Among the most highly dysregulated miRNAs were those
belonging to the let-7 family. Subsequent computational modeling and target
validation identified c-Myc and miRNA-binding proteins Lin28A/Lin28B (Lin28) as
key players, along with Sox2, Nanog, and Oct-3/4. These targets of altered miRNAs
in colon cancers have been implicated in tumor recurrence and reduced patient
survival, in addition to their role as pluripotency factors. In parallel with
these findings, the tumor-suppressive effects of dietary spinach given
postinitiation correlated with elevated levels of let-7 family members and
partial normalization of c-myc, Sox2, Nanog, Oct-3/4, HmgA2, Dnmt3b, and P53
expression.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that the let-7/c-Myc/Lin28 axis is dysregulated in
heterocyclic amine-induced colon carcinogenesis, and that the tumor suppressive
effects of dietary spinach are associated with partial normalization of this
pathway.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMCID: PMC3762592
PMID: 22641368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Aug;40(15):7492-506. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks355. Epub 2012
May 8.

The Lin28 cold-shock domain remodels pre-let-7 microRNA.

Mayr F(1), Schütz A, Döge N, Heinemann U.

Author information: 
(1)Crystallography, Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert-Rössle
Straße 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany.

The RNA-binding protein Lin28 regulates the processing of a developmentally
important group of microRNAs, the let-7 family. Lin28 blocks the biogenesis of
let-7 in embryonic stem cells and thereby prevents differentiation. It was shown 
that both RNA-binding domains (RBDs) of this protein, the cold-shock domain (CSD)
and the zinc-knuckle domain (ZKD) are indispensable for pri- or pre-let-7 binding
and blocking its maturation. Here, we systematically examined the nucleic
acid-binding preferences of the Lin28 RBDs and determined the crystal structure
of the Lin28 CSD in the absence and presence of nucleic acids. Both RNA-binding
domains bind to single-stranded nucleic acids with the ZKD mediating specific
binding to a conserved GGAG motif and the CSD showing only limited sequence
specificity. However, only the isolated Lin28 CSD, but not the ZKD, can bind with
a reasonable affinity to pre-let-7 and thus is able to remodel the terminal loop 
of pre-let-7 including the Dicer cleavage site. Further mutagenesis studies
reveal that the Lin28 CSD induces a conformational change in the terminal loop of
pre-let-7 and thereby facilitates a subsequent specific binding of the Lin28 ZKD 
to the conserved GGAG motif.

PMCID: PMC3424542
PMID: 22570413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cancer Res. 2012 Jul 1;72(13):3207-16. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-1639. Epub
2012 Apr 24.

Induction of the RNA regulator LIN28A is required for the growth and pathogenesis
of RESTless breast tumors.

Gunsalus KT(1), Wagoner MP, Meyer K, Potter WB, Schoenike B, Kim S, Alexander CM,
Friedl A, Roopra A.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, Department of
Neuroscience, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin 53706, USA.

The transcription factor RE1 silencing transcription factor (REST) is lost in
approximately 20% of breast cancers. Although it is known that these RESTless
tumors are highly aggressive and include all tumor subtypes, the underlying
tumorigenic mechanisms remain unknown. In this study, we show that loss of REST
results in upregulation of LIN28A, a known promoter of tumor development, in
breast cancer cell lines and human breast tumors. We found that LIN28A was a
direct transcriptional target of REST in cancer cells and that loss of REST
resulted in increased LIN28A expression and enhanced tumor growth both in vitro
and in vivo, effects that were dependent on heightened LIN28A expression. Tumors 
lacking REST expression were locally invasive, consistent with the increased
lymph node involvement observed in human RESTless tumors. Clinically, human
RESTless breast tumors also displayed significantly enhanced LIN28A expression
when compared with non-RESTless tumors. Our findings therefore show a critical
role for the REST-LIN28A axis in tumor aggression and suggest a causative
relationship between REST loss and tumorigenicity in vivo.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3539431
PMID: 22532168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 18;287(21):17386-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.321158. Epub
2012 Mar 30.

Lin-28 homologue A (LIN28A) promotes cell cycle progression via regulation of
cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2), cyclin D1 (CCND1), and cell division cycle 25
homolog A (CDC25A) expression in cancer.

Li N(1), Zhong X, Lin X, Guo J, Zou L, Tanyi JL, Shao Z, Liang S, Wang LP, Hwang 
WT, Katsaros D, Montone K, Zhao X, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer Research Center and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The RNA-binding protein LIN28A regulates the translation and stability of a large
number of mRNAs as well as the biogenesis of certain miRNAs in embryonic stem
cells and developing tissues. Increasing evidence indicates that LIN28A functions
as an oncogene promoting cancer cell growth. However, little is known about its
molecular mechanism of cell cycle regulation in cancer. Using tissue microarrays,
we found that strong LIN28A expression was reactivated in about 10% (7.1-17.1%)
of epithelial tumors (six tumor types, n = 369). Both in vitro and in vivo
experiments demonstrate that LIN28A promotes cell cycle progression in cancer
cells. Genome-wide RNA-IP-chip experiments indicate that LIN28A binds to
thousands of mRNAs, including a large group of cell cycle regulatory mRNAs in
cancer and embryonic stem cells. Furthermore, the ability of LIN28A to stimulate 
translation of LIN28A-binding mRNAs, such as CDK2, was validated in vitro and in 
vivo. Finally, using a combined gene expression microarray and bioinformatics
approach, we found that LIN28A also regulates CCND1 and CDC25A expression and
that this is mediated by inhibiting the biogenesis of let-7 miRNA. Taken
together, these results demonstrate that LIN28A is reactivated in about 10% of
epithelial tumors and promotes cell cycle progression by regulation of both mRNA 
translation (let-7-independent) and miRNA biogenesis (let-7-dependent).

PMCID: PMC3366838
PMID: 22467868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Br J Cancer. 2012 Apr 10;106(8):1415-23. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.90. Epub 2012 Mar 
20.

High expression of Lin28 is associated with tumour aggressiveness and poor
prognosis of patients in oesophagus cancer.

Hamano R(1), Miyata H, Yamasaki M, Sugimura K, Tanaka K, Kurokawa Y, Nakajima K, 
Takiguchi S, Fujiwara Y, Mori M, Doki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lin28 is a negative regulator of the tumour suppressor microRNA,
let-7, suggesting its role in tumourigenesis. However, the clinical significance 
of Lin28 expression in oesophageal cancer has not been elucidated.
METHODS: Lin28 and Lin28B expression was examined by immunohistochemistry in 161 
tissues from patients with oesophageal cancer who had undergone curative surgery.
The relationship between the expressions of Lin28 and Lin28B and various
clinicopathological factors was examined. In vitro assays were conducted to
determine the role of Lin28 in aggressiveness of oesophageal cancers using
oesophageal cancer cell line.
RESULTS: Lin28 and Lin28B were overexpressed in oesophageal cancer cells compared
with non-cancerous epithelial cells, especially in the invasive front. High
expression of Lin28 and Lin28B correlated significantly with lymph node
metastasis and poor prognosis. High expression of Lin28B expression correlated
significantly with low expression of let-7. Multivariate analysis also identified
Lin28B expression as an independent prognostic factor. In vitro assays showed
that the proliferative and invasive activities were significantly reduced in
Lin28B-knockdown cells, compared with control cells.
CONCLUSION: High expression of Lin28 is associated with poor prognosis and high
tumour aggressiveness in oesophageal cancer and these effects are mediated
through increased proliferation and invasiveness of oesophageal cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3326671
PMID: 22433967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Korean J Pediatr. 2012 Jan;55(1):6-10. doi: 10.3345/kjp.2012.55.1.6. Epub 2012
Jan 31.

The genes associated with gonadotropin-releasing hormone-dependent precocious
puberty.

Hwang JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ajou University Hospital, Ajou University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

Human puberty is a complex, coordinated biological process with multiple levels
of regulations. The timing of puberty varies greatly in children and is
influenced by both environmental and genetic factors. The key genes of pubertal
onset, KISS1, GPR54, GNRH1 and GNRHR, may be major causal factors underlying
gonadotropin-releasing hormone-dependent precocious puberty (GDPP). Two
gain-of-function mutations in KISS1 and GPR54 have been identified recently as
genetic causes of GDPP. GNRH1 and GNRHR are also gene candidates for GDPP;
however no mutations have been identified in these genes. Presently potential
genetic causes like LIN28B continues to appear; many areas of research await
exploration in this context. In this review, I focus primarily on the genetic
causes of GDPP.

PMCID: PMC3282217
PMID: 22359524  [PubMed]


165. Science. 2012 Mar 9;335(6073):1195-200. doi: 10.1126/science.1216557. Epub 2012
Feb 16.

Lin28b reprograms adult bone marrow hematopoietic progenitors to mediate
fetal-like lymphopoiesis.

Yuan J(1), Nguyen CK, Liu X, Kanellopoulou C, Muljo SA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases (NIAID), National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The immune system develops in waves during ontogeny; it is initially populated by
cells generated from fetal hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and later by cells
derived from adult HSCs. Remarkably, the genetic programs that control these two 
distinct stem cell fates remain poorly understood. We report that Lin28b is
specifically expressed in mouse and human fetal liver and thymus, but not in
adult bone marrow or thymus. We demonstrate that ectopic expression of Lin28
reprograms hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) from adult bone marrow,
which endows them with the ability to mediate multilineage reconstitution that
resembles fetal lymphopoiesis, including increased development of B-1a, marginal 
zone B, gamma/delta (<U+03B3>d) T cells, and natural killer T (NKT) cells.

PMCID: PMC3471381
PMID: 22345399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Bing Du Xue Bao. 2011 Nov;27(6):533-41.

[Effects of Lin28a and Lin28b on let-7 family activity].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu XR(1), Tian WH, Dong XY, Wu XZ, Lv JX, Wu XB.

Author information: 
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Wenzhou Medical
College, Wenzhou 325035, China.

In this report, we study the effects of over-expression of Lin28a and Lin28b on
let-7 family activity in HeLaS3. Firstly, we constructed pAAV2neo-Lin28a and
pAAV2neo-Lin28b to express Lin28a and Lin28b, respectively. Then, pAAV2neo-Lin28a
and pAAV2neo-Lin28b were transfected into HeLaS3, selected with G418 and obtained
cell lines, HeLaS3/pAAV2neo-Lin28a and HeLaS3/pAAV2neo-Lin28b, to express Lin28a 
and Lin28b stably. Thereafter, we constructed eight plasmid vectors for detection
of let-7 family activity based on pAAV2neo-Gluc-(Fluc). These vectors were
further packaged into recombinant adeno-associated viral vectors (rAAV) which
were used as sensors, nominated as Asensors, to detect inhibition activity of
miRNA at post-transcriptional level. Subsequently, with HeLaS3 as a control, we
assayed expression levels of Lin28a and Lin28b by Western blot, detected
expression levels of let-7 family by QRT-PCR, and tested let-7 family activity by
Asensors in HeLaS3/pAAV2neo-Lin28a and HeLaS3/pAAV2neo-Lin28b. Results
demonstrated that both HeLaS3/pAAV2neo-Lin28a and HeLaS3/pAAV2neo-Lin28b could
express Lin28a and Lin28b effectively. Compared with HeLaS3, the expression level
of let-7 family except let-7e declined in HeLaS3/pAAV2neo-Lin28a. But declining
extent among members of let-7 family was different. The let-7 family activity
also decreased while the decreasing extent varied among members. Furthermore, the
activity level was not consistent with its expression level for the same member
in let-7 family. Compared with HeLaS3, both expression level and activity level
of let-7 family in HeLaS3/ pAAV2neo-Lin28b were decreased. However, the
decreasing extent of let-7 family expression changes was larger than that of
HeLaS3/pAAV2neo-Lin28a while the decreasing extent of activity changes was
similar. In this study, we established a method to detect and compare
post-transcriptional inhibition level mediated by miRNA complementary targets. We
firstly clarified the effect of Lin28a and Lin28b on let-7 family activity
profile and found that this effect was not the same as that at expression level
of let-7 family, suggesting that it was more comprehensive to understand miRNA
regulation roles to detect both miRNA expression and activity. This paves a way
for further research on mechanism of regulation of let-7 family.

PMID: 22263265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Hum Reprod Update. 2012 Mar-Apr;18(2):198-210. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmr050. Epub
2012 Jan 18.

Genetics of age at menarche: a systematic review.

Dvornyk V(1), Waqar-ul-Haq.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong
SAR, PR China. dvornyk@hku.hk

BACKGROUND: Menarche is the first menstrual period of a girl at puberty. The
timing of menarche is important for health in later life. Age at menarche is a
complex trait and has a strong genetic component. This review summarizes the
results of the genetic studies of age at menarche conducted to date, highlights
existing problems in this area and outlines prospects of future studies on
genetic factors for the trait.
METHODS: PubMed and Google Scholar were searched until May 2011 using the
keywords: 'menarche', 'puberty' and 'age at menarche' in combination with the
keywords 'polymorphism', 'candidate gene', 'genome-wide association study' and
'linkage'.
RESULTS: Our search yielded 170 papers, 35 of which were selected for further
analysis. Several large-scale genome-wide association studies along with a
powerful meta-analysis of their aggregated data identified about 50 candidate
genes for the trait. Some genes were replicated in different studies of
Caucasians (e.g. LIN28B, TMEM38B) or in different ethnicities (e.g. SPOCK, RANK
and RANKL). However, despite the large volume of results obtained, there is a
huge gap in relevant data on ethnic groups other than Caucasians.
CONCLUSIONS: The reviewed studies laid a solid basis for future research on
genetics of age at menarche. However, as yet specific genes for this trait have
not been identified consistently in all ethnicities and types of studies. We
suggest expanding the research to different ethnicities and propose several
methodologies to increase the efficiency of studies in this area, including a
systems approach, which combines existing high-throughput methods in a single
pipeline.

PMID: 22258758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Apr 4;351(2):264-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.12.016.
Epub 2012 Jan 3.

Analysis of LIN28A in early human ovary development and as a candidate gene for
primary ovarian insufficiency.

El-Khairi R(1), Parnaik R, Duncan AJ, Lin L, Gerrelli D, Dattani MT, Conway GS,
Achermann JC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Endocrinology Research Group, Clinical and Molecular Genetics
Unit, University College London (UCL) Institute of Child Health, University
College London, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

Lin28 proteins are emerging as important regulators of microRNAs in endocrine
systems. Lin28a regulates primordial germ cell development and puberty timing in 
mice, whereas the related protein LIN28B is associated with age at menarche in
genome-wide association studies in humans. Here, we studied expression of LIN28A 
and LIN28B in early human gonad development. LIN28A increased in the developing
ovary between 6 and 9weeks post conception, but not in the developing testis.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated LIN28A in peripheral germ cells. LIN28B was
expressed at lower levels in both tissues and did not increase with time. As
disruption of Lin28a affects germ cell development in mice, LIN28A was considered
a candidate gene for primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) in humans. However, no
significant changes were found in 50 women studied. These findings show LIN28A is
strongly expressed in germ cells during early human ovary development, but
disruption of LIN28A is not a common cause of POI.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3314903
PMID: 22240064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cell. 2012 Jan 20;148(1-2):259-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.050. Epub 2012 Jan
5.

Glycine decarboxylase activity drives non-small cell lung cancer tumor-initiating
cells and tumorigenesis.

Zhang WC(1), Shyh-Chang N, Yang H, Rai A, Umashankar S, Ma S, Soh BS, Sun LL, Tai
BC, Nga ME, Bhakoo KK, Jayapal SR, Nichane M, Yu Q, Ahmed DA, Tan C, Sing WP, Tam
J, Thirugananam A, Noghabi MS, Pang YH, Ang HS, Mitchell W, Robson P, Kaldis P,
Soo RA, Swarup S, Lim EH, Lim B.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60
Biopolis Street, Singapore 138672.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2012 Mar 2;148(5):1066. Mitchell, Wayne [added].

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 Feb 14;21(2):143-5.

Identification of the factors critical to the tumor-initiating cell (TIC) state
may open new avenues in cancer therapy. Here we show that the metabolic enzyme
glycine decarboxylase (GLDC) is critical for TICs in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC). TICs from primary NSCLC tumors express high levels of the oncogenic stem
cell factor LIN28B and GLDC, which are both required for TIC growth and
tumorigenesis. Overexpression of GLDC and other glycine/serine enzymes, but not
catalytically inactive GLDC, promotes cellular transformation and tumorigenesis. 
We found that GLDC induces dramatic changes in glycolysis and glycine/serine
metabolism, leading to changes in pyrimidine metabolism to regulate cancer cell
proliferation. In the clinic, aberrant activation of GLDC correlates with poorer 
survival in lung cancer patients, and aberrant GLDC expression is observed in
multiple cancer types. This link between glycine metabolism and tumorigenesis may
provide novel targets for advancing anticancer therapy.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22225612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 May;40(9):3856-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkr1302. Epub 2011
Dec 30.

Ectopic over-expression of tristetraprolin in human cancer cells promotes
biogenesis of let-7 by down-regulation of Lin28.

Kim CW(1), Vo MT, Kim HK, Lee HH, Yoon NA, Lee BJ, Min YJ, Joo WD, Cha HJ, Park
JW, Cho WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Ulsan, Ulsan 680-749, Korea.

Tristetraprolin (TTP) is a AU-rich element (ARE) binding protein and exhibits
suppressive effects on cell growth through down-regulation of ARE-containing
oncogenes. The let-7 microRNA has emerged as a significant factor in tumor
suppression. Both TTP and let-7 are often repressed in human cancers, thereby
promoting oncogenesis by derepressing their target genes. In this work, an
unexpected link between TTP and let-7 has been found in human cancer cells. TTP
promotes an increase in expression of mature let-7, which leads to the inhibition
of let-7 target gene CDC34 expression and suppresses cell growth. This event is
associated with TTP-mediated inhibition of Lin28, which has emerged as a negative
modulator of let-7. Lin28 mRNA contains ARE within its 3'-UTR and TTP enhances
the decay of Lin28 mRNA through binding to its 3'-UTR. This suggests that the
TTP-mediated down-regulation of Lin28 plays a key role in let-7 miRNA biogenesis 
in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3351177
PMID: 22210895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. PLoS Genet. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002413. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002413. Epub 2011
Dec 8.

An assessment of the individual and collective effects of variants on height
using twins and a developmentally informative study design.

Vrieze SI(1), McGue M, Miller MB, Legrand LN, Schork NJ, Iacono WG.

Author information: 
(1)Psychology Department, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, United
States of America. vrie0006@umn.edu

In a sample of 3,187 twins and 3,294 of their parents, we sought to investigate
association of both individual variants and a genotype-based height score
involving 176 of the 180 common genetic variants with adult height identified
recently by the GIANT consortium. First, longitudinal observations on height
spanning pre-adolescence through adulthood in the twin sample allowed us to
investigate the separate effects of the previously identified SNPs on
pre-pubertal height and pubertal growth spurt. We show that the effect of SNPs
identified by the GIANT consortium is primarily on prepubertal height. Only one
SNP, rs7759938 in LIN28B, approached a significant association with pubertal
growth. Second, we show how using the twin data to control statistically for
environmental variance can provide insight into the ultimate magnitude of SNP
effects and consequently the genetic architecture of a phenotype. Specifically,
we computed a genetic score by weighting SNPs according to their effects as
assessed via meta-analysis. This weighted score accounted for 9.2% of the
phenotypic variance in height, but 14.3% of the corresponding genetic variance.
Longitudinal samples will be needed to understand the developmental context of
common genetic variants identified through GWAS, while genetically informative
designs will be helpful in accurately characterizing the extent to which these
variants account for genetic, and not just phenotypic, variance.

PMCID: PMC3234218
PMID: 22174699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Mar 15;21(6):1419-32. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr570. Epub 2011 Nov 
30.

Replication of loci influencing ages at menarche and menopause in Hispanic women:
the Women's Health Initiative SHARe Study.

Chen CT(1), Fernández-Rhodes L, Brzyski RG, Carlson CS, Chen Z, Heiss G, North
KE, Woods NF, Rajkovic A, Kooperberg C, Franceschini N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. ctchen@fhcrc.org

Several genome-wide studies have identified loci associated with reproductive
traits, such as ages of menarche and menopause, in women of European ancestry. In
this study, we investigated the relevance of these loci in minority US Hispanic
women. We utilized data from 3468 women who were genotyped as a part of the
Women's Health Initiative SNP Health Association Resource. We replicated
associations of eight loci (LRP18, LIN28B, CENPW, INHBA, TMEM38B, ZNF483, NFAT5
and OLFM2) with age at menarche, and of two loci (MCM8 and BRSK1/TMEM150B) with
age at menopause. The MCM8 locus was also associated with early menopause risk.
Three loci (CENPW, MCM8 and BRSK1/TMEM150B) were associated with the length of
reproductive lifespan. We provide evidence that genetic variants influencing
reproductive traits identified in European populations are also important in
minority US Hispanic women.

PMCID: PMC3284121
PMID: 22131368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Feb;78(2):262-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.10.041. Epub 2011 
Nov 29.

Metformin may antagonize Lin28 and/or Lin28B activity, thereby boosting let-7
levels and antagonizing cancer progression.

McCarty MF(1).

Author information: 
(1)NutriGuard Research, 1051 Hermes Ave., Encinitas, CA 92024, USA.
markfmccarty@gmail.com

Cancer cells with stem cell characteristics are harbored by most tumors, and are 
characterized by epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) - which promotes
invasive growth and metastasis - chemoresistance, and the capacity to
reconstitute new tumors. Hence, the control or destruction of cancer stem cells
should be a major goal of cancer management. The let-7 family of microRNAs has
cancer suppressor activity, and recent evidence suggests that markedly reduced
levels of let-7 are not only a typical feature of cancer stem cells, but may be
largely responsible for cancer stemness. It is therefore particularly intriguing 
that metformin, a diabetes drug thought to have potential in the prevention and
treatment of cancer, has recently been found to oppose cancer cell stemness, to
markedly potentiate chemotherapeutic control of cancer in mouse xenograft models,
and to notably boost let-7a levels in cancer stem cells. It is proposed that this
latter effect of metformin may reflect AMPK-mediated inhibition of the expression
or activity of Lin28/Lin28A, proteins which act post-transcriptionally to
decrease the levels of all let-7 family members. The transcription of Lin28B is
promoted by NF-kappaB and by Myc; hence, practical measures which antagonize
NF-kappaB or Myc activity may complement the utility of metformin for boosting
let-7 expression and controlling cancer stemness; salsalate, antioxidants,
tyrosine kinase and cox-2 inhibitors, ribavirin, vitamin D, gamma-secretase
inhibitors (when available), and parenteral curcumin may have some utility in
this regard. Although the impact of histone deacetylase inhibitors on let-7
expression has not been assessed, there is reason to suspect that these drugs
might complement let-7's impact on chemoresistance, EMT, and stemness. Multifocal
strategies centering on metformin may have considerable potential for reversing
cancer stemness and rendering advanced cancers more susceptible to long term
control.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22129484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Cell. 2011 Nov 23;147(5):1066-79. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.10.039.

Lin28A and Lin28B inhibit let-7 microRNA biogenesis by distinct mechanisms.

Piskounova E(1), Polytarchou C, Thornton JE, LaPierre RJ, Pothoulakis C, Hagan
JP, Iliopoulos D, Gregory RI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program, Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Lin28A and Lin28B selectively block the expression of let-7 microRNAs and
function as oncogenes in a variety of human cancers. Lin28A recruits a TUTase
(Zcchc11/TUT4) to let-7 precursors to block processing by Dicer in the cell
cytoplasm. Here we find that unlike Lin28A, Lin28B represses let-7 processing
through a Zcchc11-independent mechanism. Lin28B functions in the nucleus by
sequestering primary let-7 transcripts and inhibiting their processing by the
Microprocessor. The inhibitory effects of Zcchc11 depletion on the tumorigenic
capacity and metastatic potential of human cancer cells and xenografts are
restricted to Lin28A-expressing tumors. Furthermore, the majority of human colon 
and breast tumors analyzed exclusively express either Lin28A or Lin28B. Lin28A is
expressed in HER2-overexpressing breast tumors, whereas Lin28B expression
characterizes triple-negative breast tumors. Overall our results illuminate the
distinct mechanisms by which Lin28A and Lin28B function and have implications for
the development of new strategies for cancer therapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3227872
PMID: 22118463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2012 Sep;131(3-5):101-6. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.10.007. Epub 2011 Nov 3.

LIN28: a regulator of tumor-suppressing activity of let-7 microRNA in human
breast cancer.

Sakurai M(1), Miki Y, Masuda M, Hata S, Shibahara Y, Hirakawa H, Suzuki T, Sasano
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University, Graduate School of Medicine,
Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan.

A tumor-suppressor gene, let-7 microRNA (miRNA) family, is often inactivated in
various human malignancies. LIN28 is a RNA-binding protein that has been well
characterized for regulation of let-7 maturation in undifferentiated embryonic
stem cells at post-transcriptional level. Oncogenic regulation of let-7 miRNAs
has been demonstrated in several human malignancies but their correlation with
LIN28 has not been studied in breast cancer. We therefore explored a possible
mechanism of tumorigenesis in breast carcinoma tissue via an alternation of let-7
miRNA precursor processing by LIN28 in this study. A total of 26 breast cancer
surgical pathology specimens were evaluated for LIN28 and LIN28B expression using
immunohistochemistry. We then isolated carcinoma cells in 21 cases using laser
capture microdissection, and the miRNAs from these samples were profiled using
PCR array analysis. LIN28 status was positively correlated with ERa, PR, and
Ki-67 status and inversely correlated with HER2 status. These results suggest the
possible involvement of LIN28 in regulation of sex steroid dependent cell
proliferation of breast carcinoma cells. We further demonstrated that expression 
of let-7a, let-7c, let-7d (P=0.026) and let-7f (P=0.016) were inversely
correlated with those of LIN28. These results also suggest that LIN28 promotes
tumorigenic activity by suppressing let-7 miRNA maturation in breast carcinoma
cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22081076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Cell. 2011 Sep 30;147(1):81-94. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.08.033.

The Lin28/let-7 axis regulates glucose metabolism.

Zhu H(1), Shyh-Chang N, Segrè AV, Shinoda G, Shah SP, Einhorn WS, Takeuchi A,
Engreitz JM, Hagan JP, Kharas MG, Urbach A, Thornton JE, Triboulet R, Gregory RI;
DIAGRAM Consortium; MAGIC Investigators, Altshuler D, Daley GQ.

Collaborators: Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch 
RP, Zeggini E, Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, McCulloch LJ, Ferreira T,
Grallert H, Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S, McCarroll SA, Langenberg C, 
Hofmann OM, Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M, Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B, 
Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Boström KB,
Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier G, Chines PS, Cornelis M, Couper
DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott AL, Erdos MR, Fox CS, Franklin CS, 
Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin S, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Hadjadj 
S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Kao WH, 
Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen T, Li M, Lieverse A, Lindgren CM,
Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, Morken MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P,
Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou C, Proença C, Prokopenko I,
Rathmann W, Rayner NW, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G, Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, 
Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T, Strassburger K, Stringham HM, Sun 
Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van Dam RM, van Haeften TW, van Herpt 
T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Walters GB, Weedon MN, Wijmenga C, Witteman J,
Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL, Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA,
Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Laakso M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer
CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A,
Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR, Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ,
Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS, Pedersen O, Wichmann HE, Barroso I,
Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R, Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig
T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM, Stefansson K, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI,
Dupuis J, Langenberg C, Prokopenko I, Saxena R, Soranzo N, Jackson AU, Wheeler E,
Glazer NL, Bouatia-Naji N, Gloyn AL, Lindgren CM, Mägi R, Morris AP, Randall J,
Johnson T, Elliott P, Rybin D, Thorleifsson G, Steinthorsdottir V, Henneman P,
Grallert H, Dehghan A, Hottenga JJ, Franklin CS, Navarro P, Song K, Goel A, Perry
JR, Egan JM, Lajunen T, Grarup N, Sparsø T, Doney A, Voight BF, Stringham HM, Li 
M, Kanoni S, Shrader P, Cavalcanti-Proença C, Kumari M, Qi L, Timpson NJ, Gieger 
C, Zabena C, Rocheleau G, Ingelsson E, An P, O'Connell J, Luan J, Elliott A,
McCarroll SA, Payne F, Roccasecca RM, Pattou F, Sethupathy P, Ardlie K, Ariyurek 
Y, Balkau B, Barter P, Beilby JP, Ben-Shlomo Y, Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ,
Bergmann S, Bochud M, Boerwinkle E, Bonnefond A, Bonnycastle LL, Borch-Johnsen K,
Böttcher Y, Brunner E, Bumpstead SJ, Charpentier G, Chen YD, Chines P, Clarke R, 
Coin LJ, Cooper MN, Cornelis M, Crawford G, Crisponi L, Day IN, de Geus EJ,
Delplanque J, Dina C, Erdos MR, Fedson AC, Fischer-Rosinsky A, Forouhi NG, Fox
CS, Frants R, Franzosi MG, Galan P, Goodarzi MO, Graessler J, Groves CJ, Grundy
S, Gwilliam R, Gyllensten U, Hadjadj S, Hallmans G, Hammond N, Han X, Hartikainen
AL, Hassanali N, Hayward C, Heath SC, Hercberg S, Herder C, Hicks AA, Hillman DR,
Hingorani AD, Hofman A, Hui J, Hung J, Isomaa B, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Jula A,
Kaakinen M, Kaprio J, Kesaniemi YA, Kivimaki M, Knight B, Koskinen S, Kovacs P,
Kyvik KO, Lathrop GM, Lawlor DA, Le Bacquer O, Lecoeur C, Li Y, Lyssenko V,
Mahley R, Mangino M, Manning AK, Martínez-Larrad MT, McAteer JB, McCulloch LJ,
McPherson R, Meisinger C, Melzer D, Meyre D, Mitchell BD, Morken MA, Mukherjee S,
Naitza S, Narisu N, Neville MJ, Oostra BA, Orrù M, Pakyz R, Palmer CN, Paolisso
G, Pattaro C, Pearson D, Peden JF, Pedersen NL, Perola M, Pfeiffer AF, Pichler I,
Polasek O, Posthuma D, Potter SC, Pouta A, Province MA, Psaty BM, Rathmann W,
Rayner NW, Rice K, Ripatti S, Rivadeneira F, Roden M, Rolandsson O, Sandbaek A,
Sandhu M, Sanna S, Sayer AA, Scheet P, Scott LJ, Seedorf U, Sharp SJ, Shields B, 
Sigurðsson G, Sijbrands EJ, Silveira A, Simpson L, Singleton A, Smith NL, Sovio
U, Swift A, Syddall H, Syvänen AC, Tanaka T, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tönjes A, Tuomi
T, Uitterlinden AG, van Dijk KW, van Hoek M, Varma D, Visvikis-Siest S, Vitart V,
Vogelzangs N, Waeber G, Wagner PJ, Walley A, Walters GB, Ward KL, Watkins H,
Weedon MN, Wild SH, Willemsen G, Witteman JC, Yarnell JW, Zeggini E, Zelenika D, 
Zethelius B, Zhai G, Zhao JH, Zillikens MC, Borecki IB, Loos RJ, Meneton P,
Magnusson PK, Nathan DM, Williams GH, Hattersley AT, Silander K, Salomaa V, Smith
GD, Bornstein SR, Schwarz P, Spranger J, Karpe F, Shuldiner AR, Cooper C,
Dedoussis GV, Serrano-Ríos M, Morris AD, Lind L, Palmer LJ, Hu FB, Franks PW,
Ebrahim S, Marmot M, Kao WH, Pankow JS, Sampson MJ, Kuusisto J, Laakso M, Hansen 
T, Pedersen O, Pramstaller PP, Wichmann HE, Illig T, Rudan I, Wright AF, Stumvoll
M, Campbell H, Wilson JF, Hamsten A, Bergman RN, Buchanan TA, Collins FS, Mohlke 
KL, Tuomilehto J, Valle TT, Altshuler D, Rotter JI, Siscovick DS, Penninx BW,
Boomsma DI, Deloukas P, Spector TD, Frayling TM, Ferrucci L, Kong A,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K, van Duijn CM, Aulchenko YS, Cao A, Scuteri A,
Schlessinger D, Uda M, Ruokonen A, Jarvelin MR, Waterworth DM, Vollenweider P,
Peltonen L, Mooser V, Abecasis GR, Wareham NJ, Sladek R, Froguel P, Watanabe RM, 
Meigs JB, Groop L, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Florez JC, Barroso I.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Nov;11(11):756.

The let-7 tumor suppressor microRNAs are known for their regulation of oncogenes,
while the RNA-binding proteins Lin28a/b promote malignancy by inhibiting let-7
biogenesis. We have uncovered unexpected roles for the Lin28/let-7 pathway in
regulating metabolism. When overexpressed in mice, both Lin28a and LIN28B promote
an insulin-sensitized state that resists high-fat-diet induced diabetes.
Conversely, muscle-specific loss of Lin28a or overexpression of let-7 results in 
insulin resistance and impaired glucose tolerance. These phenomena occur, in
part, through the let-7-mediated repression of multiple components of the
insulin-PI3K-mTOR pathway, including IGF1R, INSR, and IRS2. In addition, the mTOR
inhibitor, rapamycin, abrogates Lin28a-mediated insulin sensitivity and enhanced 
glucose uptake. Moreover, let-7 targets are enriched for genes containing SNPs
associated with type 2 diabetes and control of fasting glucose in human
genome-wide association studies. These data establish the Lin28/let-7 pathway as 
a central regulator of mammalian glucose metabolism.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3353524
PMID: 21962509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. BMC Res Notes. 2011 Sep 22;4:363. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-4-363.

LIN28B, LIN28A, KISS1, and KISS1R in idiopathic central precocious puberty.

Tommiska J(1), Sørensen K, Aksglaede L, Koivu R, Puhakka L, Juul A, Raivio T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. johanna.tommiska@helsinki.fi.

BACKGROUND: Pubertal timing is a strongly heritable trait, but no single puberty 
gene has been identified. Thus, the genetic background of idiopathic central
precocious puberty (ICPP) is poorly understood. Overall, the genetic modulation
of pubertal onset most likely arises from the additive effect of multiple genes, 
but also monogenic causes of ICPP probably exist, as cases of familial ICPP have 
been reported. Mutations in KISS1 and KISSR, coding for kisspeptin and its
receptor, involved in GnRH secretion and puberty onset, have been suggested
causative for monogenic ICPP. Variation in LIN28B was associated with timing of
puberty in genome-wide association (GWA) studies. LIN28B is a human ortholog of
the gene that controls, through microRNAs, developmental timing in C. elegans. In
addition, Lin28a transgenic mice manifest the puberty phenotypes identified in
the human GWAS. Thus, both LIN28B and LIN28A may have a role in pubertal
development and are good candidate genes for monogenic ICPP.
METHODS: Thirty girls with ICPP were included in the study. ICPP was defined by
pubertal onset before 8 yrs of age, and a pubertal LH response to GnRH testing.
The coding regions of LIN28B, LIN28A, KISS1, and KISS1R were sequenced. The
missense change in LIN28B was also screened in 132 control subjects.
RESULTS: No rare variants were detected in KISS1 or KISS1R in the 30 subjects
with ICPP. In LIN28B, one missense change, His199Arg, was found in one subject
with ICPP. However, this variant was also detected in one of the 132 controls. No
variation in LIN28A was found.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not find any evidence that mutations in LIN28B or LIN28A
would underlie ICPP. In addition, we confirmed that mutations in KISS1 and KISS1R
are not a common cause for ICPP.

PMCID: PMC3184284
PMID: 21939553  [PubMed]


178. Cell Res. 2012 Jan;22(1):178-93. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.133. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

Defining the nature of human pluripotent stem cell progeny.

Patterson M(1), Chan DN, Ha I, Case D, Cui Y, Van Handel B, Mikkola HK, Lowry WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

While it is clear that human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) can differentiate to 
generate a panoply of various cell types, it is unknown how closely in vitro
development mirrors that which occurs in vivo. To determine whether human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs)
make equivalent progeny, and whether either makes cells that are analogous to
tissue-derived cells, we performed comprehensive transcriptome profiling of
purified PSC derivatives and their tissue-derived counterparts. Expression
profiling demonstrated that hESCs and hiPSCs make nearly identical progeny for
the neural, hepatic, and mesenchymal lineages, and an absence of re-expression
from exogenous reprogramming factors in hiPSC progeny. However, when compared to 
a tissue-derived counterpart, the progeny of both hESCs and hiPSCs maintained
expression of a subset of genes normally associated with early mammalian
development, regardless of the type of cell generated. While pluripotent genes
(OCT4, SOX2, REX1, and NANOG) appeared to be silenced immediately upon
differentiation from hPSCs, genes normally unique to early embryos (LIN28A,
LIN28B, DPPA4, and others) were not fully silenced in hPSC derivatives. These
data and evidence from expression patterns in early human fetal tissue (3-16
weeks of development) suggest that the differentiated progeny of hPSCs are
reflective of very early human development (< 6 weeks). These findings provide
support for the idea that hPSCs can serve as useful in vitro models of early
human development, but also raise important issues for disease modeling and the
clinical application of hPSC derivatives.

PMCID: PMC3351932
PMID: 21844894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. EMBO Rep. 2011 Jul 1;12(7):690-6. doi: 10.1038/embor.2011.100.

Single-molecule approach to immunoprecipitated protein complexes: insights into
miRNA uridylation.

Yeom KH(1), Heo I, Lee J, Hohng S, Kim VN, Joo C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences and Creative Research Center, Seoul National
University, Seoul 151-742, Korea; Kavli Institute of NanoScience and Department
of BioNanoScience, Delft University of Technology, Lorentzweg 1, Delft 2628 CJ,
The Netherlands.

Single-molecule techniques have been used for only a subset of biological
problems because of difficulties in studying proteins that require cofactors or
post-translational modifications. Here, we present a new method integrating
single-molecule fluorescence microscopy and immunopurification to study protein
complexes. We used this method to investigate Lin28-mediated microRNA uridylation
by TUT4 (terminal uridylyl transferase 4, polyU polymerase), which regulates
let-7 microRNA biogenesis. Our real-time analysis of the uridylation by the TUT4 
immunoprecipitates suggests that Lin28 functions as a processivity factor of
TUT4. Our new technique, SIMPlex (single-molecule approach to immunoprecipitated 
protein complexes), provides a universal tool to analyse complex proteins at the 
single-molecule level.

PMCID: PMC3128948
PMID: 21637296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Oncogene. 2011 Oct 6;30(40):4185-93. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.131. Epub 2011 May 30.

LIN28B fosters colon cancer migration, invasion and transformation through
let-7-dependent and -independent mechanisms.

King CE(1), Wang L, Winograd R, Madison BB, Mongroo PS, Johnstone CN, Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division and Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Lin28b is an RNA-binding protein that inhibits biogenesis of let-7 microRNAs.
LIN28B is overexpressed in diverse cancers, yet a specific role in the molecular 
pathogenesis of colon cancer has to be elucidated. We have determined that human 
colon tumors exhibit decreased levels of mature let-7 isoforms and increased
expression of LIN28B. To determine LIN28B's mechanistic role in colon cancer, we 
expressed LIN28B in immortalized colonic epithelial cells and human colon cancer 
cell lines. We found that LIN28B promotes cell migration, invasion and transforms
immortalized colonic epithelial cells. In addition, constitutive LIN28B
expression increases expression of intestinal stem cell markers LGR5 and PROM1 in
the presence of let-7 restoration. This may occur as a result of Lin28b protein
binding LGR5 and PROM1 mRNA, suggesting that a subset of LIN28B functions is
independent of its ability to repress let-7. Our findings establish a new role
for LIN28B in human colon cancer pathogenesis, and suggest LIN28B
post-transcriptionally regulates LGR5 and PROM1 through a let-7-independent
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3165068
PMID: 21625210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Int J Cancer. 2012 Apr 15;130(8):1787-97. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26190. Epub 2011 Aug
16.

Let-7 modulates acquired resistance of ovarian cancer to Taxanes via
IMP-1-mediated stabilization of multidrug resistance 1.

Boyerinas B(1), Park SM, Murmann AE, Gwin K, Montag AG, Zillhardt M, Hua YJ,
Lengyel E, Peter ME.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine, Division Hematology/Oncology, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Ovarian cancer patients frequently develop resistance to chemotherapy regiments
using Taxol and carboplatin. One of the resistance factors that protects cancer
cells from Taxol-based therapy is multidrug resistance 1 (MDR1). micro(mi)RNAs
are small noncoding RNAs that negatively regulate protein expression. Members of 
the let-7 family of miRNAs are downregulated in many human cancers, and low let-7
expression has been correlated with resistance to microtubule targeting drugs
(Taxanes), although little is known that would explain this activity. We now
provide evidence that, although let-7 is not a universal sensitizer of cancer
cells to Taxanes, it affects acquired resistance of cells to this class of drugs 
by targeting IMP-1, resulting in destabilization of the mRNA of MDR1. Introducing
let-7g into ADR-RES cells expressing both IMP-1 and MDR1 reduced expression of
both proteins rendering the cells more sensitive to treatment with either Taxol
or vinblastine without affecting the sensitivity of the cells to carboplatin, a
non-MDR1 substrate. This effect could be reversed by reintroducing IMP-1 into
let-7g high/MDR1 low cells causing MDR1 to again become stabilized. Consistently,
many relapsed ovarian cancer patients tested before and after chemotherapy were
found to downregulate let-7 and to co-upregulate IMP-1 and MDR1, and the increase
in the expression levels of both proteins after chemotherapy negatively
correlated with disease-free time before recurrence. Our data point at IMP-1 and 
MDR1 as indicators for response to therapy, and at IMP-1 as a novel therapeutic
target for overcoming multidrug resistance of ovarian cancer.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3230767
PMID: 21618519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 13;6(4):e18064. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0018064.

Deregulation of MYCN, LIN28B and LET7 in a molecular subtype of aggressive
high-grade serous ovarian cancers.

Helland Å(1), Anglesio MS, George J, Cowin PA, Johnstone CN, House CM, Sheppard
KE, Etemadmoghadam D, Melnyk N, Rustgi AK, Phillips WA, Johnsen H, Holm R,
Kristensen GB, Birrer MJ; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study Group, Pearson RB,
Børresen-Dale AL, Huntsman DG, deFazio A, Creighton CJ, Smyth GK, Bowtell DD.

Collaborators: Bowtell D, Chenevix-Trench G, Green A, Webb P, deFazio A, Gertig
D, Traficante N, Moore S, Hung J, Fereday S, Harrap K, Sadkowsky T, Pandeya N,
Malt M, Mellon A, Robertson R, Vanden Bergh T, Jones M, Mackenzie P, Maidens J,
Nattress K, Chiew YE, Stenlake A, Sullivan H, Alexander B, Ashover P, Brown S,
Corrish T, Green L, Jackman L, Ferguson K, Martin K, Martyn A, Ranieri B, White
J, Jayde V, Bowes L, Mamers P, Galletta L, Giles D, Hendley J, Alsop K, Schmidt
T, Shirley H, Ball C, Young C, Viduka S, Tran H, Bilic S, Glavinas L, Brooks J,
Stuart-Harris R, Kirsten F, Rutovitz J, Clingan P, Glasgow A, Proietto A, Braye
S, Otton G, Shannon J, Bonaventura T, Stewart J, Begbie S, Friedlander M, Bell D,
Baron-Hay S, Valmadre S, Ferrier A, Gard G, Nevell D, Pavlakis N, Young B,
Camaris C, Crouch R, Edwards L, Hacker N, Marsden D, Robertson G, Beale P, Beith 
J, Carter J, Dalrymple C, Hamilton A, Houghton R, Russell P, Links M, Grygiel J, 
Hill J, Brand A, Byth K, Jaworski R, Harnett P, Sharma R, Wain G, Ward B,
Papadimos D, Crandon A, Cummings M, Horwood K, Obermair A, Perrin L, Wyld D,
Nicklin J, Davy M, Oehler MK, Hall C, Dodd T, Healy T, Pittman K, Henderson D,
Miller J, Pierdes J, Blomfield P, Challis D, McIntosh R, Parker A, Brown B, Rome 
R, Allen D, Grant P, Hyde S, Robbie RL, Healy D, Jobling T, Manolitsas T,
McNealage J, Rogers P, Susil B, Sumithran E, Simpson I, Phillips K, Rischin D,
Fox S, Johnson D, Waring P, Lade S, Loughrey M, O'Callaghan N, Murray W, Billson 
V, Pyman J, Neesham D, Quinn M, Underhill C, Bell R, Ng LF, Blum R, Ganju V,
Hammond I, McCartney A, Leung Y, Buck M, Haviv I, Purdie D, Whiteman D, Zeps N,
Gurry P, Hamilton A, Hankinson S, Meltzer P, Stuart-Harris R, Kirsten F, Rutovitz
J, Clingan P, Glasgow A, Proietto A, Braye S, Otton G, Shannon J, Bonaventura T, 
Stewart J, Begbie S, Friedlander M, Bell D, Baron-Hay S, Ferrier A, Gard G,
Nevell D, Pavlakis N, Young B, Camaris C, Crouch R, Edwards L, Hacker N, Marsden 
D, Robertson G, Beale P, Beith J, Carter J, Dalrymple C, Hamilton A, Houghton R, 
Russell P, Links M, Grygiel J, Hill J, Brand A, Byth K, Jaworski R, Harnett P,
Sharma R, Wain G, Purdie D, Whiteman D, Ward B, Papadimos D, Crandon A, Cummings 
M, Horwood K, Obermair A, Perrin L, Wyld D, Nicklin J, Davy M, Oehler MK, Hall C,
Dodd T, Healy T, Pittman K, Henderson D, Miller J, Pierdes J, Blomfield P,
Challis D, McIntosh R, Parker A, Brown B, Rome R, Allen D, Grant P, Hyde S,
Robbie RL, Healy D, Jobling T, Manolitsas T, McNealage J, Rogers P, Susil B,
Sumithran E, Simpson I, Haviv I, Phillips K, Rischin D, Fox S, Johnson D, Lade S,
Waring P, Loughrey M, O'Callaghan N, Murray B, Billson V, Pyman J, Neesham D,
Quinn M, Underhill C, Bell R, Ng LF, Blum R, Ganju V, Hammond I, McCartney A,
Leung Y, Buck M, Zeps N.

Molecular subtypes of serous ovarian cancer have been recently described. Using
data from independent datasets including over 900 primary tumour samples, we show
that deregulation of the Let-7 pathway is specifically associated with the C5
molecular subtype of serous ovarian cancer. DNA copy number and gene expression
of HMGA2, alleles of Let-7, LIN28, LIN28B, MYC, MYCN, DICER1, and RNASEN were
measured using microarray and quantitative reverse transcriptase PCR.
Immunohistochemistry was performed on 127 samples using tissue microarrays and
anti-HMGA2 antibodies. Fluorescence in situ hybridisation of bacterial artificial
chromosomes hybridized to 239 ovarian tumours was used to measure translocation
at the LIN28B locus. Short interfering RNA knockdown in ovarian cell lines was
used to test the functionality of associations observed. Four molecular subtypes 
(C1, C2, C4, C5) of high-grade serous ovarian cancers were robustly represented
in each dataset and showed similar pattern of patient survival. We found highly
specific activation of a pathway involving MYCN, LIN28B, Let-7 and HMGA2 in the
C5 molecular subtype defined by MYCN amplification and over-expression,
over-expression of MYCN targets including the Let-7 repressor LIN28B, loss of
Let-7 expression and HMGA2 amplification and over-expression. DICER1, a known
Let-7 target, and RNASEN were over-expressed in C5 tumours. We saw no evidence of
translocation at the LIN28B locus in C5 tumours. The reported interaction between
LIN28B and Let-7 was recapitulated by siRNA knockdown in ovarian cancer cell
lines. Our results associate deregulation of MYCN and downstream targets,
including Let-7 and oncofetal genes, with serous ovarian cancer. We define for
the first time how elements of an oncogenic pathway, involving multiple genes
that contribute to stem cell renewal, is specifically altered in a molecular
subtype of serous ovarian cancer. By defining the drivers of a molecular subtype 
of serous ovarian cancers we provide a novel strategy for targeted therapeutic
intervention.

PMCID: PMC3076323
PMID: 21533284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Mol Biol. 2011 Jun 24;409(5):710-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.04.041. Epub 2011 
Apr 21.

Post-transcriptional fine-tuning of COP9 signalosome subunit biosynthesis is
regulated by the c-Myc/Lin28B/let-7 pathway.

Leppert U(1), Henke W, Huang X, Müller JM, Dubiel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral, Vascular and Thoracic Surgery, Division of
Molecular Biology, Charité - Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Charitéplatz 1, 10117
Berlin, Germany.

The COP9 signalosome (CSN) complex controls protein degradation via the ubiquitin
(Ub) proteasome system (UPS) in eukaryotes. In mammalian cells, the multimeric
CSN is composed of eight subunits (CSN1 - CSN8). It regulates cullin-RING Ub
ligases (CRLs), which target essential regulatory proteins for ubiquitination and
subsequent degradation. Thereby, the CSN cooperates with the UPS in a variety of 
essential cellular functions, including DNA repair, cell cycle and
differentiation. Although functions of the CSN have been elucidated, mechanisms
and regulatory principles of its de novo formation are completely unknown. Here, 
we show that there is a fundamental mechanism that allows a coordinated
expression of all CSN subunits, a prerequisite for CSN assembly. CSN subunit
mRNAs are targets of miRNAs of the let-7 family suppressing CSN subunit
expression in human cells. Factors that reduce or block let-7 miRNAs induce the
coordinated expression of CSN subunits. For instance, over-expression of CSN1
specifically traps let-7a-1 miRNA and elevates CSN subunit levels by two- to
fourfold in a coordinated manner. CSN subunit expression is also increased by
specific miRNA inhibitors or by interferon (IFN)-mediated induction of STAT1 and 
c-Myc reducing levels of let-7 miRNAs. Activation of STAT1 by IFNa or IFN<U+03B3>
induces c-Myc, which increases CSN subunit expression via the Lin28B/let-7
regulatory pathway. By contrast, a let-7a-1 mimic reduces CSN subunit expression.
Our data show that let-7 miRNAs control the fine-tuning and coordinated
expression of subunits for CSN de novo formation, presumably a general regulatory
principle for other Zomes complexes as well.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21530537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2011;24(1-2):103-4.

Association study in Taiwanese girls with precocious puberty.

Chou IC(1), Wang CH, Lin WD, Tsai CH, Tsai FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Medical Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The timing of puberty has a genetic component. Recently, genome-wide 
association studies have identified that rs314280 on 6q21 (near the LIN28B gene) 
and rs2090409 on 9q31.2 (in an intergenic region) are associated with age at
menarche. In this study, we aimed to determine whether the two loci were
associated with the timing of puberty in Taiwanese girls.
RESULTS: A total of 117 girls were divided into two groups: (1) precocious
puberty (n=50) and (2) normal control subjects (n=45). The genotype proportions
and allele frequencies in both groups were not significantly different.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that rs314280 and rs2090409 polymorphisms are not 
a useful marker for prediction of the susceptibility of precocious puberty.

PMID: 21528826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 15;71(12):4260-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-4637. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

LIN28B promotes colon cancer progression and metastasis.

King CE(1), Cuatrecasas M, Castells A, Sepulveda AR, Lee JS, Rustgi AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division and Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

LIN28B is a homologue of LIN28 that induces pluripotency when expressed in
conjunction with OCT4, SOX2, and KLF4 in somatic fibroblasts. LIN28B represses
biogenesis of let-7 microRNAs and is implicated in both development and
tumorigenesis. Recently, we have determined that LIN28B overexpression occurs in 
colon tumors. We conducted a comprehensive analysis of LIN28B protein expression 
in human colon adenocarcinomas. We found that LIN28B overexpression correlates
with reduced patient survival and increased probability of tumor recurrence. To
elucidate tumorigenic functions of LIN28B, we constitutively expressed LIN28B in 
colon cancer cells and evaluated tumor formation in vivo. Tumors with
constitutive LIN28B expression exhibit increased expression of colonic stem cell 
markers LGR5 and PROM1, mucinous differentiation, and metastasis. Together, our
findings point to a function for LIN28B in promoting colon tumor pathogenesis,
especially metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3117110
PMID: 21512136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 1;71(11):3896-903. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-4167. Epub 
2011 Apr 11.

LIN28B polymorphisms influence susceptibility to epithelial ovarian cancer.

Permuth-Wey J(1), Kim D, Tsai YY, Lin HY, Chen YA, Barnholtz-Sloan J, Birrer MJ, 
Bloom G, Chanock SJ, Chen Z, Cramer DW, Cunningham JM, Dagne G, Ebbert-Syfrett J,
Fenstermacher D, Fridley BL, Garcia-Closas M, Gayther SA, Ge W, Gentry-Maharaj A,
Gonzalez-Bosquet J, Goode EL, Iversen E, Jim H, Kong W, McLaughlin J, Menon U,
Monteiro AN, Narod SA, Pharoah PD, Phelan CM, Qu X, Ramus SJ, Risch H,
Schildkraut JM, Song H, Stockwell H, Sutphen R, Terry KL, Tyrer J, Vierkant RA,
Wentzensen N, Lancaster JM, Cheng JQ, Sellers TA; Ovarian Cancer Association
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epidemiology Program, Division of Population Sciences, Moffitt Cancer
Center, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Defective microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis contributes to the development and
progression of epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). In this study, we examined the
hypothesis that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in miRNA biogenesis genes
may influence EOC risk. In an initial investigation, 318 SNPs in 18 genes were
evaluated among 1,815 EOC cases and 1,900 controls, followed up by a replicative 
joint meta-analysis of data from an additional 2,172 cases and 3,052 controls. Of
23 SNPs from 9 genes associated with risk (empirical P < 0.05) in the initial
investigation, the meta-analysis replicated 6 SNPs from the DROSHA, FMR1, LIN28, 
and LIN28B genes, including rs12194974 (G>A), an SNP in a putative transcription 
factor binding site in the LIN28B promoter region (summary OR = 0.90, 95% CI:
0.82-0.98; P = 0.015) which has been recently implicated in age of menarche and
other phenotypes. Consistent with reports that LIN28B overexpression in EOC
contributes to tumorigenesis by repressing tumor suppressor let-7 expression, we 
provide data from luciferase reporter assays and quantitative RT-PCR to suggest
that the inverse association among rs12194974 A allele carriers may be because of
reduced LIN28B expression. Our findings suggest that variants in LIN28B and
possibly other miRNA biogenesis genes may influence EOC susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3107389
PMID: 21482675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Am J Hum Biol. 2011 May-Jun;23(3):423-5. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.21144. Epub 2011 Mar
28.

Right hand digit ratio (2D:4D) is associated with oral cancer.

Nicolás Hopp R(1), Jorge J.

Author information: 
(1)Piracicaba Dental School, Department of Oral Diagnosis, Piracicaba, São Paulo,
Brazil 13414-903. renhopp@gmail.com

Finger length ratio has been proposed as a putative marker for prenatal hormone
exposure, as well as the action of HOX, AR, and a variant of the LIN28b genes.
These genes have been recently connected to carcinogenesis and digit ratio could 
help to identify patients with this predisposition.OBJECTIVES: The purpose of
this study was to investigate the possible correlations between digit ratio, oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)-the most common oral cancer-and oral premalignant 
lesions (OPLs) in tobacco-consuming males, the main risk group for this disease.
METHODS: Digital images of the right hands of patients diagnosed with OSCC (n =
25), OPLs (n = 25), and age-matched controls (n = 25) were obtained. Fingers were
measured using Adobe Photoshop and the mean ratios between the 2nd and 4th digits
were compared. Data were analyzed by ANOVA (a = 0.05).
RESULTS: Risk factors (alcohol and tobacco consumption, familial history) were
similar between the three study groups. Males in the OSCC group presented
significantly higher digit ratio (P = 0.03) in comparison with males with OPLs
and individuals without oral lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: According to the results, males with the higher digit ratio seem to 
be more prone to undergo malignization of lesions in the oral cavity. Similar
deleterious habits for the three groups allows us to infer that digit ratio could
add to the research of etiological factors and be a putative marker for the
screening of patients' susceptibility to develop oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21445935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Hum Genet. 2011 May;129(5):465-72. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-0969-x. Epub 2011 Feb 
22.

Recent progress in the study of the genetics of height.

Lettre G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Heart Institute, 5000 Bélanger Street, Montreal, QC, Canada.
guillaume.lettre@mhi-humangenetics.org

Adult height is a classic polygenic trait of high narrow-sense heritability (h
(2) = 0.8). In the late nineteenth to early twentieth century, variation in adult
height was used as a model to set the foundation of the fields of statistics and 
quantitative genetics. More recently, with our increasing knowledge concerning
the extent of genetic variation in the human genome, human geneticists have used 
genome-wide association studies to identify hundreds of loci robustly associated 
with adult height, providing new insights into human growth and development, and 
into the architecture of complex human traits. In this review, I highlight the
progress made in the last 2 years in understanding how genetic variation controls
height variation in humans, including non-Caucasian populations and children.

PMID: 21340692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Nat Genet. 2010 Dec;42(12):1077-85. doi: 10.1038/ng.714.

Thirty new loci for age at menarche identified by a meta-analysis of genome-wide 
association studies.

Elks CE, Perry JR, Sulem P, Chasman DI, Franceschini N, He C, Lunetta KL, Visser 
JA, Byrne EM, Cousminer DL, Gudbjartsson DF, Esko T, Feenstra B, Hottenga JJ,
Koller DL, Kutalik Z, Lin P, Mangino M, Marongiu M, McArdle PF, Smith AV, Stolk
L, van Wingerden SH, Zhao JH, Albrecht E, Corre T, Ingelsson E, Hayward C,
Magnusson PK, Smith EN, Ulivi S, Warrington NM, Zgaga L, Alavere H, Amin N,
Aspelund T, Bandinelli S, Barroso I, Berenson GS, Bergmann S, Blackburn H,
Boerwinkle E, Buring JE, Busonero F, Campbell H, Chanock SJ, Chen W, Cornelis MC,
Couper D, Coviello AD, d'Adamo P, de Faire U, de Geus EJ, Deloukas P, Döring A,
Smith GD, Easton DF, Eiriksdottir G, Emilsson V, Eriksson J, Ferrucci L, Folsom
AR, Foroud T, Garcia M, Gasparini P, Geller F, Gieger C; GIANT Consortium,
Gudnason V, Hall P, Hankinson SE, Ferreli L, Heath AC, Hernandez DG, Hofman A, Hu
FB, Illig T, Järvelin MR, Johnson AD, Karasik D, Khaw KT, Kiel DP, Kilpeläinen
TO, Kolcic I, Kraft P, Launer LJ, Laven JS, Li S, Liu J, Levy D, Martin NG,
McArdle WL, Melbye M, Mooser V, Murray JC, Murray SS, Nalls MA, Navarro P, Nelis 
M, Ness AR, Northstone K, Oostra BA, Peacock M, Palmer LJ, Palotie A, Paré G,
Parker AN, Pedersen NL, Peltonen L, Pennell CE, Pharoah P, Polasek O, Plump AS,
Pouta A, Porcu E, Rafnar T, Rice JP, Ring SM, Rivadeneira F, Rudan I, Sala C,
Salomaa V, Sanna S, Schlessinger D, Schork NJ, Scuteri A, Segrè AV, Shuldiner AR,
Soranzo N, Sovio U, Srinivasan SR, Strachan DP, Tammesoo ML, Tikkanen E, Toniolo 
D, Tsui K, Tryggvadottir L, Tyrer J, Uda M, van Dam RM, van Meurs JB,
Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Wareham NJ, Waterworth DM, Weedon MN, Wichmann HE,
Willemsen G, Wilson JF, Wright AF, Young L, Zhai G, Zhuang WV, Bierut LJ, Boomsma
DI, Boyd HA, Crisponi L, Demerath EW, van Duijn CM, Econs MJ, Harris TB, Hunter
DJ, Loos RJ, Metspalu A, Montgomery GW, Ridker PM, Spector TD, Streeten EA,
Stefansson K, Thorsteinsdottir U, Uitterlinden AG, Widen E, Murabito JM, Ong KK, 
Murray A.

To identify loci for age at menarche, we performed a meta-analysis of 32
genome-wide association studies in 87,802 women of European descent, with
replication in up to 14,731 women. In addition to the known loci at LIN28B (P =
5.4 × 10<U+207B>6°) and 9q31.2 (P = 2.2 × 10<U+207B>³³), we identified 30 new menarche loci
(all P < 5 × 10<U+207B>8) and found suggestive evidence for a further 10 loci (P < 1.9 ×
10<U+207B>6). The new loci included four previously associated with body mass index (in 
or near FTO, SEC16B, TRA2B and TMEM18), three in or near other genes implicated
in energy homeostasis (BSX, CRTC1 and MCHR2) and three in or near genes
implicated in hormonal regulation (INHBA, PCSK2 and RXRG). Ingenuity and gene-set
enrichment pathway analyses identified coenzyme A and fatty acid biosynthesis as 
biological processes related to menarche timing.

PMCID: PMC3140055
PMID: 21102462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9463-72. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2388. Epub 
2010 Nov 2.

Double-negative feedback loop between reprogramming factor LIN28 and microRNA
let-7 regulates aldehyde dehydrogenase 1-positive cancer stem cells.

Yang X(1), Lin X, Zhong X, Kaur S, Li N, Liang S, Lassus H, Wang L, Katsaros D,
Montone K, Zhao X, Zhang Y, Bützow R, Coukos G, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Early Detection and Cure of Ovarian Cancer, Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

A relatively rare aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1)-positive "stem cell-like"
subpopulation of tumor cells has the unique ability to initiate and perpetuate
tumor growth; moreover, it is highly resistant to chemotherapy and significantly 
associated with poor clinical outcomes. The development of more effective
therapies for cancer requires targeting of this cell population. Using cDNA
microarray analysis, we identified that the expression of the Caenorhabditis
elegans lin-28 homologue (LIN28) was positively correlated with the percentage of
ALDH1+ tumor cells; this was further validated in an independent set of tissue
arrays (n=197). Both loss-of-function and gain-of-function studies showed that
LIN28 plays a critical role in the maintenance of ALDH1+ tumor cells. In
addition, we found that there is a double-negative feedback loop between LIN28
and let-7 in tumor cells, and that let-7 negatively regulates ALDH1+ tumor cells.
Finally, we report that a LIN28/let-7 loop modulates self-renewal and
differentiation of mammary gland epithelial progenitor cells. Our data provide
evidence that cancer stem cells may arise through a "reprogramming-like"
mechanism. A rebalancing of the LIN28/let-7 regulatory loop could be a novel
therapeutic strategy to target ALDH1+ cancer stem cells.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3057570
PMID: 21045151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Jan;96(1):E125-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-0941. Epub
2010 Oct 20.

Associations between the pubertal timing-related variant in LIN28B and BMI vary
across the life course.

Ong KK(1), Elks CE, Wills AK, Wong A, Wareham NJ, Loos RJ, Kuh D, Hardy R.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Epidemiology Unit, Institute of Metabolic
Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
ken.ong@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk

CONTEXT: The common C allele of rs314276 in LIN28B has been robustly associated
with earlier age at menarche in girls and associated with earlier timing of other
pubertal traits in both sexes.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to explore the associations between rs314276, as a
marker of earlier pubertal timing, and body mass index (BMI), weight, and height 
across the life course.
METHODS: The rs314276 in LIN28B was genotyped in 1242 men and 1209 women born in 
1946 and participating in the Medical Research Council National Survey of Health 
and Development. Birth weight was recorded, and height and weight were measured
or self-reported repeatedly at 11 time points between ages 2 and 53 yr.
Polynomial mixed models were used to test whether additive genetic associations
with sd scores (SDS) for BMI and height changed with age between 0 and 53 yr.
RESULTS: Longitudinal analyses revealed age-dependent associations between
rs314276 genotype and BMI (P < 0.001 for genotype-by-age(2) interaction) and body
weight (P < 0.001 for genotype-by-age(2) interaction) in women, but not in men.
In women only, the C allele at rs314276 was associated with higher BMI SDS from
ages 15-43 yr. In contrast, C allele associations with shorter height SDS were
apparent in both men and women and did not vary with age.
CONCLUSION: A common genetic variant in LIN28B that confers earlier puberty was
associated with a prolonged increase in BMI during adolescence and early to
mid-adulthood in women only. Such genetic associations may provide insights into 
the direct effects of pubertal timing on obesity risk.

PMCID: PMC3504301
PMID: 20962026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Hepatology. 2010 Nov;52(5):1731-40. doi: 10.1002/hep.23904.

MicroRNA-125b suppressesed human liver cancer cell proliferation and metastasis
by directly targeting oncogene LIN28B2.

Liang L(1), Wong CM, Ying Q, Fan DN, Huang S, Ding J, Yao J, Yan M, Li J, Yao M, 
Ng IO, He X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, noncoding RNAs that can act as oncogenes or tumor
suppressors in human cancer. Our previous study showed that miR-125b was a
prognostic indicator for patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but its
functions and exact mechanisms in hepatic carcinogenesis are still unknown. Here 
we demonstrate that miR-125b suppressed HCC cell growth in vitro and in vivo.
Moreover, miR-125b increased p21Cip1/Waf1 expression and arrested cell cycle at
G1 to S transition. In addition, miR-125b inhibited HCC cell migration and
invasion. Further studies revealed that LIN28B was a downstream target of
miR-125b in HCC cells as miR-125b bound directly to the 3' untranslated region of
LIN28B, thus reducing both the messenger RNA and protein levels of LIN28B.
Silencing of LIN28B recapitulated the effects of miR-125b overexpression, whereas
enforced expression of LIN28B reversed the suppressive effects of
miR-125b.CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that miR-125b exerts
tumor-suppressive effects in hepatic carcinogenesis through the suppression of
oncogene LIN28B expression and suggest a therapeutic application of miR-125b in
HCC.

PMID: 20827722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 27;5(8):e12445. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012445.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition is mechanistically linked with stem cell
signatures in prostate cancer cells.

Kong D(1), Banerjee S, Ahmad A, Li Y, Wang Z, Sethi S, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Current management of patients diagnosed with prostate cancer (PCa)
is very effective; however, tumor recurrence with Castrate Resistant Prostate
Cancer (CRPC) and subsequent metastasis lead to poor survival outcome, suggesting
that there is a dire need for novel mechanistic understanding of tumor
recurrence, which would be critical for designing novel therapies. The recurrence
and the metastasis of PCa are tightly linked with the biology of prostate cancer 
stem cells or cancer-initiating cells that is reminiscent of the acquisition of
Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT) phenotype. Increasing evidence
suggests that EMT-type cells share many biological characteristics with cancer
stem-like cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we found that PCa cells with EMT
phenotype displayed stem-like cell features characterized by increased expression
of Sox2, Nanog, Oct4, Lin28B and/or Notch1, consistent with enhanced clonogenic
and sphere (prostasphere)-forming ability and tumorigenecity in mice, which was
associated with decreased expression of miR-200 and/or let-7 family. Reversal of 
EMT by re-expression of miR-200 inhibited prostasphere-forming ability of
EMT-type cells and reduced the expression of Notch1 and Lin28B. Down-regulation
of Lin28B increased let-7 expression, which was consistent with repressed
self-renewal capability.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that miR-200 played a pivotal
role in linking the characteristics of cancer stem-like cells with EMT-like cell 
signatures in PCa. Selective elimination of cancer stem-like cells by reversing
the EMT phenotype to Mesenchymal-Epithelial Transition (MET) phenotype using
novel agents would be useful for the prevention of tumor recurrence especially by
eliminating those cells that are the "Root Cause" of tumor development and
recurrence.

PMCID: PMC2929211
PMID: 20805998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Aug;17(8):1011-8. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1874. Epub 2010 Jul
18.

Antagonistic role of hnRNP A1 and KSRP in the regulation of let-7a biogenesis.

Michlewski G(1), Cáceres JF.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and
Molecular Medicine, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.

The pluripotency-promoting proteins Lin28a and Lin28b act as post-transcriptional
repressors of let-7 miRNA biogenesis in undifferentiated embryonic stem cells.
The levels of mature let-7a differ substantially in cells lacking Lin28
expression, indicating the existence of additional mechanism(s) of
post-transcriptional regulation. Here, we present evidence supporting a role for 
heteronuclear ribonucleoprotein A1 (hnRNP A1) as a negative regulator of let-7a. 
HnRNP A1 binds the conserved terminal loop of pri-let-7a-1 and inhibits its
processing by Drosha. Levels of mature let-7a negatively correlate with hnRNP A1 
levels in somatic cell lines. Furthermore, hnRNP A1 depletion increased
pri-let-7a-1 processing by cell extracts, whereas its ectopic expression
decreased let-7a production in vivo. Finally, hnRNP A1 binding to let-7a
interferes with the binding of KSRP, which is known to promote let-7a biogenesis.
We propose that hnRNP A1 and KSRP have antagonistic roles in the
post-transcriptional regulation of let-7a expression.

PMCID: PMC2923024
PMID: 20639884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Nat Genet. 2010 Jul;42(7):626-30. doi: 10.1038/ng.593. Epub 2010 May 30.

Lin28a transgenic mice manifest size and puberty phenotypes identified in human
genetic association studies.

Zhu H(1), Shah S, Shyh-Chang N, Shinoda G, Einhorn WS, Viswanathan SR, Takeuchi
A, Grasemann C, Rinn JL, Lopez MF, Hirschhorn JN, Palmert MR, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 
Children's Hospital Boston and Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Department of
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Recently, genome-wide association studies have implicated the human LIN28B locus 
in regulating height and the timing of menarche. LIN28B and its homolog LIN28A
are functionally redundant RNA-binding proteins that block biogenesis of let-7
microRNAs. lin-28 and let-7 were discovered in Caenorhabditis elegans as
heterochronic regulators of larval and vulval development but have recently been 
implicated in cancer, stem cell aging and pluripotency. The let-7 targets Myc,
Kras, Igf2bp1 and Hmga2 are known regulators of mammalian body size and
metabolism. To explore the function of the Lin28-Let-7 pathway in vivo, we
engineered transgenic mice to express Lin28a and observed in them increased body 
size, crown-rump length and delayed onset of puberty. Investigation of metabolic 
and endocrine mechanisms of overgrowth in these transgenic mice revealed
increased glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Here we report a mouse that
models the human phenotypes associated with genetic variation in the Lin28-Let-7 
pathway.

PMCID: PMC3069638
PMID: 20512147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 May 14;86(5):773-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.03.010. Epub
2010 Apr 15.

Distinct variants at LIN28B influence growth in height from birth to adulthood.

Widén E(1), Ripatti S, Cousminer DL, Surakka I, Lappalainen T, Järvelin MR,
Eriksson JG, Raitakari O, Salomaa V, Sovio U, Hartikainen AL, Pouta A, McCarthy
MI, Osmond C, Kajantie E, Lehtimäki T, Viikari J, Kähönen M, Tyler-Smith C,
Freimer N, Hirschhorn JN, Peltonen L, Palotie A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland. elisabeth.widen@helsinki.fi

We have studied the largely unknown genetic underpinnings of height growth by
using a unique resource of longitudinal childhood height data available in
Finnish population cohorts. After applying GWAS mapping of potential genes
influencing pubertal height growth followed by further characterization of the
genetic effects on complete postnatal growth trajectories, we have identified
strong association between variants near LIN28B and pubertal growth (rs7759938;
female p = 4.0 x 10(-9), male p = 1.5 x 10(-4), combined p = 5.0 x 10(-11), n =
5038). Analysis of growth during early puberty confirmed an effect on the timing 
of the growth spurt. Correlated SNPs have previously been implicated as
influencing both adult stature and age at menarche, the same alleles associating 
with taller height and later age of menarche in other studies as with later
pubertal growth here. Additionally, a partially correlated LIN28B SNP, rs314277, 
has been associated previously with final height. Testing both rs7759938 and
rs314277 (pairwise r(2) = 0.29) for independent effects on postnatal growth in
8903 subjects indicated that the pubertal timing-associated marker rs7759938
affects prepubertal growth in females (p = 7 x 10(-5)) and final height in males 
(p = 5 x 10(-4)), whereas rs314277 has sex-specific effects on growth (p for
interaction = 0.005) that were distinct from those observed at rs7759938. In
conclusion, partially correlated variants at LIN28B tag distinctive, complex, and
sex-specific height-growth-regulating effects, influencing the entire period of
postnatal growth. These findings imply a critical role for LIN28B in the
regulation of human growth.

Copyright (c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2869010
PMID: 20398887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jun;95(6):3063-6. doi: 10.1210/jc.2009-2344. Epub
2010 Mar 29.

LIN28B in constitutional delay of growth and puberty.

Tommiska J(1), Wehkalampi K, Vaaralahti K, Laitinen EM, Raivio T, Dunkel L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Physiology, University of Helsinki,
Biomedicum Helsinki, P.O. Box 63 (Haartmaninkatu 8), University of Helsinki,
FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Recently variation in LIN28B, a human ortholog of the gene-regulating
processing of micro-RNAs (miRNAs) controlling the timing of major developmental
events in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, was reported to be associated with
timing of puberty in humans. In C. elegans, a gain-of-function allele of lin-28
causes a retarded phenotype.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to evaluate the variation in the LIN28B
gene in 145 subjects with constitutional delay of growth and puberty (CDGP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: For this study, 115 males and 30 females with CDGP were
included. CDGP was defined by Tanner genital or breast stage II and pubertal
growth spurt taking place 2 SD later than average. The four coding exons (exons
1-4) and exon-intron boundaries, as well as the fragment of 3' untranslated
region containing miRNA recognition elements A and B, of LIN28B were PCR
amplified from genomic DNA obtained from peripheral blood leukocytes of the
subjects and bidirectionally sequenced.
RESULTS: No variation in the coding region of LIN28B in the 145 subjects with
CDGP was found. However, 16 of 145 subjects carried a 2-nucleotide deletion
immediately 5' from miRNA recognition element A. These patients did not differ in
phenotypic features as compared with noncarriers, and this variant was present in
100 controls with the same frequency.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that mutations in the coding region or 3'
untranslated region miRNA recognition elements A and B of LIN28B do not underlie 
CDGP. Lack of any variation in the coding region of the gene suggests that LIN28B
in developmental timing is so crucial that any changes in the conserved protein
would probably be lethal.

PMID: 20350940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Apr 9;86(4):519-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.02.017. Epub
2010 Mar 18.

A variant in LIN28B is associated with 2D:4D finger-length ratio, a putative
retrospective biomarker of prenatal testosterone exposure.

Medland SE(1), Zayats T, Glaser B, Nyholt DR, Gordon SD, Wright MJ, Montgomery
GW, Campbell MJ, Henders AK, Timpson NJ, Peltonen L, Wolke D, Ring SM, Deloukas
P, Martin NG, Smith GD, Evans DM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Australia.

The ratio of the lengths of an individual's second to fourth digit (2D:4D) is
commonly used as a noninvasive retrospective biomarker for prenatal androgen
exposure. In order to identify the genetic determinants of 2D:4D, we applied a
genome-wide association approach to 1507 11-year-old children from the Avon
Longitudinal Study of Parents and Children (ALSPAC) in whom 2D:4D ratio had been 
measured, as well as a sample of 1382 12- to 16-year-olds from the Brisbane
Adolescent Twin Study. A meta-analysis of the two scans identified a single
variant in the LIN28B gene that was strongly associated with 2D:4D (rs314277: p =
4.1 x 10(-8)) and was subsequently independently replicated in an additional 3659
children from the ALSPAC cohort (p = 1.53 x 10(-6)). The minor allele of the
rs314277 variant has previously been linked to increased height and delayed age
at menarche, but in our study it was associated with increased 2D:4D in the
direction opposite to that of previous reports on the correlation between 2D:4D
and age at menarche. Our findings call into question the validity of 2D:4D as a
simplistic retrospective biomarker for prenatal testosterone exposure.

(c) 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2850436
PMID: 20303062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Aug 5;324(1-2):21-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2010.01.038.
Epub 2010 Feb 6.

Genetic determinants of pubertal timing in the general population.

Gajdos ZK(1), Henderson KD, Hirschhorn JN, Palmert MR.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics and Division of Endocrinology, Children's Hospital,
Boston, MA 02115, United States.

Puberty is an important developmental stage during which reproductive capacity is
attained. The timing of puberty varies greatly among healthy individuals in the
general population and is influenced by both genetic and environmental factors.
Although genetic variation is known to influence the normal spectrum of pubertal 
timing, the specific genes involved remain largely unknown. Genetic analyses have
identified a number of genes responsible for rare disorders of pubertal timing
such as hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and Kallmann syndrome. Recently, the first 
loci with common variation reproducibly associated with population variation in
the timing of puberty were identified at 6q21 in or near LIN28B and at 9q31.2.
However, these two loci explain only a small fraction of the genetic contribution
to population variation in pubertal timing, suggesting the need to continue to
consider other loci and other types of variants. Here we provide an update of the
genes implicated in disorders of puberty, discuss genes and pathways that may be 
involved in the timing of normal puberty, and suggest additional avenues of
investigation to identify genetic regulators of puberty in the general
population.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2891370
PMID: 20144687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Exp Mol Med. 2009 Dec 31;41(12):912-8. doi: 10.3858/emm.2009.41.12.097.

LIN28B confers radio-resistance through the posttranscriptional control of KRAS.

Jeong SH(1), Wu HG, Park WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Seoul
National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-799, Korea.

To screen the differentially expressed microRNAs related to radio-resistance, we 
compared the microRNA profiles of lung cancer cells with different responses to
ionizing radiation (IR). Of 328 microRNAs in microarray, 27 microRNAs were
differentially expressed in NCI-H460 (H460) and NCI-H1299 (H1299) cells. Among
them, let-7g was down-regulated in radio-resistant H1299 cells, and the level of 
let-7g was higher in radio-sensitive cells like Caski, H460, and ME180 in qRT-PCR
analysis than in radio-resistant cells like A549, H1299, DLD1, and HeLa.
Over-expression of let-7g in H1299 cells could suppress the translation of KRAS, 
and increase the sensitivity to IR. When we knockdown the expression of LIN28B,
an upstream regulator of let-7g, the level of mature let-7g was increased in
H1299 cells and the sensitivity to IR was also enhanced in LIN28B knockdown
cells. From these data, we suggest that LIN28B plays an important role in
radiation responses of lung cancer cells through inhibiting let-7g processing and
increasing translation of KRAS.

PMCID: PMC2802686
PMID: 19745602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2009 Oct;16(10):1021-5. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1676. Epub 2009
Aug 27.

Lin28 recruits the TUTase Zcchc11 to inhibit let-7 maturation in mouse embryonic 
stem cells.

Hagan JP(1), Piskounova E, Gregory RI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program, Children's Hospital Boston, Department of Biological
Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Lin28 and Lin28B, two developmentally regulated RNA-binding proteins and likely
proto-oncogenes, selectively inhibit the maturation of let-7 family microRNAs
(miRNAs) in embryonic stem cells and certain cancer cell lines. Moreover, let-7
precursors (pre-let-7) were previously found to be terminally uridylated in a
Lin28-dependent fashion. Here we identify Zcchc11 (zinc finger, CCHC domain
containing 11) as the 3' terminal uridylyl transferase (TUTase) responsible for
Lin28-mediated pre-let-7 uridylation and subsequent blockade of let-7 processing 
in mouse embryonic stem cells. We demonstrate that Zcchc11 activity is
UTP-dependent, selective for let-7 and recruited by Lin28. Furthermore, knockdown
of either Zcchc11 or Lin28, or overexpression of a catalytically inactive TUTase,
relieves the selective inhibition of let-7 processing and leads to the
accumulation of mature let-7 miRNAs and repression of let-7 target reporter
genes. Our results establish a role for Zcchc11-catalyzed pre-let-7 uridylation
in the control of miRNA biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2758923
PMID: 19713958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cell Cycle. 2009 Aug;8(15):2325. Epub 2009 Aug 1.

An interview with Dr. Marcus E. Peter on his highly cited paper published in Cell
Cycle.

Peter ME.

Comment on
    Cell Cycle. 2007 Nov 1;6(21):2585-90.

PMID: 19571670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Nat Genet. 2009 Jul;41(7):768-9. doi: 10.1038/ng0709-768.

Tumors line up for a letdown.

Mendell JT(1).

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine and Department of Pediatrics
and Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA. jmendell@jhmi.edu

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jul;41(7):843-8.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) and the pathways that regulate their expression have critical 
functions during normal development. A new study demonstrates that select cancer 
cells have appropriated one developmental mechanism of miRNA regulation, the
inhibition of let-7 biogenesis by the Lin-28 and Lin-28B RNA binding proteins, to
rid themselves of an antitumorigenic miRNA.

PMID: 19557079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. PLoS One. 2009 Jun 4;4(6):e5799. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005799.

N-Myc regulates expression of pluripotency genes in neuroblastoma including lif, 
klf2, klf4, and lin28b.

Cotterman R(1), Knoepfler PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, and Stem Cell Program,
University of California Davis School of Medicine, Shriners Hospital For Children
Northern California, Sacramento, California, USA.

myc genes are best known for causing tumors when overexpressed, but recent
studies suggest endogenous myc regulates pluripotency and self-renewal of stem
cells. For example, N-myc is associated with a number of tumors including
neuroblastoma, but also plays a central role in the function of normal neural
stem and precursor cells (NSC). Both c- and N-myc also enhance the production of 
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) and are linked to neural tumor stem cells. 
The mechanisms by which myc regulates normal and neoplastic stem-related
functions remain largely open questions. Here from a global, unbiased search for 
N-Myc bound genes using ChIP-chip assays in neuroblastoma, we found lif as a
putative N-Myc bound gene with a number of strong N-Myc binding peaks in the
promoter region enriched for E-boxes. Amongst putative N-Myc target genes in
expression microarray studies in neuroblastoma we also found lif and three
additional important embryonic stem cell (ESC)-related factors that are linked to
production of iPSC: klf2, klf4, and lin28b. To examine the regulation of these
genes by N-Myc, we measured their expression using neuroblastoma cells that
contain a Tet-regulatable N-myc transgene (TET21N) as well as NSC with a
nestin-cre driven N-myc knockout. N-myc levels closely correlated with the
expression of all of these genes in neuroblastoma and all but lif in NSC. Direct 
ChIP assays also indicate that N-Myc directly binds the lif promoter. N-Myc
regulates trimethylation of lysine 4 of histone H3 in the promoter of lif and
possibly in the promoters of several other stem-related genes. Together these
findings indicate that N-Myc regulates overlapping stem-related gene expression
programs in neuroblastoma and NSC, supporting a novel model by which
amplification of the N-myc gene may drive formation of neuroblastoma. They also
suggest mechanisms by which Myc proteins more generally contribute to maintenance
of pluripotency and self-renewal of ESC as well as to iPSC formation.

PMCID: PMC2686170
PMID: 19495417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Nat Genet. 2009 Jul;41(7):843-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.392. Epub 2009 May 31.

Lin28 promotes transformation and is associated with advanced human malignancies.

Viswanathan SR(1), Powers JT, Einhorn W, Hoshida Y, Ng TL, Toffanin S, O'Sullivan
M, Lu J, Phillips LA, Lockhart VL, Shah SP, Tanwar PS, Mermel CH, Beroukhim R,
Azam M, Teixeira J, Meyerson M, Hughes TP, Llovet JM, Radich J, Mullighan CG,
Golub TR, Sorensen PH, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Boston, Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, MA,
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jul;41(7):768-9.
    J Hepatol. 2010 Nov;53(5):974-5.

Multiple members of the let-7 family of miRNAs are often repressed in human
cancers, thereby promoting oncogenesis by derepressing targets such as HMGA2,
K-Ras and c-Myc. However, the mechanism by which let-7 miRNAs are coordinately
repressed is unclear. The RNA-binding proteins LIN28 and LIN28B block let-7
precursors from being processed to mature miRNAs, suggesting that their
overexpression might promote malignancy through repression of let-7. Here we show
that LIN28 and LIN28B are overexpressed in primary human tumors and human cancer 
cell lines (overall frequency approximately 15%), and that overexpression is
linked to repression of let-7 family miRNAs and derepression of let-7 targets.
LIN28 and LIN28b facilitate cellular transformation in vitro, and overexpression 
is associated with advanced disease across multiple tumor types. Our work
provides a mechanism for the coordinate repression of let-7 miRNAs observed in a 
subset of human cancers, and associates activation of LIN28 and LIN28B with poor 
clinical prognosis.

PMCID: PMC2757943
PMID: 19483683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Eur J Cancer. 2009 Aug;45(12):2212-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2009.05.003. Epub 2009 
May 26.

Pluripotent factor lin-28 and its homologue lin-28b in epithelial ovarian cancer 
and their associations with disease outcomes and expression of let-7a and IGF-II.

Lu L(1), Katsaros D, Shaverdashvili K, Qian B, Wu Y, de la Longrais IA, Preti M, 
Menato G, Yu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale Cancer Center, Yale
University School of Medicine, 60 College Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8034, USA.

Lin-28 and lin-28B are RNA-binding proteins which can block microRNA let-7
maturation and affect the differentiation and proliferation of embryonic stem
cells. Lin-28 may also regulate the expression of insulin-like growth factor II
(IGF-II). As one of the pluripotent factors involved in making induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPS), lin-28 is considered a potential therapeutic target
for cancer treatment. To further understand the role of lin-28 in cancer, we
analysed the expression of lin-28 and its homologue lin-28B in tumour samples,
and evaluated their associations with let-7a maturation, IGF-II expression,
disease features and outcomes in 211 patients with primary epithelial ovarian
cancer. The analysis showed that both lin-28 and lin-28B were positively
correlated with primary and pre-let-7a-3; lin-28B, not lin-28, was inversely
correlated with mature let-7a. A positive correlation was also observed between
lin-28B and IGF-II expression, while no association was found between lin-28B and
IGF-I or IGFBP-3. The study further demonstrated that lin-28B expression was
associated with the risk of disease progression and death; patients with high
lin-28B had shorter progression-free and overall survival than those with low
lin-28B. These results seem to support the findings of recent in vitro
experiments, showing that lin-28 blocks the process of let-7a maturation. Our
study also suggests that lin-28B may promote ovarian cancer progression and serve
as an unfavourable prognostic marker for the disease. The correlation between
lin-28B and IGF-II indicates that the growth factor may mediate the effect of
lin-28B on tumour growth.

PMID: 19477633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):729-33. doi: 10.1038/ng.382. Epub 2009 May 17.

Genetic variation in LIN28B is associated with the timing of puberty.

Ong KK(1), Elks CE, Li S, Zhao JH, Luan J, Andersen LB, Bingham SA, Brage S,
Smith GD, Ekelund U, Gillson CJ, Glaser B, Golding J, Hardy R, Khaw KT, Kuh D,
Luben R, Marcus M, McGeehin MA, Ness AR, Northstone K, Ring SM, Rubin C, Sims MA,
Song K, Strachan DP, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Waterworth DM, Wong A, Deloukas P,
Barroso I, Mooser V, Loos RJ, Wareham NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Epidemiology Unit, Addenbrooke's Hospital,
Cambridge, UK. ken.ong@mrc-epid.cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):637-8.

The timing of puberty is highly variable. We carried out a genome-wide
association study for age at menarche in 4,714 women and report an association in
LIN28B on chromosome 6 (rs314276, minor allele frequency (MAF) = 0.33, P = 1.5 × 
10(-8)). In independent replication studies in 16,373 women, each major allele
was associated with 0.12 years earlier menarche (95% CI = 0.08-0.16; P = 2.8 ×
10(-10); combined P = 3.6 × 10(-16)). This allele was also associated with
earlier breast development in girls (P = 0.001; N = 4,271); earlier voice
breaking (P = 0.006, N = 1,026) and more advanced pubic hair development in boys 
(P = 0.01; N = 4,588); a faster tempo of height growth in girls (P = 0.00008; N =
4,271) and boys (P = 0.03; N = 4,588); and shorter adult height in women (P = 3.6
× 10(-7); N = 17,274) and men (P = 0.006; N = 9,840) in keeping with earlier
growth cessation. These studies identify variation in LIN28B, a potent and
specific regulator of microRNA processing, as the first genetic determinant
regulating the timing of human pubertal growth and development.

PMCID: PMC3000552
PMID: 19448623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):734-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.383. Epub 2009 May 17.

Genome-wide association study identifies sequence variants on 6q21 associated
with age at menarche.

Sulem P(1), Gudbjartsson DF, Rafnar T, Holm H, Olafsdottir EJ, Olafsdottir GH,
Jonsson T, Alexandersen P, Feenstra B, Boyd HA, Aben KK, Verbeek AL, Roeleveld N,
Jonasdottir A, Styrkarsdottir U, Steinthorsdottir V, Karason A, Stacey SN,
Gudmundsson J, Jakobsdottir M, Thorleifsson G, Hardarson G, Gulcher J, Kong A,
Kiemeney LA, Melbye M, Christiansen C, Tryggvadottir L, Thorsteinsdottir U,
Stefansson K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE Genetics, Reykjavik, Iceland. patrick.sulem@decode.is

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):637-8.

Earlier menarche correlates with shorter adult height and higher childhood body
fat. We conducted a genome-wide association study of age at menarche (AAM) on
15,297 Icelandic women. Combined analysis with replication sets from Iceland,
Denmark and the Netherlands (N = 10,040) yielded a significant association
between rs314280[T] on 6q21, near the LIN28B gene, and AAM (effect = 1.2 months
later per allele; P = 1.8 × 10(-14)). A second SNP within the same linkage
disequilibrium (LD) block, rs314277, splits rs314280[T] into two haplotypes with 
different effects (0.9 months and 1.9 months per allele). These variants have
been associated with greater adult height. The association with adult height did 
not account for the association with AAM or vice versa. Other variants,
previously associated with height, did not associate significantly with AAM.
Given the link between body fat and AAM, we also assessed 11 variants recently
associated with higher body mass index (BMI) and 5 of those associated with
earlier AAM.

PMID: 19448622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):724-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.385. Epub 2009 May 17.

Genome-wide association studies identify loci associated with age at menarche and
age at natural menopause.

He C(1), Kraft P, Chen C, Buring JE, Paré G, Hankinson SE, Chanock SJ, Ridker PM,
Hunter DJ, Chasman DI.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. che@hsph.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):637-8.

Age at menarche and age at natural menopause are associated with causes of
substantial morbidity and mortality such as breast cancer and cardiovascular
disease. We conducted a joint analysis of two genome-wide association studies of 
these two traits in a total of 17,438 women from the Nurses' Health Study (NHS, N
= 2,287) and the Women's Genome Health Study (WGHS, N = 15,151). For age at
menarche, we identified ten associated SNPs (P = 1 × 10(-7)-3 × 10(-13))
clustered at 6q21 (in or near the gene LIN28B) and 9q31.2 (in an intergenic
region). For age at natural menopause, we identified 13 associated SNPs (P = 1 × 
10(-7)-1 × 10(-21)) clustered at 20p12.3 (in the gene MCM8), 19q13.42 (in or near
the gene BRSK1), 5q35.2 (in or near genes UIMC1 and HK3) and 6p24.2 (in the gene 
SYCP2L). These newly identified loci might expand understanding of the biological
pathways regulating these two traits.

PMCID: PMC2888798
PMID: 19448621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):648-50. doi: 10.1038/ng.386. Epub 2009 May 17.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association data identifies two loci influencing age
at menarche.

Perry JR(1), Stolk L, Franceschini N, Lunetta KL, Zhai G, McArdle PF, Smith AV,
Aspelund T, Bandinelli S, Boerwinkle E, Cherkas L, Eiriksdottir G, Estrada K,
Ferrucci L, Folsom AR, Garcia M, Gudnason V, Hofman A, Karasik D, Kiel DP, Launer
LJ, van Meurs J, Nalls MA, Rivadeneira F, Shuldiner AR, Singleton A, Soranzo N,
Tanaka T, Visser JA, Weedon MN, Wilson SG, Zhuang V, Streeten EA, Harris TB,
Murray A, Spector TD, Demerath EW, Uitterlinden AG, Murabito JM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jun;41(6):637-8.

We conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide association data to detect genes
influencing age at menarche in 17,510 women. The strongest signal was at 9q31.2
(P = 1.7 × 10(-9)), where the nearest genes include TMEM38B, FKTN, FSD1L, TAL2
and ZNF462. The next best signal was near the LIN28B gene (rs7759938; P = 7.0 ×
10(-9)), which also influences adult height. We provide the first evidence for
common genetic variants influencing female sexual maturation.

PMCID: PMC2942986
PMID: 19448620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell. 2008 Oct 24;32(2):276-84. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2008.09.014.

Lin28 mediates the terminal uridylation of let-7 precursor MicroRNA.

Heo I(1), Joo C, Cho J, Ha M, Han J, Kim VN.

Author information: 
(1)National Creative Research Center and School of Biological Sciences, Seoul
National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

The precise control of microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis is critical for embryonic
development and normal cellular functions, and its dysregulation is often
associated with human diseases. Though the birth and maturation pathway of miRNA 
has been established, the regulation and death pathway remains largely unknown.
Here, we report the RNA-binding proteins, Lin28a and Lin28b, as
posttranscriptional repressors of let-7 miRNA biogenesis. We observe that the
Lin28 proteins act mainly in the cytoplasm by inducing uridylation of precursor
let-7 (pre-let-7) at its 3' end. The uridylated pre-let-7 (up-let-7) fails Dicer 
processing and undergoes degradation. We provide a mechanism for the
posttranscriptional regulation of miRNA biogenesis by Lin28 which is highly
expressed in undifferentiated cells and certain cancer cells. The Lin28-mediated 
downregulation of let-7 may play a key role in development, stem cell
programming, and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 18951094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Science. 2008 Apr 4;320(5872):97-100. doi: 10.1126/science.1154040. Epub 2008 Feb
21.

Selective blockade of microRNA processing by Lin28.

Viswanathan SR(1), Daley GQ, Gregory RI.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Program, Children's Hospital Boston, Department of Biological
Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2008 Apr 4;320(5872):58-9.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play critical roles in development, and dysregulation of miRNA
expression has been observed in human malignancies. Recent evidence suggests that
the processing of several primary miRNA transcripts (pri-miRNAs) is blocked
posttranscriptionally in embryonic stem cells, embryonal carcinoma cells, and
primary tumors. Here we show that Lin28, a developmentally regulated RNA binding 
protein, selectively blocks the processing of pri-let-7 miRNAs in embryonic
cells. Using in vitro and in vivo studies, we found that Lin28 is necessary and
sufficient for blocking Microprocessor-mediated cleavage of pri-let-7 miRNAs. Our
results identify Lin28 as a negative regulator of miRNA biogenesis and suggest
that Lin28 may play a central role in blocking miRNA-mediated differentiation in 
stem cells and in certain cancers.

PMCID: PMC3368499
PMID: 18292307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Gene. 2006 Dec 15;384:51-61. Epub 2006 Jul 28.

Identification and characterization of lin-28 homolog B (LIN28B) in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Guo Y(1), Chen Y, Ito H, Watanabe A, Ge X, Kodama T, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, 
The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide. 
Several studies have identified signature gene sets that may be useful as
potential diagnostic tools by global microarray analysis. Here we report the
cloning and characterization of a novel gene, lin-28 homolog B (LIN28B), which is
overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma. The heterochronic gene lin-28 is a key
regulator of developmental timing in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Similar
with lin-28 proteins, LIN28B conserves a cold shock domain and a pair of CCHC
zinc finger domains. Phylogenetic analysis suggests that they might arise as a
result of duplication from an ancestral gene. Overexpression of LIN28B was noted 
in most HCC cell lines and clinical samples. By western blot analysis using a
polyclonal antibody against LIN28B, a short LIN28B isoform was also identified in
non-tumor liver tissue and fetal liver. Although predominantly localized in the
cytoplasm, we found that LIN28B protein shows cell cycle-dependent nuclear
translocation in Huh7 cells. Induced expression of exogenous LIN28B in a tet-off 
cell line promoted cancer cell proliferation. Interestingly, the segment of the
unusually long 3'UTR of LIN28B contains complementary sites to let-7 microRNA of 
mammals. And our studies provided indirect evidence that LIN28B is a possibly
natural target for let-7 mediated regulation. These findings strongly implicate a
critical role of LIN28B during development and tumorigenesis and suggest a
possible novel mechanism.

PMID: 16971064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


