
1. Korean J Intern Med. 2015 Sep;30(5):719-26. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2015.30.5.719. Epub
2015 Aug 27.

Replication of the results of genome-wide and candidate gene association studies 
on telomere length in a Korean population.

Do SK(1), Yoo SS(2), Choi YY(1), Choi JE(1), Jeon HS(1), Lee WK(3), Lee SY(2),
Lee J(2), Cha SI(2), Kim CH(2), Park JY(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Kyungpook National University
School of Medicine, Daegu, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Kyungpook
National University School of Medicine, Daegu, Korea. (3)Department of Preventive
Medicine, Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: A number of genome-wide and candidate gene association studies
have identified polymorphisms associated with telomere length in Caucasian
populations. This study was conducted to determine the impacts of 17
polymorphisms identified in Caucasians on telomere length in a Korean population.
METHODS: Ninety-four healthy individuals were enrolled in this study. Relative
telomere length of chromosomes from peripheral blood samples was measured using
quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Two polymorphisms, rs10936599 of MYNN and rs412658 of ZNF676, were found
to be associated w ith telomere length (under dominant model, p = 0.04; under
recessive model, p = 0.001). Three polymorphisms, rs2853669, rs7705526, and
rs2736108, at the TERT locus were also associated with telomere length (under
recessive model, p = 0.01, p = 0.02, and p = 0.01, respectively). The genotypes
of the five polymorphisms associated with short telomere length were considered
bad genotypes; telomere length was significantly decreased with increasing number
of bad genotypes (p= 1.7 × 10(-5)).
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified polymorphisms associated with telomere length in 
a Korean population.

PMCID: PMC4578038
PMID: 26354067  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Environ Sci (China). 2015 Jun 1;32:168-79. doi: 10.1016/j.jes.2014.10.025. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

Numerical study of the effects of Planetary Boundary Layer structure on the
pollutant dispersion within built-up areas.

Miao Y(1), Liu S(2), Zheng Y(3), Wang S(3), Liu Z(4), Zhang B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences, School of Physics, Peking
University, Beijing 100871, China. Electronic address: miaoyucong@yeah.net.
(2)Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences, School of Physics, Peking
University, Beijing 100871, China. Electronic address: lshuhua@pku.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences, School of Physics, Peking
University, Beijing 100871, China. (4)Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic
Sciences, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China;
International Center of Climate and Environment Sciences, Institute of
Atmospheric Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China.
(5)National Meteorological Center, China Meteorological Administration, Beijing
100081, China.

The effects of different Planetary Boundary Layer (PBL) structures on pollutant
dispersion processes within two idealized street canyon configurations and a
realistic urban area were numerically examined by a Computational Fluid Dynamics 
(CFD) model. The boundary conditions of different PBL structures/conditions were 
provided by simulations of the Weather Researching and Forecasting model. The
simulated results of the idealized 2D and 3D street canyon experiments showed
that the increment of PBL instability favored the downward transport of momentum 
from the upper flow above the roof to the pedestrian level within the street
canyon. As a result, the flow and turbulent fields within the street canyon under
the more unstable PBL condition are stronger. Therefore, more pollutants within
the street canyon would be removed by the stronger advection and turbulent
diffusion processes under the unstable PBL condition. On the contrary, more
pollutants would be concentrated in the street canyon under the stable PBL
condition. In addition, the simulations of the realistic building cluster
experiments showed that the density of buildings was a crucial factor determining
the dynamic effects of the PBL structure on the flow patterns. The momentum field
within a denser building configuration was mostly transported from the upper
flow, and was more sensitive to the PBL structures than that of the sparser
building configuration. Finally, it was recommended to use the
Mellor-Yamada-Nakanishi-Niino (MYNN) PBL scheme, which can explicitly output the 
needed turbulent variables, to provide the boundary conditions to the CFD
simulation.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26040743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Epigenetics. 2015;10(7):650-61. doi: 10.1080/15592294.2015.1057672.

DNA methylation levels and long-term trihalomethane exposure in drinking water:
an epigenome-wide association study.

Salas LA(1), Bustamante M, Gonzalez JR, Gracia-Lavedan E, Moreno V, Kogevinas M, 
Villanueva CM.

Author information: 
(1)a Centre for Research in Environmental Epidemiology (CREAL) ; Barcelona ,
Spain.

Trihalomethanes (THM) are undesired disinfection byproducts (DBPs) formed during 
water treatment. Mice exposed to DBPs showed global DNA hypomethylation and c-myc
and c-jun gene-specific hypomethylation, while evidence of epigenetic effects in 
humans is scarce. We explored the association between lifetime THM exposure and
DNA methylation through an epigenome-wide association study. We selected 138
population-based controls from a case-control study of colorectal cancer
conducted in Barcelona, Spain, exposed to average lifetime THM levels =85 µg/L
vs. >85 µg/L (N = 68 and N = 70, respectively). Mean age of participants was 70
years, and 54% were male. Average lifetime THM level in the exposure groups was
64 and 130 µg/L, respectively. DNA was extracted from whole blood and was
bisulphite converted to measure DNA methylation levels using the Illumina
HumanMethylation450 BeadChip. Data preprocessing was performed using RnBeads.
Methylation was compared between exposure groups using empirical Bayes moderated 
linear regression for CpG sites and Gaussian kernel for CpG regions.
ConsensusPathDB was used for gene set enrichment. Statistically significant
differences in methylation between exposure groups was found in 140 CpG sites and
30 gene-related regions, after false discovery rate <0.05 and adjustment for age,
sex, methylation first principal component, and blood cell proportion. The
annotated genes were localized to several cancer pathways. Among them, 29 CpGs
had methylation levels associated with THM levels (|<U+0394>ß|=0.05) located in 11 genes
associated with cancer in other studies. Our results suggest that THM exposure
may affect DNA methylation in genes related to tumors, including colorectal and
bladder cancers. Future confirmation studies are required.

PMCID: PMC4622514 [Available on 2016-06-03]
PMID: 26039576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Front Genet. 2014 Jan 17;4:310. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00310. eCollection 2013.

Genome wide association and linkage analyses identified three loci-4q25, 17q23.2,
and 10q11.21-associated with variation in leukocyte telomere length: the Long
Life Family Study.

Lee JH(1), Cheng R(2), Honig LS(3), Feitosa M(4), Kammerer CM(5), Kang MS(6),
Schupf N(7), Lin SJ(4), Sanders JL(8), Bae H(9), Druley T(10), Perls T(11),
Christensen K(12), Province M(4), Mayeux R(13).

Author information: 
(1)Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University New
York, NY, USA ; Taub Institute, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University New York, NY, USA ; Department of Epidemiology, School of Public
Health, Columbia University New York, NY, USA. (2)Sergievsky Center, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University New York, NY, USA ; Taub Institute, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University New York, NY, USA.
(3)Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University New
York, NY, USA ; Taub Institute, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University New York, NY, USA ; Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University New York, NY, USA. (4)Division of Statistical
Genomics, Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine St.
Louis, MO, USA. (5)Department of Epidemiology, University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, USA ; Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh
Pittsburgh, PA, USA ; Center for Aging and Population Health, University of
Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (6)Taub Institute, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University New York, NY, USA. (7)Sergievsky Center, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University New York, NY, USA ; Taub Institute, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University New York, NY, USA ;
Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Columbia University New
York, NY, USA ; Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University New York, NY, USA. (8)Department of Epidemiology, University 
of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA ; Center for Aging and Population Health,
University of Pittsburgh Pittsburgh, PA, USA. (9)Department of Biostatistics,
Boston University Medical Center Boston, MA, USA. (10)Department of Pediatrics
and Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine St. Louis, MO, USA.
(11)Department of Medicine, Boston University Medical Center Boston, MA, USA.
(12)The Danish Aging Research Center, Epidemiology, University of Southern
Denmark Odense, Denmark. (13)Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and
Surgeons, Columbia University New York, NY, USA ; Taub Institute, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University New York, NY, USA ; Department of
Epidemiology, School of Public Health, Columbia University New York, NY, USA ;
Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University 
New York, NY, USA ; Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons,
Columbia University New York, NY, USA.

Leukocyte telomere length is believed to measure cellular aging in humans, and
short leukocyte telomere length is associated with increased risks of late onset 
diseases, including cardiovascular disease, dementia, etc. Many studies have
shown that leukocyte telomere length is a heritable trait, and several candidate 
genes have been identified, including TERT, TERC, OBFC1, and CTC1. Unlike most
studies that have focused on genetic causes of chronic diseases such as heart
disease and diabetes in relation to leukocyte telomere length, the present study 
examined the genome to identify variants that may contribute to variation in
leukocyte telomere length among families with exceptional longevity. From the
genome wide association analysis in 4,289 LLFS participants, we identified a
novel intergenic SNP rs7680468 located near PAPSS1 and DKK2 on 4q25 (p = 4.7E-8).
From our linkage analysis, we identified two additional novel loci with HLOD
scores exceeding three, including 4.77 for 17q23.2, and 4.36 for 10q11.21. These 
two loci harbor a number of novel candidate genes with SNPs, and our gene-wise
association analysis identified multiple genes, including DCAF7, POLG2, CEP95,
and SMURF2 at 17q23.2; and RASGEF1A, HNRNPF, ANF487, CSTF2T, and PRKG1 at
10q11.21. Among these genes, multiple SNPs were associated with leukocyte
telomere length, but the strongest association was observed with one contiguous
haplotype in CEP95 and SMURF2. We also show that three previously reported
genes-TERC, MYNN, and OBFC1-were significantly associated with leukocyte telomere
length at p empirical < 0.05.

PMCID: PMC3894567
PMID: 24478790  [PubMed]


5. J Diabetes Res. 2013;2013:970435. doi: 10.1155/2013/970435. Epub 2013 Dec 26.

Identifying candidate genes for Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus and obesity through gene
expression profiling in multiple tissues or cells.

Chen J(1), Meng Y(2), Zhou J(1), Zhuo M(1), Ling F(1), Zhang Y(3), Du H(1), Wang 
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory
of Fermentation and Enzyme Engineering, South China University of Technology,
Guangzhou 510006, China. (2)School of Bioscience and Bioengineering, Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Fermentation and Enzyme Engineering, South China
University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China ; Chinese PLA General Hospital,
Beijing 100853, China. (3)Guangdong Laboratory Animals Monitoring Institute,
Guangzhou 510555, China.

Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (T2DM) and obesity have become increasingly prevalent in
recent years. Recent studies have focused on identifying causal variations or
candidate genes for obesity and T2DM via analysis of expression quantitative
trait loci (eQTL) within a single tissue. T2DM and obesity are affected by
comprehensive sets of genes in multiple tissues. In the current study, gene
expression levels in multiple human tissues from GEO datasets were analyzed, and 
21 candidate genes displaying high percentages of differential expression were
filtered out. Specifically, DENND1B, LYN, MRPL30, POC1B, PRKCB, RP4-655J12.3,
HIBADH, and TMBIM4 were identified from the T2DM-control study, and BCAT1, BMP2K,
CSRNP2, MYNN, NCKAP5L, SAP30BP, SLC35B4, SP1, BAP1, GRB14, HSP90AB1, ITGA5, and
TOMM5 were identified from the obesity-control study. The majority of these genes
are known to be involved in T2DM and obesity. Therefore, analysis of gene
expression in various tissues using GEO datasets may be an effective and feasible
method to determine novel or causal genes associated with T2DM and obesity.

PMCID: PMC3888709
PMID: 24455749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Avian Pathol. 2010 Dec;39(6):519-24. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2010.530938.

A molecular epidemiological investigation of avian paramyxovirus type 1 viruses
isolated from game birds of the order Galliformes.

Aldous EW(1), Mynn JK, Irvine RM, Alexander DJ, Brown IH.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Department, Veterinary Laboratories Agency Weybridge, Addlestone,
Surrey, UK. e.aldous@VLA.defra.gsi.gov.uk

The partial (370 nucleotides) fusion gene sequences of 55 avian paramyxovirus
type 1 (APMV-1) isolates were obtained. Included were 41 published sequences, of 
which 16 were from strains of APMV-1 of previously determined lineages included
as markers for the data analysed and 25 were from APMV-1 viruses isolated from
game birds of the order Galliformes. In addition, we sequenced a further 14 game 
bird isolates obtained from the repository at the Veterinary Laboratories Agency.
The game bird isolates had been obtained from 17 countries, and spanned four
decades. Earlier studies have shown that class II APMV-1 viruses can be divided
into at least 15 lineages and sub-lineages. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that
the 39 game bird isolates were distributed across 12 of these sub-lineages. We
conclude that no single lineage of Newcastle disease viruses appears to be
prevalent in game birds, and the isolates obtained from these hosts reflected the
prevailing, both geographically and temporally, viruses in poultry, pigeons or
wild birds.

PMID: 21154063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 8;5(4):e9983. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009983.

Identification of candidate growth promoting genes in ovarian cancer through
integrated copy number and expression analysis.

Ramakrishna M(1), Williams LH, Boyle SE, Bearfoot JL, Sridhar A, Speed TP,
Gorringe KL, Campbell IG.

Author information: 
(1)VBCRC Cancer Genetics Laboratory, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2011;6(7). doi:10.1371/annotation/4056b510-e92d-4472-871f-2cf1f6834689.

Ovarian cancer is a disease characterised by complex genomic rearrangements but
the majority of the genes that are the target of these alterations remain
unidentified. Cataloguing these target genes will provide useful insights into
the disease etiology and may provide an opportunity to develop novel diagnostic
and therapeutic interventions. High resolution genome wide copy number and
matching expression data from 68 primary epithelial ovarian carcinomas of various
histotypes was integrated to identify genes in regions of most frequent
amplification with the strongest correlation with expression and copy number.
Regions on chromosomes 3, 7, 8, and 20 were most frequently increased in copy
number (> 40% of samples). Within these regions, 703/1370 (51%) unique gene
expression probesets were differentially expressed when samples with gain were
compared to samples without gain. 30% of these differentially expressed probesets
also showed a strong positive correlation (r > or =0.6) between expression and
copy number. We also identified 21 regions of high amplitude copy number gain, in
which 32 known protein coding genes showed a strong positive correlation between 
expression and copy number. Overall, our data validates previously known ovarian 
cancer genes, such as ERBB2, and also identified novel potential drivers such as 
MYNN, PUF60 and TPX2.

PMCID: PMC2851616
PMID: 20386695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Cancer Res. 2007 Apr 1;67(7):3074-84.

Amplification of MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1, located in the 3q26.2 amplicon, is
associated with favorable patient prognosis in ovarian cancer.

Nanjundan M(1), Nakayama Y, Cheng KW, Lahad J, Liu J, Lu K, Kuo WL, Smith-McCune 
K, Fishman D, Gray JW, Mills GB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, University
of Texas, Houston, Texas, USA. mnanjund@mdanderson.org

Increased copy number involving chromosome 3q26 is a frequent and early event in 
cancers of the ovary, lung, head and neck, cervix, and BRCA1 positive and basal
breast cancers. The p110alpha catalytic subunit of phosphoinositide-3-kinase
(PI3KCA) and protein kinase Ciota (PKCiota) have previously been shown as
functionally deregulated by 3q copy number increase. High-resolution array
comparative genomic hybridization of 235 high-grade serous epithelial ovarian
cancers using contiguous bacterial artificial chromosomes across 3q26 delineated 
an approximately 2 Mb-wide region at 3q26.2 encompassing PDCD10 to MYNN
(chr3:168722613-170908630). Ecotropic viral integration site-1 (EVI1) and
myelodysplastic syndrome 1 (MDS1) are located at the center of this region, and
their DNA copy number increases are associated with at least 5-fold increased RNA
transcript levels in 83% and 98% of advanced ovarian cancers, respectively.
Moreover, MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1 protein levels are increased in ovarian cancers and 
cancer cell lines. EVI1 and MDS1/EVI1 gene products increased cell proliferation,
migration, and decreased transforming growth factor-beta-mediated plasminogen
activator inhibitor-1 promoter activity in ovarian epithelial cells.
Intriguingly, the increases in EVI1 DNA copy number and MDS1/EVI1 transcripts are
associated with improved patient outcomes, whereas EVI1 transcript levels are
associated with a poor patient survival. Thus, the favorable patient prognosis
associated with increased DNA copy number seems to be as a result of high-level
expression of the fusion transcript MDS1/EVI1. Collectively, these studies
suggest that MDS1/EVI1 and EVI1, previously implicated in acute myelogenous
leukemia, contribute to the pathophysiology of epithelial ovarian cancer.

PMID: 17409414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Avian Pathol. 2004 Apr;33(2):258-69.

A molecular epidemiological investigation of isolates of the variant avian
paramyxovirus type 1 virus (PPMV-1) responsible for the 1978 to present panzootic
in pigeons.

Aldous EW(1), Fuller CM, Mynn JK, Alexander DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Department, Veterinary Laboratories Agency Weybridge, Surrey, UK.
e.aldous@VLA.defra.gsi.gov.uk

A sequence of 375 nucleotides, which included the region encoding the cleavage
activation site and signal peptide of the fusion protein gene, was determined for
178 isolates of the pigeon variant strain of Newcastle disease virus (PPMV-1).
These were compared with the sequences of 47 similar isolates published by
GenBank, which included 30 isolates from pigeons and 17 representatives from each
sublineage of avian paramyxovirus type 1. The resulting alignment was analysed
phylogenetically using maximum likelihood and the results are presented as
unrooted phylogenetic trees. By phylogenetic analysis all the PPMV-1 isolates
except one were placed in lineage 4b (VIb). Within this lineage there was
considerable genetic heterogeneity, which appears to be predominantly influenced 
by the date of isolation and, to a lesser extent, geographical origins of the
isolates. There were two large distinguishable groups, 4bi and 4bii. The earliest
isolate available, PIQPI78442, isolated in 1978 in Iraq, was situated at the node
from which the two groups diverge.

PMID: 15276997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Muscle Nerve. 2004 Jan;29(1):59-65.

Neuromuscular expression of the BTB/POZ and zinc finger protein myoneurin.

Cifuentes-Diaz C(1), Bitoun M, Goudou D, Seddiqi N, Romero N, Rieger F, Perin JP,
Alliel PM.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-440 and U-536, IFM, 17 rue du Fer-à-Moulin, Paris, France.

Myoneurin belongs to the BTB/POZ and zinc finger protein family whose members
have been implicated in regulatory functions of gene expression. Myoneurin has
been identified in various tissues, but muscle is a privileged site of myoneurin 
gene transcription. We examined the neuromuscular expression of myoneurin during 
development and after axotomy. Myoneurin expression is developmentally regulated 
in mouse muscle and appeared to be associated with neuromuscular junctions during
the late embryonic period. Myoneurin is located in and around synaptic myonuclei 
in mouse and human adult muscle. The expression of myoneurin is dysregulated
after nerve section. Thus, the restricted myoneurin expression in synaptic
myonuclei appeared to be controlled by muscle electrical activity. Myoneurin is
identified within the peripheral condensed chromatin and the
euchromatin/heterochromatin regions, and thus fulfills structural and expression 
criteria to represent a synaptic gene regulator.

PMID: 14694499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Avian Pathol. 2003 Jun;32(3):239-56.

A molecular epidemiological study of avian paramyxovirus type 1 (Newcastle
disease virus) isolates by phylogenetic analysis of a partial nucleotide sequence
of the fusion protein gene.

Aldous EW(1), Mynn JK, Banks J, Alexander DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Virology Department Veterinary Laboratories Agency-Weybridge New Haw,
Addlestone KT15 3NB Surrey, UK. e.aldous@VLA.defra.gsi.gov

A sequence 375 nucleotides in length, which included the region encoding the
cleavage activation site and signal peptide of the fusion protein gene, was
determined for 174 isolates of Newcastle disease virus (avian paramyxovirus type 
1). These were compared with the sequences of 164 isolates published on GenBank, 
and the resulting alignment was analysed phylogenetically using maximum
likelihood. The results are presented as unrooted phylogenetic trees. Briefly,
the isolates divided into six broadly distinct groups (lineages 1 to 6). Lineages
3 and 4 were further subdivided into four sublineages (a to d) and lineage 5 into
five lineages (a to e). Considerable genetic heterogeneity was detected within
avian paramyxoviruses type 1, which appears to be influenced by host, time and
geographical origin. It is concluded that by using this dataset it will be
possible to type future virus isolates rapidly on the basis of their nucleotide
sequence and make inferences about their origins.

PMID: 12850913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jun 24;273(1):385-91.

Myoneurin, a novel member of the BTB/POZ-zinc finger family highly expressed in
human muscle.

Alliel PM(1), Seddiqi N, Goudou D, Cifuentes-Diaz C, Romero N, Velasco E, Rieger 
F, Périn JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U488, Bâtiment
Gregory Pincus, 80 rue du Général Leclerc, Le Kremlin Bicêtre cedex, 94276,
France. alliel@infobiogen.fr

Initially characterized as Drosophila developmental regulators, the BTB/POZ and
zinc finger proteins (BTB/POZ-ZF) constitute a growing family of proteins with
gene expression regulatory functions since they have been shown to be involved in
both transcriptional activation and repression of various genes in a broad range 
of species, including mammals. Here we report the cloning of a novel human
transcript, coding for a 68-kDa deduced BTB/POZ-ZF protein. This molecule, called
myoneurin on the basis of its prevalent expression in the neuromuscular system,
contains an amino-terminal BTB/POZ domain and eight tandemly repeated zinc-finger
motifs of the C(2)H(2) type. The murine myoneurin, identified in the mouse
embryo, is highly homologous to the human protein.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10873615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


