
1. Colorectal Dis. 2016 Mar 21. doi: 10.1111/codi.13336. [Epub ahead of print]

Hypermethylated DNA, a Biomarker for colorectal cancer: A systematic review.

Rasmussen SL(1,)(2), Krarup HB(3), Sunesen KG(1), Pedersen IS(3), Madsen PH(3),
Thorlacius-Ussing O(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery and Clinical Cancer Research Center,
Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark. (2)Department of Clinical Medicine, Aalborg
University, Denmark. (3)Section of Molecular Diagnostics, Clinical Biochemistry
and Clinical Cancer Research Center, Aalborg University Hospital, Denmark.

AIM: In colorectal cancer (CRC), improved methods for early detection are
essential for increasing survival. Hypermethylated DNA in blood or stool has been
proposed as a biomarker for CRC. In recent years, biochemical methods have
improved, and several hypermethylated genes that are sensitive and specific for
CRC have been proposed. Articles describing the use of hypermethylated promoter
regions in blood or stool as biomarkers for CRC were systematically reviewed.
METHOD: The Medline, Web of Science, and Embase databases were used in a
systematic literature search. Studies were included if they analysed
hypermethylated genes from stool or blood samples in correlation with CRC.
Non-English-language studies and studies based on animal models or cell lines
were excluded.
RESULTS: The literature search yielded 72 articles, including 43 addressing blood
samples and 29 addressing stool samples. In blood samples, hypermethylated P16,
HLTF, TMEFF1, ALX4, VIM, and FBN2 were associated with poor prognosis,
hypermethylated APC, TAC1, SEPT9, NEUROG1, RASSF1A, SDC2, and THBD were detected 
in early-stage CRC, and hypermethylated P16 and TFPI2 could detect CRC
recurrence. In stool samples, hypermethylated BMP3, PHACTR3, SFRP2, SPG20, TFPI2,
and TMEFF2 could detect CRC in the early stages.
CONCLUSION: Hypermethylation of the promoters of specific genes measured in blood
or stool samples could be used to detect CRC and could provide prognostic
information. The majority of studies include, however, only a few patients with
poorly defined control groups. Further studies are therefore needed before
hypermethylated DNA can be applied as a clinical biomarker for CRC detection and 
prognosis. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26998585  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2015 Nov 11. pii: S1533-0028(15)00144-9. doi:
10.1016/j.clcc.2015.10.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Evaluation of CpG Island Methylator Phenotype as a Biomarker in Colorectal Cancer
Treated With Adjuvant Oxaliplatin.

Cohen SA(1), Wu C(2), Yu M(3), Gourgioti G(4), Wirtz R(5), Raptou G(6), Gkakou
C(7), Kotoula V(8), Pentheroudakis G(9), Papaxoinis G(10), Karavasilis V(11),
Pectasides D(10), Kalogeras KT(12), Fountzilas G(7), Grady WM(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA; Clinical Research
Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA. Electronic
address: shiovitz@uw.edu. (2)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center, Seattle, WA; College of Life Sciences, Hebei University,
Baoding, Hebei, People's Republic of China. (3)Clinical Research Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA. (4)Section of Biostatistics,
Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group, Data Office, Athens, Greece. (5)Stratifyer
Molecular Pathology GmbH, Cologne, Germany. (6)Department of Pathology, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(7)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Hellenic Foundation for Cancer Research,
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(8)Department of Pathology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of
Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece; Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Hellenic
Foundation for Cancer Research, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of
Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece. (9)Department of Medical Oncology, Ioannina
University Hospital, Ioannina, Greece. (10)Oncology Section, Second Department of
Internal Medicine, "Hippokration" Hospital, Athens, Greece. (11)Department of
Medical Oncology, "Papageorgiou" Hospital, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece. (12)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology,
Hellenic Foundation for Cancer Research, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
School of Medicine, Thessaloniki, Greece; Translational Research Section,
Hellenic Cooperative Oncology Group, Data Office, Athens, Greece. (13)Clinical
Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA; Division 
of Gastroenterology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

BACKGROUND: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) is a promising biomarker
for irinotecan/5-fluorouracil/leucovorin chemotherapy for stage III colon cancer.
In the present study, we evaluated whether CIMP is a prognostic biomarker for
standard-of-care oxaliplatin-based adjuvant therapy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The HE6C/05 trial randomized 441 patients with stage
II-III colorectal adenocarcinoma to adjuvant XELOX (capecitabine, oxaliplatin) or
modified FOLFOX6 (5-fluorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin). The primary and
secondary objectives were disease-free and overall survival, respectively. CIMP
status was determined using the DNA methylation status of CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1,
RUNX3, and SOCS1. Cox models were used to assess the association of CIMP with
survival.
RESULTS: Of the 293 available tumors, 28 (9.6%) were CIMP(+). On univariate Cox
regression analysis, no significant differences in survival were observed between
individuals with CIMP(+) versus CIMP(-) tumors. CIMP(+) tumors were more likely
to be right-sided and BRAF mutant (<U+03C7>(2), P < .001). In the multivariate model,
TNM stage II (vs. stage III) was associated with a reduced risk of relapse
(hazard ratio [HR], 0.25; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.11-0.55; Wald's P <
.001), and a colon primary located on the left side and earlier TNM stage were
associated with a reduced risk of death (HR, 0.48; 95% CI, 0.28-0.81; P = .006;
and HR, 0.22; 95% CI, 0.10-0.49; P < .001, respectively).
CONCLUSION: In the present exploratory analysis, CIMP did not appear to be a
prognostic biomarker in oxaliplatin-treated patients with resected colorectal
cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26702772  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Acta Otolaryngol. 2016 Mar;136(3):277-82. doi: 10.3109/00016489.2015.1109706.
Epub 2015 Dec 4.

The role of transcription factors of neurosensory cells in non-syndromic
sensorineural hearing loss with or without inner ear malformation.

Zhou Y(1), Qing J(1), Dong Y(1), Nie J(1), Li J(1), Wang C(1), Liu Y(1), Peng
T(1), Duan M(2), Liu X(1,)(3), Xie D(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery , Institute of Otology,
the Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University , Changsha , PR China ;
(2)b Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology, Department of
Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Department of Neurotology and Audiology ,
Karolinska Institutet , Stockholm , Sweden ; (3)c Department of Otolaryngology,
Miller School of Medicine , University of Miami , Miami , FL , USA.

CONCLUSIONS: Previous studies have stated the roles and correlation of the four
TFs (Sox2, Atoh1, Neurog1, and Neurod1) in the development of neurosensory cells.
but whether they are inherited pathogenic factors to cause non-syndromic
sensorineural hearing loss is unknown so far. This is the first time for
screening the Sox2, Atoh1, Neurog1, and Neurod1 genes in children with NSHL. The 
c.133A<U+2009>><U+2009>G in Neurod1 gene is a polymorphism, which is not associated with NSHL. 
Although these genes are the recognized TFs for modulating the development and
transformation of NSCs, they may not be the inherited pathogenic factors to cause
congenital severe or profound NSHL directly.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of the transcription factors (TFs) for the
development of neurosensory cells (NSCs) and to explore the genetic etiology of
congenital profound non-syndromic sensorineural hearing loss (NSHL).
METHODS: Children with NSHL, from multi-national and regional group, and control 
group were recruited to screen for the most common mutations for non-syndromic
deafness among East Asian (mtDNA 12S rRNA: 1555A<U+2009>><U+2009>G, 1494C<U+2009>><U+2009>T; SLC26A4: IVS7-2 
A<U+2009>><U+2009>G, 2168 C<U+2009>><U+2009>T). And mutational analysis of the coding regions in Sox2, Atoh1 
and Neurog1, Neurod1 genes were performed.
RESULTS: Only the c.133A<U+2009>><U+2009>G (p. Ala45Thr) in the Neurod1 gene was detected in
this study. The allele frequencies of this variant were 88.00% and 84.88% in the 
inner ear malformation group and the normal inner ear group, respectively, while 
90.85% of children in the control group carried c.133A<U+2009>><U+2009>G. This variant existed 
in every group commonly and had no significant difference among them. No variant 
in the other two TFs was detected in this cohort.

PMID: 26634621  [PubMed - in process]


4. Clin Lab. 2015;61(9):1171-8.

BMP4: a Possible Key Factor in Differentiation of Auditory Neuron-Like Cells from
Bone-Derived Mesenchymal Stromal Cells.

Peng T, Zhu G, Dong Y, Zeng J, Li W, Guo W, Chen Y, Duan M, Hocher B, Xie D.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that BMP4 may play an important part in
the development of auditory neurons (ANs), which are degenerated in sensorineural
hearing loss. However, whether BMP4 can promote sensory fate specification from
mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) is unknown so far.
METHODS: MSCs isolated from Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats were confirmed by expression
of MSC markers using flow cytometry and adipogenesis/osteogenesis using
differentiation assays. MSCs treated with a complex of neurotrophic factors (BMP4
group and non-BMP4 group) were induced into auditory neuron-like cells, then the 
differences between the two groups were analyzed in morphological observation,
cell growth curve, qRT-PCR, and immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: Flow cytometric analysis showed that the isolated cells expressed
typical MSC surface markers. After adipogenic and osteogenic induction, the cells
were stained by oil red O and Alizarin Red. The neuronal induced cells were in
the growth plateau and had special forms of neurons. In the presence of BMP4, the
inner ear genes NF-M, Neurog1, GluR4, NeuroD, Calretinin, NeuN, Tau, and GATA3
were up-regulated in MSCs.
CONCLUSIONS: MSCs have the capacity to differentiate into auditory neuron-like
cells in vitro. As an effective inducer, BMP4 may play a key role in
transdifferentiation.

PMID: 26634236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 19;5:16821. doi: 10.1038/srep16821.

The Specification and Maturation of Nociceptive Neurons from Human Embryonic Stem
Cells.

Boisvert EM(1,)(2), Engle SJ(3), Hallowell SE(3), Liu P(2), Wang ZW(2), Li
XJ(2,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030. (2)Department of Neuroscience, University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030. (3)Pharmacokinetics, Dynamics,
Metabolism-New Chemical Entities, Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development,
Pfizer Inc., Groton, CT 06340. (4)Stem Cell Institute, University of Connecticut 
Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030.

Nociceptive neurons play an essential role in pain sensation by transmitting
painful stimuli to the central nervous system. However, investigations of
nociceptive neuron biology have been hampered by the lack of accessibility of
human nociceptive neurons. Here, we describe a system for efficiently guiding
human embryonic stem cells into nociceptive neurons by first inducing these cells
to the neural lineage. Subsequent addition of retinoic acid and BMP4 at specific 
time points and concentrations yielded a high population of neural crest
progenitor cells (AP2a(+), P75(+)), which further differentiated into nociceptive
neurons (TRKA(+), Nav1.7(+), P2X3(+)). The overexpression of Neurogenin 1
(Neurog1) promoted the neurons to express genes related to sensory neurons
(Peripherin, TrkA) and to further mature into TRPV1(+) nociceptive neurons.
Importantly, the overexpression of Neurog1 increased the response of these
neurons to capsaicin stimulation, a hallmark of mature functional nociceptive
neurons. Taken together, this study reveals the important role that Neurog1 plays
in generating functional human nociceptive neurons.

PMCID: PMC4652175
PMID: 26581770  [PubMed - in process]


6. Neurobiol Dis. 2016 Jan;85:35-48. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.10.010. Epub 2015 Oct
18.

Knock-down of pantothenate kinase 2 severely affects the development of the
nervous and vascular system in zebrafish, providing new insights into PKAN
disease.

Zizioli D(1), Tiso N(2), Guglielmi A(3), Saraceno C(3), Busolin G(2), Giuliani
R(3), Khatri D(3), Monti E(3), Borsani G(3), Argenton F(2), Finazzi D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia,
viale Europa 11, 25123 Brescia, Italy. Electronic address:
daniela.zizioli@unibs.it. (2)Department of Biology, University of Padova, via U. 
Bassi 58/B, 35121 Padova, Italy. (3)Department of Molecular and Translational
Medicine, University of Brescia, viale Europa 11, 25123 Brescia, Italy.
(4)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine, University of Brescia,
viale Europa 11, 25123 Brescia, Italy; Clinical Chemistry Laboratory, Spedali
Civili Hospital, 25123 Brescia, Italy. Electronic address:
dario.finazzi@unibs.it.

Pantothenate Kinase Associated Neurodegeneration (PKAN) is an autosomal recessive
disorder with mutations in the pantothenate kinase 2 gene (PANK2), encoding an
essential enzyme for Coenzyme A (CoA) biosynthesis. The molecular connection
between defects in this enzyme and the neurodegenerative phenotype observed in
PKAN patients is still poorly understood. We exploited the zebrafish model to
study the role played by the pank2 gene during embryonic development and get new 
insight into PKAN pathogenesis. The zebrafish orthologue of hPANK2 lies on
chromosome 13, is a maternal gene expressed in all development stages and, in
adult animals, is highly abundant in CNS, dorsal aorta and caudal vein. The
injection of a splice-inhibiting morpholino induced a clear phenotype with
perturbed brain morphology and hydrocephalus; edema was present in the heart
region and caudal plexus, where hemorrhages with reduction of blood circulation
velocity were detected. We characterized the CNS phenotype by studying the
expression pattern of wnt1 and neurog1 neural markers and by use of the
Tg(neurod:EGFP/sox10:dsRed) transgenic line. The results evidenced that
downregulation of pank2 severely impairs neuronal development, particularly in
the anterior part of CNS (telencephalon). Whole-mount in situ hybridization
analysis of the endothelial markers cadherin-5 and fli1a, and use of
Tg(fli1a:EGFP/gata1a:dsRed) transgenic line, confirmed the essential role of
pank2 in the formation of the vascular system. The specificity of the
morpholino-induced phenotype was proved by the restoration of a normal
development in a high percentage of embryos co-injected with pank2 mRNA. Also,
addition of pantethine or CoA, but not of vitamin B5, to pank2
morpholino-injected embryos rescued the phenotype with high efficiency. The
zebrafish model indicates the relevance of pank2 activity and CoA homeostasis for
normal neuronal development and functioning and provides evidence of an
unsuspected role for this enzyme and its product in vascular development.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4684146
PMID: 26476142  [PubMed - in process]


7. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Dec;8(12):1615-24. doi: 10.1242/dmm.021550. Epub 2015 Sep
22.

Seipin knockout in mice impairs stem cell proliferation and progenitor cell
differentiation in the adult hippocampal dentate gyrus via reduced levels of
PPAR<U+03B3>.

Li G(1), Zhou L(2), Zhu Y(2), Wang C(2), Sha S(2), Xian X(3), Ji Y(4), Liu G(5), 
Chen L(6).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing 210029, China Department of Physiology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing 210029, China. (2)Department of Physiology, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing 210029, China. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics, UT Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (4)Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular
Disease and Molecular Intervention, Atherosclerosis Research Centre, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China. (5)Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100191, China lingchen@njmu.edu.cn
georgeliu@bjmu.edu.cn. (6)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing 
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China Department of Physiology, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China lingchen@njmu.edu.cn
georgeliu@bjmu.edu.cn.

The seipin gene (BSCL2) was originally identified in humans as a loss-of-function
gene associated with congenital generalized lipodystrophy type 2 (CGL2). Neuronal
seipin-knockout (seipin-nKO) mice display a depression-like phenotype with a
reduced level of hippocampal peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPAR<U+03B3>). The present study investigated the influence of seipin deficiency on
adult neurogenesis in the hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) and the underlying
mechanisms of the effects. We show that the proliferative capability of stem
cells in seipin-nKO mice was substantially reduced compared to in wild-type (WT) 
mice, and that this could be rescued by the PPAR<U+03B3> agonist rosiglitazone (rosi).
In seipin-nKO mice, neuronal differentiation of progenitor cells was inhibited,
with the enhancement of astrogliogenesis; both of these effects were recovered by
rosi treatment during early stages of progenitor cell differentiation. In
addition, rosi treatment could correct the decline in hippocampal ERK2
phosphorylation and cyclin A mRNA level in seipin-nKO mice. The MEK inhibitor
U0126 abolished the rosi-rescued cell proliferation and cyclin A expression in
seipin-nKO mice. In seipin-nKO mice, the hippocampal Wnt3 protein level was less 
than that in WT mice, and there was a reduction of neurogenin 1 (Neurog1) and
neurogenic differentiation 1 (NeuroD1) mRNA, levels of which were corrected by
rosi treatment. STAT3 phosphorylation (Tyr705) was enhanced in seipin-nKO mice,
and was further elevated by rosi treatment. Finally, rosi treatment for 10 days
could alleviate the depression-like phenotype in seipin-nKO mice, and this
alleviation was blocked by the MEK inhibitor U0126. The results indicate that, by
reducing PPAR<U+03B3>, seipin deficiency impairs proliferation and differentiation of
neural stem and progenitor cells, respectively, in the adult DG, which might be
responsible for the production of the depression-like phenotype in seipin-nKO
mice.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728316
PMID: 26398946  [PubMed - in process]


8. Development. 2015 Aug 15;142(16):2810-21. doi: 10.1242/dev.123091. Epub 2015 Jul 
24.

Neurog1 can partially substitute for Atoh1 function in hair cell differentiation 
and maintenance during organ of Corti development.

Jahan I(1), Pan N(2), Kersigo J(2), Fritzsch B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts & Sciences, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA israt-jahan@uiowa.edu bernd-fritzsch@uiowa.edu.
(2)Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts & Sciences, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Atoh1, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor (TF), is essential
for the differentiation of hair cells (HCs), mechanotransducers that convert
sound into auditory signals in the mammalian organ of Corti (OC). Previous work
demonstrated that replacing mouse Atoh1 with the fly ortholog atonal rescues HC
differentiation, indicating functional replacement by other bHLH genes. However, 
replacing Atoh1 with Neurog1 resulted in reduced HC differentiation compared with
transient Atoh1 expression in a 'self-terminating' Atoh1 conditional null mouse
(Atoh1-Cre; Atoh1(f/f)). We now show that combining Neurog1 in one allele with
removal of floxed Atoh1 in a self-terminating conditional mutant (Atoh1-Cre;
Atoh1(f/kiNeurog1)) mouse results in significantly more differentiated inner HCs 
and outer HCs that have a prolonged longevity of 9 months compared with Atoh1
self-terminating littermates. Stereocilia bundles are partially disorganized,
disoriented and not HC type specific. Replacement of Atoh1 with Neurog1 maintains
limited expression of Pou4f3 and Barhl1 and rescues HCs quantitatively, but not
qualitatively. OC patterning and supporting cell differentiation are also
partially disrupted. Diffusible factors involved in patterning are reduced (Fgf8)
and factors involved in cell-cell interactions are affected (Jag1, Hes5). Despite
the presence of many HCs with stereocilia these mice are deaf, possibly owing to 
HC and OC patterning defects. This study provides a novel approach to disrupt OC 
development through modulating the HC-specific intracellular TF network. The
resulting disorganized OC indicates that normally differentiated HCs act as
'self-organizers' for OC development and that Atoh1 plays a crucial role to
initiate HC stereocilia differentiation independently of HC viability.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4550966 [Available on 2016-08-15]
PMID: 26209643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2015 Sep;68:131-42. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2015.07.002. Epub 2015 
Jul 9.

Excessive Wnt/beta-catenin signaling promotes midbrain floor plate neurogenesis, 
but results in vacillating dopamine progenitors.

Nouri N(1), Patel MJ(2), Joksimovic M(3), Poulin JF(4), Anderegg A(5), Taketo
MM(6), Ma YC(7), Awatramani R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and 
Center for Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA. Electronic address: navidnouri2015@u.northwestern.edu.
(2)Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and 
Center for Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA; Committee on Neurobiology, University of Chicago, 924 E 57th St.
R222, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address: meerapatel@uchicago.edu.
(3)Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and 
Center for Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA. Electronic address: milanjok@hotmail.com. (4)Northwestern
University, Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and Center for
Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. Electronic address: j-poulin@northwestern.edu. (5)Northwestern University,
Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and Center for Genetic Medicine,
7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic
address: angela.anderegg@gmail.com. (6)Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoé-cho, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. Electronic address: 
taketo@mfour.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Children's Hospital of Chicago Research
Center, 2430 North Halsted Street, Room C321, Chicago, IL 60614, USA. Electronic 
address: ma@northwestern.edu. (8)Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical
School, Department of Neurology and Center for Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie
Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
r-awatramani@northwestern.edu.

The floor plate (FP), a ventral midline structure of the developing neural tube, 
has differential neurogenic capabilities along the anterior-posterior axis. The
midbrain FP, unlike the hindbrain and spinal cord floor plate, is highly
neurogenic and produces midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons. Canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, at least in part, is thought to account for the
difference in neurogenic capability. Removal of beta-catenin results in mDA
progenitor specification defects as well as a profound reduction of neurogenesis.
To examine the effects of excessive Wnt/beta-catenin signaling on mDA
specification and neurogenesis, we have analyzed a model wherein beta-catenin is 
conditionally stabilized in the Shh+domain. Here, we show that the Foxa2+/Lmx1a+ 
domain is extended rostrally in mutant embryos, suggesting that canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling can drive FP expansion along the rostrocaudal axis.
Although excess canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling generally promotes
neurogenesis at midbrain levels, less tyrosine hydroxylase (Th)+, mDA neurons are
generated, particularly impacting the Substantia Nigra pars compacta. This is
likely because of improper progenitor specification. Excess canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling causes downregulation of net Lmx1b, Shh and Foxa2
levels in mDA progenitors. Moreover, these progenitors assume a mixed identity to
that of Lmx1a+/Lmx1b+/Nkx6-1+/Neurog1+ progenitors. We also show by lineage
tracing analysis that normally, Neurog1+ progenitors predominantly give rise to
Pou4f1+ neurons, but not Th+ neurons. Accordingly, in the mutant embryos,
Neurog1+ progenitors at the midline generate ectopic Pou4f1+ neurons at the
expense of Th+ mDA neurons. Our study suggests that an optimal dose of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is critical for proper establishment of the mDA
progenitor character. Our findings will impact embryonic stem cell protocols that
utilize Wnt pathway reagents to derive mDA neuron models and therapeutics for
Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4633300 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26164566  [PubMed - in process]


10. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Jul 9;7(1):63. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0106-0. eCollection
2015.

Different prognostic effect of CpG island methylation according to sex in
colorectal cancer patients treated with adjuvant FOLFOX.

Lee DW(1), Han SW(2), Cha Y(1), Rhee YY(3), Bae JM(3), Cho NY(3), Lee KH(1), Kim 
TY(1), Oh DY(2), Im SA(2), Bang YJ(2), Jeong SY(4), Park KJ(4), Kang GH(3), Kim
TY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101
Daehang-Ro, Jongno-Gu, Seoul 110-744 South Korea. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, 101 Daehang-Ro, Jongno-Gu, Seoul
110-744 South Korea ; Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, 101 Daehang-Ro, Jongno-Gu, Seoul 110-744 South
Korea. (4)Department of Surgery, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital,
101 Daehang-Ro, Jongno-Gu, Seoul 110-744 South Korea ; Cancer Research Institute,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea ; Department of
Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence
Science and Technology, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Profound methylation of CpG islands constitutes a distinct molecular 
subtype of colorectal cancer (CRC). The frequencies of methylation in CRC vary
according to clinico-pathological characteristics including sex. However,
interaction between these characteristics and prognostic influence of methylation
status has not been clearly defined. We have investigated the prognostic role of 
promoter methylation using eight CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) markers
in 497 stage II or III CRC patients who underwent curative resection followed by 
adjuvant FOLFOX. Overall survival (OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) were
compared between subgroups classified by methylation status, and interactions
with clinico-pathological features were analyzed.
RESULTS: CIMP-high (=5 methylated loci) and concurrent methylation in NEUROG1 and
CDKN2A (p16) were found in 5.8 and 7.9 % of patients, respectively. Although
CIMP-high status was not associated with survival, concurrent methylation in
NEUROG1 and CDKN2A (p16) was associated with shorter OS and DFS. Moreover, the
prognostic role of the concurrent methylation was different among sex. The
negative prognostic impact was only observed in male but not in female
(interaction p value<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.026 for OS and 0.011 for DFS). In male, the 5-year OS
was 61.6 % in concurrent methylation (+) and 91.7 % in concurrent methylation (-)
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) whereas it was 95.0 and 92.8 % in female, respectively (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.78).
CONCLUSIONS: Concurrent methylation in NEUROG1 and CDKN2A is associated with poor
survival in CRC treated with adjuvant FOLFOX. Interaction analysis indicates that
the prognostic role is different according to sex.

PMCID: PMC4495938
PMID: 26157509  [PubMed]


11. Hum Genet. 2015 Sep;134(9):967-80. doi: 10.1007/s00439-015-1575-0. Epub 2015 Jun 
16.

High diagnostic yield of clinical exome sequencing in Middle Eastern patients
with Mendelian disorders.

Yavarna T(1), Al-Dewik N, Al-Mureikhi M, Ali R, Al-Mesaifri F, Mahmoud L,
Shahbeck N, Lakhani S, AlMulla M, Nawaz Z, Vitazka P, Alkuraya FS, Ben-Omran T.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Metabolic Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Hamad Medical
Corporation, P.O.BOX. 3050, Doha, Qatar.

Clinical exome sequencing (CES) has become an increasingly popular diagnostic
tool in patients with heterogeneous genetic disorders, especially in those with
neurocognitive phenotypes. Utility of CES in consanguineous populations has not
yet been determined on a large scale. A clinical cohort of 149 probands from
Qatar with suspected Mendelian, mainly neurocognitive phenotypes, underwent CES
from July 2012 to June 2014. Intellectual disability and global developmental
delay were the most common clinical presentations but our cohort displayed other 
phenotypes, such as epilepsy, dysmorphism, microcephaly and other structural
brain anomalies and autism. A pathogenic or likely pathogenic mutation, including
pathogenic CNVs, was identified in 89 probands for a diagnostic yield of 60%.
Consanguinity and positive family history predicted a higher diagnostic yield. In
5% (7/149) of cases, CES implicated novel candidate disease genes (MANF, GJA9,
GLG1, COL15A1, SLC35F5, MAGE4, NEUROG1). CES uncovered two coexisting genetic
disorders in 4% (6/149) and actionable incidental findings in 2% (3/149) of
cases. Average time to diagnosis was reduced from 27 to 5 months. CES, which
already has the highest diagnostic yield among all available diagnostic tools in 
the setting of Mendelian disorders, appears to be particularly helpful
diagnostically in the highly consanguineous Middle Eastern population.

PMID: 26077850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2015 Jul-Aug;50:53-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ntt.2015.06.001. Epub
2015 Jun 6.

2-Bromopalmitate impairs neural stem/progenitor cell proliferation, promotes cell
apoptosis and induces malformation in zebrafish embryonic brain.

Wang C(1), Chen X(2), Shi W(3), Wang F(3), Du Z(3), Li X(3), Yao Y(3), Liu T(1), 
Shao T(3), Li G(4), Hao A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Experimental Teratology,
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mental Disorders, Department of Histology
and Embryology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250012,
PR China; Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong University,
Jinan, Shandong 250012, PR China. (2)Center of Medical Physics and Technology,
Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, Anhui
230031, PR China. (3)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Experimental
Teratology, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Mental Disorders, Department of
Histology and Embryology, Shandong University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong
250012, PR China. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Qilu Hospital of Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong 250012, PR China. (5)Key Laboratory of the Ministry
of Education for Experimental Teratology, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of
Mental Disorders, Department of Histology and Embryology, Shandong University
School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250012, PR China. Electronic address:
aijunhao@sdu.edu.cn.

2-Bromopalmitate (2BP) is a widely used palmitoylation inhibitor. Besides, it has
been reported that 2BP can inhibit T-cell activation, making it a potential
immunosuppressor for the treatment of autoimmune diseases. Although the important
roles of palmitoylation in a neural system have been noted during the past
decades, the effect of 2BP on neural development is still not very clear. In this
study, we demonstrated that 25 µM-100 µM 2BP exposure caused apparent neural
malformation in the presumptive brains of zebrafish embryos at 14 hpf. Further
studies implied that the mRNA quantities and distributions of neural
stem/progenitor cell (NSPC) markers (neurog1, sox2, and sox3) in the affected
regions of 50 µM 2BP treated embryos significantly decreased. In addition, we
found that 2BP impaired the NSPC proliferation at 10 hpf and 14 hpf as well as
promoted cell apoptosis at 14 hpf, consistent with which the interference with
FGF/ERK signaling pathway was also detected. For the first time, this study
provided information about the toxicity and teratogenicity of 2BP for neural
development in vivo.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26056731  [PubMed - in process]


13. PLoS One. 2015 May 22;10(5):e0127360. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127360.
eCollection 2015.

Neuregulin 1 Type II-ErbB Signaling Promotes Cell Divisions Generating Neurons
from Neural Progenitor Cells in the Developing Zebrafish Brain.

Sato T(1), Sato F(1), Kamezaki A(2), Sakaguchi K(1), Tanigome R(1), Kawakami
K(3), Sehara-Fujisawa A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Growth Regulation, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. (2)Department of Growth Regulation,
Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto,
Japan; Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology and Development, Graduate School of
Biostudies, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, Japan. (3)Division of Molecular
and Developmental Biology, National Institute of Genetics, Mishima-shi, Shizuoka,
Japan.

Post-mitotic neurons are generated from neural progenitor cells (NPCs) at the
expense of their proliferation. Molecular and cellular mechanisms that regulate
neuron production temporally and spatially should impact on the size and shape of
the brain. While transcription factors such as neurogenin1 (neurog1) and neurod
govern progression of neurogenesis as cell-intrinsic mechanisms, recent studies
show regulatory roles of several cell-extrinsic or intercellular signaling
molecules including Notch, FGF and Wnt in production of neurons/neural progenitor
cells from neural stem cells/radial glial cells (NSCs/RGCs) in the ventricular
zone (VZ). However, it remains elusive how production of post-mitotic neurons
from neural progenitor cells is regulated in the sub-ventricular zone (SVZ). Here
we show that newborn neurons accumulate in the basal-to-apical direction in the
optic tectum (OT) of zebrafish embryos. While neural progenitor cells are
amplified by mitoses in the apical ventricular zone, neurons are exclusively
produced through mitoses of neural progenitor cells in the sub-basal zone, later 
in the sub-ventricular zone, and accumulate apically onto older neurons. This
neurogenesis depends on Neuregulin 1 type II (NRG1-II)-ErbB signaling. Treatment 
with an ErbB inhibitor, AG1478 impairs mitoses in the sub-ventricular zone of the
optic tectum. Removal of AG1478 resumes sub-ventricular mitoses without precedent
mitoses in the apical ventricular zone prior to basal-to-apical accumulation of
neurons, suggesting critical roles of ErbB signaling in mitoses for post-mitotic 
neuron production. Knockdown of NRG1-II impairs both mitoses in the
sub-basal/sub-ventricular zone and the ventricular zone. Injection of soluble
human NRG1 into the developing brain ameliorates neurogenesis of
NRG1-II-knockdown embryos, suggesting a conserved role of NRG1 as a
cell-extrinsic signal. From these results, we propose that NRG1-ErbB signaling
stimulates cell divisions generating neurons from neural progenitor cells in the 
developing vertebrate brain.

PMCID: PMC4441363
PMID: 26001123  [PubMed - in process]


14. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Feb 1;8(2):1920-8. eCollection 2015.

Nuclear maspin expression correlates with the CpG island methylator phenotype and
tumor aggressiveness in colorectal cancer.

Kim JH(1), Cho NY(2), Bae JM(3), Kim KJ(3), Rhee YY(3), Lee HS(4), Kang GH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, SMG-SNU Boramae Medical Center Seoul, Korea.
(2)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Pathology, Seoul
National University College of Medicine Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Pathology,
Seoul National University Bundang Hospital Seongnam, Korea. (5)Laboratory of
Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University College of
Medicine Seoul, Korea ; Department of Pathology, Seoul National University
College of Medicine Seoul, Korea.

It has been suggested that nuclear expression of maspin (mammary serine protease 
inhibitor; also known as SERPINB5) in colorectal cancer (CRC) is associated with 
proximal colonic tumor location, mucinous and poorly differentiated histology,
microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H), and poor prognosis. Based on these
findings, there may be a potential association between nuclear maspin expression 
and the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in CRC, but no study has
elucidated this issue. Here, we evaluated maspin protein expression status by
immunohistochemistry in 216 MSI-H CRCs. CIMP status was also determined by
methylation-specific quantitative PCR method (MethyLight) using eight CIMP
markers (MLH1, NEUROG1, CRABP1, CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), IGF2, SOCS1, and RUNX3) in
216 MSI-H CRCs. Associations between maspin expression status and various
pathological, molecular, and survival data were statistically analyzed. Among the
216 MSI-H CRCs, 111 (51%) cases presented nuclear maspin-positive tumors. Nuclear
maspin-positive MSI-H CRCs were significantly associated with proximal tumor
location (P = 0.003), tumor budding (P < 0.001), lymphovascular invasion (P =
0.001), perineural invasion (P = 0.008), absence of peritumoral lymphoid reaction
(P = 0.045), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.003), distant metastasis (P = 0.005),
advanced AJCC/UICC stage (stage III/IV) (P = 0.001), and CIMP-high (CIMP-H)
status (P < 0.001). Patients with nuclear maspin-positive tumors showed worse
disease-free survival than patients with nuclear maspin-negative tumors (log-rank
P = 0.025). In conclusion, nuclear maspin expression is molecularly associated
with CIMP-H rather than MSI-H, and clinicopathologically correlates with tumor
aggressiveness in CRC.

PMCID: PMC4396253
PMID: 25973084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Dev Cell. 2015 May 4;33(3):343-50. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.03.021.

Zeb family members and boundary cap cells underlie developmental plasticity of
sensory nociceptive neurons.

Ohayon D(1), Ventéo S(2), Sonrier C(2), Lafon PA(2), Garcès A(2), Valmier J(3),
Rivat C(3), Topilko P(4), Carroll P(2), Pattyn A(5).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, 34091 Montpellier,
France; Université de Toulouse, Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR5547
CNRS, 31062 Toulouse, France. (2)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de
Montpellier, 34091 Montpellier, France. (3)INSERM U1051, Institut des
Neurosciences de Montpellier, 34091 Montpellier, France; Université Montpellier
2, 34091 Montpellier, France. (4)INSERM U1024, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230
Paris, France. (5)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, 34091 
Montpellier, France. Electronic address: alexandre.pattyn@inserm.fr.

Dorsal root ganglia (DRG) sensory neurons arise from heterogeneous precursors
that differentiate in two neurogenic waves, respectively controlled by Neurog2
and Neurog1. We show here that transgenic mice expressing a Zeb1/2
dominant-negative form (DBZEB) exhibit reduced numbers of nociceptors and altered
pain sensitivity. This reflects an early impairment of Neurog1-dependent
neurogenesis due to the depletion of specific sensory precursor pools, which is
slightly later partially compensated by the contribution of boundary cap cells
(BCCs). Indeed, combined DBZEB expression and genetic BCCs ablation entirely
deplete second wave precursors and, in turn, nociceptors, thus recapitulating the
Neurog1(-/-) neuronal phenotype. Altogether, our results uncover roles for Zeb
family members in the developing DRGs; they show that the Neurog1-dependent
sensory neurogenesis can be functionally partitioned in two successive phases;
and finally, they illustrate plasticity in the developing peripheral
somatosensory system supported by the BCCs, thereby providing a rationale for
sensory precursor diversity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25942625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. BMC Biol. 2015 Apr 11;13:24. doi: 10.1186/s12915-015-0134-4.

Distinct adhesion-independent functions of ß-catenin control stage-specific
sensory neurogenesis and proliferation.

Gay MH(1), Valenta T(2), Herr P(3,)(4), Paratore-Hari L(5,)(6), Basler K(7),
Sommer L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Division, Institute of Anatomy, University of
Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057, Zurich, Switzerland. max.g@anatom.uzh.ch. 
(2)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057, Zurich, Switzerland. tomas.valenta@imls.uzh.ch.
(3)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich,
Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057, Zurich, Switzerland. patrick.herr@scilifelab.se.
(4)Present address: SciLifeLab, Stockholm, Sweden. patrick.herr@scilifelab.se.
(5)Cell and Developmental Biology Division, Institute of Anatomy, University of
Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057, Zurich, Switzerland.
lisette.paratore@gmx.ch. (6)Present address: University Hospital Zurich, Clinical
Trials Center, Zurich, Switzerland. lisette.paratore@gmx.ch. (7)Institute of
Molecular Life Sciences, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190, 8057,
Zurich, Switzerland. konrad.basler@imls.uzh.ch. (8)Cell and Developmental Biology
Division, Institute of Anatomy, University of Zurich, Winterthurerstrasse 190,
8057, Zurich, Switzerland. lukas.sommer@anatom.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND: ß-catenin plays a central role in multiple developmental processes.
However, it has been difficult to study its pleiotropic effects, because of the
dual capacity of ß-catenin to coordinate cadherin-dependent cell adhesion and to 
act as a component of Wnt signal transduction. To distinguish between the
divergent functions of ß-catenin during peripheral nervous system development, we
made use of a mutant allele of ß-catenin that can mediate adhesion but not
Wnt-induced TCF transcriptional activation. This allele was combined with various
conditional inactivation approaches.
RESULTS: We show that of all peripheral nervous system structures, only sensory
dorsal root ganglia require ß-catenin for proper formation and growth.
Surprisingly, however, dorsal root ganglia development is independent of
cadherin-mediated cell adhesion. Rather, both progenitor cell proliferation and
fate specification are controlled by ß-catenin signaling. These can be divided
into temporally sequential processes, each of which depends on a different
function of ß-catenin.
CONCLUSIONS: While early stage proliferation and specific Neurog2- and
Krox20-dependent waves of neuronal subtype specification involve activation of
TCF transcription, late stage progenitor proliferation and Neurog1-marked sensory
neurogenesis are regulated by a function of ß-catenin independent of TCF
activation and adhesion. Thus, switching modes of ß-catenin function are
associated with consecutive cell fate specification and stage-specific progenitor
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4416270
PMID: 25885041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Int J Epidemiol. 2015 Aug;44(4):1224-37. doi: 10.1093/ije/dyv048. Epub 2015 Apr
10.

DNA methylation mediates the effect of maternal smoking during pregnancy on
birthweight of the offspring.

Küpers LK(1), Xu X(2), Jankipersadsing SA(3), Vaez A(4), la Bastide-van Gemert
S(4), Scholtens S(5), Nolte IM(4), Richmond RC(6), Relton CL(6), Felix JF(7),
Duijts L(8), van Meurs JB(9), Tiemeier H(4), Jaddoe VW(7), Wang X(2), Corpeleijn 
E(4), Snieder H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Epidemiology, l.k.kupers@umcg.nl. (2)Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, Georgia, USA. (3)Pulmonology and Genetics, and.
(4)Departments of Epidemiology. (5)Departments of Epidemiology, LifeLines Cohort 
Study, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (6)MRC
Integrative Epidemiology Unit, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK. (7)Departments
of Epidemiology, Pediatrics, The Generation R Study Group and. (8)Departments of 
Epidemiology, Pediatrics. (9)Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical
Center Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: We examined whether the effect of maternal smoking during pregnancy
on birthweight of the offspring was mediated by smoking-induced changes to DNA
methylation in cord blood.
METHODS: First, we used cord blood of 129 Dutch children exposed to maternal
smoking vs 126 unexposed to maternal and paternal smoking (53% male)
participating in the GECKO Drenthe birth cohort. DNA methylation was measured
using the Illumina HumanMethylation450 Beadchip. We performed an epigenome-wide
association study for the association between maternal smoking and methylation
followed by a mediation analysis of the top signals [false-discovery rate
(FDR)<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05]. We adjusted both analyses for maternal age, education,
pre-pregnancy BMI, offspring's sex, gestational age and white blood cell
composition. Secondly, in 175 exposed and 1248 unexposed newborns from two
independent birth cohorts, we replicated and meta-analysed results of eight
cytosine-phosphate-guanine (CpG) sites in the GFI1 gene, which showed the most
robust mediation. Finally, we performed functional network and enrichment
analysis.
RESULTS: We found 35 differentially methylated CpGs (FDR<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in newborns
exposed vs unexposed to smoking, of which 23 survived Bonferroni correction
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7)). These 23 CpGs mapped to eight genes: AHRR, GFI1, MYO1G, CYP1A1,
NEUROG1, CNTNAP2, FRMD4A and LRP5. We observed partial confirmation as three of
the eight CpGs in GFI1 replicated. These CpGs partly mediated the effect of
maternal smoking on birthweight (Sobel P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in meta-analysis of GECKO and
the two replication cohorts. Differential methylation of these three GFI1 CpGs
explained 12-19% of the 202 g lower birthweight in smoking mothers. Functional
enrichment analysis pointed towards activation of cell-mediated immunity.
CONCLUSIONS: Maternal smoking during pregnancy was associated with cord blood
methylation differences. We observed a potentially mediating role of methylation 
in the association between maternal smoking during pregnancy and birthweight of
the offspring. Functional network analysis suggested a role in activating the
immune system.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
International Epidemiological Association.

PMCID: PMC4588868
PMID: 25862628  [PubMed - in process]


18. PLoS One. 2015 Jan 30;10(1):e0116171. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116171.
eCollection 2015.

Induction of ectopic retina-like tissue by transgenic expression of neurogenin.

Yan RT(1), He L(1), Zhan W(1), Wang SZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama, United States of America.

Degeneration of retinal neurons is an underlying cause of several major types of 
blinding diseases, and effective therapies remain to be developed. The
suppositive strategy of repopulating a degenerative retina with new cells
generated onsite faces serious challenges, because the mammalian retina seems to 
lack the ability to regenerate itself or replace its lost neurons. We
investigated the possibility of using a transcriptional factor with proneural
activities to reprogram ocular tissue with regenerative capability to give rise
to retinal cells. Transgenic mice were generated with DNA constructs that
targeted the expression in the retinal pigment epithelium of proneural gene
neurogenin1 from the promoter of Bestrophin1, or neurogenin3 from RPE65 promoter.
Here we report the presence of ectopic retina-like tissue in some of the
transgenic mice, young and aged. The ectopic retina-like tissue contained cells
positive for photoreceptor proteins Crx, recoverin, red opsin, and rhodopsin, and
cells positive for proteins that label other types of retinal neurons, including 
AP2a and Pax6 for amacrine cells, Otx2 for bipolar cells, and Brn3A for ganglion 
cells. The retina-like tissue often co-existed with darkly pigmented tissue
positive for RPE proteins: cytokeratin 18, Otx2, and RPE65. The ectopic
retina-like tissue was detected in the subretinal space, including two retinae
co-existing in the same eye, and/or in the optic nerve or in the vicinity of the 
optic nerve head. On rare occasions, it was detected in the choroid and in the
vicinity of the ciliary body. The presence of ectopic retina-like tissue in the
transgenic mouse supports the possibility of inducing retinal regeneration in the
mammalian eyes through gene-directed reprograming.

PMCID: PMC4312083
PMID: 25635399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cerebellum. 2015 Jun;14(3):247-63. doi: 10.1007/s12311-014-0641-9.

Neurog1 Genetic Inducible Fate Mapping (GIFM) Reveals the Existence of Complex
Spatiotemporal Cyto-Architectures in the Developing Cerebellum.

Obana EA(1), Lundell TG, Yi KJ, Radomski KL, Zhou Q, Doughty ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, Center for Neuroscience and
Regenerative Medicine (CNRM), Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD, 20814, USA.

Neurog1 is a pro-neural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
expressed in progenitor cells located in the ventricular zone and subsequently
the presumptive white matter tracts of the developing mouse cerebellum. We used
genetic inducible fate mapping (GIFM) with a transgenic Neurog1-CreER allele to
characterize the contributions of Neurog1 lineages to cerebellar circuit
formation in mice. GIFM reveals Neurog1-expressing progenitors are fate-mapped to
become Purkinje cells and all GABAergic interneuron cell types of the cerebellar 
cortex but not glia. The spatiotemporal sequence of GIFM is unique to each
neuronal cell type. GIFM on embryonic days (E) 10.5 to E12.5 labels Purkinje
cells with different medial-lateral settling patterns depending on the day of
tamoxifen delivery. GIFM on E11.5 to P7 labels interneurons and the timing of
tamoxifen administration correlates with the final inside-to-outside resting
position of GABAergic interneurons in the cerebellar cortex. Proliferative status
and long-term BrdU retention of GIFM lineages reveals Purkinje cells express
Neurog1 around the time they become post-mitotic. In contrast, GIFM labels
mitotic and post-mitotic interneurons. Neurog1-CreER GIFM reveals a correlation
between the timing of Neurog1 expression and the spatial organization of
GABAergic neurons in the cerebellar cortex with possible implications for
cerebellar circuit assembly.

PMID: 25592069  [PubMed - in process]


20. Nat Neurosci. 2015 Jan;18(1):25-35. doi: 10.1038/nn.3887. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Selective conversion of fibroblasts into peripheral sensory neurons.

Blanchard JW(1), Eade KT(1), Szucs A(2), Lo Sardo V(1), Tsunemoto RK(3), Williams
D(1), Sanna PP(4), Baldwin KK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Dorris Neuroscience Center,
The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA. (2)1] BioCircuits
Institute, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California, USA. [2]
Balaton Limnological Institute of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Tihany,
Hungary. (3)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Dorris
Neuroscience Center, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.
[2] Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California, USA. (4)Molecular and Integrative Neurosciences Department, The
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Humans and mice detect pain, itch, temperature, pressure, stretch and limb
position via signaling from peripheral sensory neurons. These neurons are divided
into three functional classes (nociceptors/pruritoceptors, mechanoreceptors and
proprioceptors) that are distinguished by their selective expression of TrkA,
TrkB or TrkC receptors, respectively. We found that transiently coexpressing
Brn3a with either Ngn1 or Ngn2 selectively reprogrammed human and mouse
fibroblasts to acquire key properties of these three classes of sensory neurons. 
These induced sensory neurons (iSNs) were electrically active, exhibited distinct
sensory neuron morphologies and matched the characteristic gene expression
patterns of endogenous sensory neurons, including selective expression of Trk
receptors. In addition, we found that calcium-imaging assays could identify
subsets of iSNs that selectively responded to diverse ligands known to activate
itch- and pain-sensing neurons. These results offer a simple and rapid means for 
producing genetically diverse human sensory neurons suitable for drug screening
and mechanistic studies.

PMCID: PMC4466122
PMID: 25420069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mol Syst Biol. 2014 Nov 17;10:760. doi: 10.15252/msb.20145508.

Rapid neurogenesis through transcriptional activation in human stem cells.

Busskamp V(1), Lewis NE(2), Guye P(3), Ng AH(4), Shipman SL(1), Byrne SM(1),
Sanjana NE(5), Murn J(6), Li Y(3), Li S(7), Stadler M(8), Weiss R(3), Church
GM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Wyss Institute
for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Wyss Institute
for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA
Department of Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA. (3)Department of
Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA,
USA. (4)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Wyss
Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, Boston,
MA, USA Department of Systems Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(5)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA, USA
McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA. (6)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Division of Newborn Medicine, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (7)Department of Bioengineering, University of
California, San Diego, CA, USA. (8)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical
Research, Basel, Switzerland Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Basel,
Switzerland University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (9)Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired 
Engineering at Harvard University, Boston, MA, USA
gchurch@genetics.med.harvard.edu.

Advances in cellular reprogramming and stem cell differentiation now enable ex
vivo studies of human neuronal differentiation. However, it remains challenging
to elucidate the underlying regulatory programs because differentiation protocols
are laborious and often result in low neuron yields. Here, we overexpressed two
Neurogenin transcription factors in human-induced pluripotent stem cells and
obtained neurons with bipolar morphology in 4 days, at greater than 90% purity.
The high purity enabled mRNA and microRNA expression profiling during
neurogenesis, thus revealing the genetic programs involved in the rapid
transition from stem cell to neuron. The resulting cells exhibited
transcriptional, morphological and functional signatures of differentiated
neurons, with greatest transcriptional similarity to prenatal human brain
samples. Our analysis revealed a network of key transcription factors and
microRNAs that promoted loss of pluripotency and rapid neurogenesis via
progenitor states. Perturbations of key transcription factors affected
homogeneity and phenotypic properties of the resulting neurons, suggesting that a
systems-level view of the molecular biology of differentiation may guide
subsequent manipulation of human stem cells to rapidly obtain diverse neuronal
types.

© 2014 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4299601
PMID: 25403753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 10;9(10):e107947. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107947.
eCollection 2014.

DNA methylation status of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)--related genes 
is associated with severe clinical phenotypes in ulcerative colitis (UC).

Tahara T(1), Shibata T(1), Okubo M(1), Ishizuka T(1), Nakamura M(2), Nagasaka
M(1), Nakagawa Y(1), Ohmiya N(1), Arisawa T(2), Hirata I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Fujita Health University School of Medicine,
Toyoake, Japan. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa Medical University,
Ishikawa, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a phenomenon that
allows the conversion of adherent epithelial cells to a mesenchymal cell
phenotype, which enhances migratory capacity and invasiveness. Recent studies
have suggested that EMT contributes to the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis
(UC). We investigated the promoter DNA methylation status of EMT-related genes in
the colonic mucosa in UC.
METHODS: Colonic biopsies were obtained from the rectal inflammatory mucosa of 86
UC patients and the non-inflammatory proximal colonic mucosa of 10 paired
patients. Bisulfite pyrosequencing was used to quantify the methylation of 5
candidate CpG island promoters (NEUROG1, CDX1, miR-1247, CDH1, and CDH13) and
LINE1.
RESULTS: Using an unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, inflamed rectal 
mucosa was well separated from mucosa that appeared normal. The CDH1 and CDH13
promoters were significantly associated with patient age (p = 0.04, 0.03,
respectively). A similar trend was found between those genes and the duration of 
disease (CDH1: p = 0.07, CDH13: p = 0.0002, mean of both: p<0.00001). Several
positive associations were found between hypermethylation and severe clinical
phenotypes (CDX1 and miR-1247 and a refractory phenotype: p = 0.04 and 0.006,
respectively. miR-1247 and CDH1 hyper methylation and a more severe Mayo
endoscopic subscore: miR-1247: p = 0.0008, CDH1: p = 0.03, mean of both: p =
0.003). When the severe clinical phenotype was defined as having any of five
phenotypes (hospitalized more than twice, highest Mayo endoscopic subscore,
steroid dependence, refractory, or a history of surgery) miR-1247
hypermethylation was associated with the same phenotype (p = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that variability in the methylation status of
EMT-related genes is associated with more severe clinical phenotypes in UC.

PMCID: PMC4193736
PMID: 25303049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 9;9(10):e109860. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0109860.
eCollection 2014.

The role of her4 in inner ear development and its relationship with proneural
genes and Notch signalling.

Radosevic M(1), Fargas L(1), Alsina B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

The generation of sensory neurons and hair cells of the inner ear is under tight 
control. Different members of the Hairy and Enhancer of Split genes (HES) are
expressed in the inner ear, their full array of functions still not being
disclosed. We have previously shown that zebrafish her9 acts as a patterning gene
to restrict otic neurogenesis to an anterior domain. Here, we disclose the role
of another her gene, her4, a zebrafish ortholog of Hes5 that is expressed in the 
neurogenic and sensory domains of the inner ear. The expression of her4 is highly
dynamic and spatiotemporally regulated. We demonstrate by loss of function
experiments that in the neurogenic domain her4 expression is under the regulation
of neurogenin1 (neurog1) and the Notch pathway. Moreover, her4 participates in
lateral inhibition during otic neurogenesis since her4 knockdown results in
overproduction of the number of neurog1 and deltaB-positive otic neurons. In
contrast, during sensorigenesis her4 is initially Notch-independent and induced
by atoh1b in a broad prosensory domain. At later stages her4 expression becomes
Notch-dependent in the future sensory domains but loss of her4 does not result in
hair cell overproduction, suggesting that there other her genes can compensate
its function.

PMCID: PMC4192589
PMID: 25299450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2014;110:75-127. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-405943-6.00002-6.

Proneural bHLH genes in development and disease.

Huang C(1), Chan JA(2), Schuurmans C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. (2)Department of Pathology &
Laboratory Medicine, Southern Alberta Cancer Research Institute, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. Electronic address: jawchan@ucalgary.ca.
(3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Alberta Children's Hospital 
Research Institute, Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary,
Alberta, Canada. Electronic address: cschuurm@ucalgary.ca.

Proneural genes encode evolutionarily conserved basic-helix-loop-helix
transcription factors. In Drosophila, proneural genes are required and sufficient
to confer a neural identity onto naïve ectodermal cells, inducing delamination
and subsequent neuronal differentiation. In vertebrates, proneural genes are
expressed in cells that already have a neural identity, but they are still
required and sufficient to initiate neurogenesis. In all organisms, proneural
genes control neurogenesis by regulating Notch-mediated lateral inhibition and
initiating the expression of downstream differentiation genes. The general mode
of proneural gene function has thus been elucidated. However, the regulatory
mechanisms that spatially and temporally control proneural gene function are only
beginning to be deciphered. Understanding how proneural gene function is
regulated is essential, as aberrant proneural gene expression has recently been
linked to a variety of human diseases-ranging from cancer to neuropsychiatric
illnesses and diabetes. Recent insights into proneural gene function in
development and disease are highlighted herein.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25248474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Sep 26;452(3):581-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.08.121. Epub 2014 Aug 30.

A feasibility study of an in vitro differentiation potential toward
insulin-producing cells by dental tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Sawangmake C(1), Nowwarote N(2), Pavasant P(3), Chansiripornchai P(4), Osathanon 
T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand; Graduate Program in Veterinary Bioscience,
Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand;
Research Unit of Mineralized Tissue, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. (2)Research Unit of Mineralized Tissue,
Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(3)Research Unit of Mineralized Tissue, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand; Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Dentistry,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. (4)Department of Pharmacology,
Faculty of Veterinary Science, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand.
(5)Research Unit of Mineralized Tissue, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn
University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand; Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Dentistry,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330, Thailand. Electronic address:
thanaphum.o@chula.ac.th.

Dental tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells have been proposed as an alternative
source for mesenchymal stem cells. Here, we investigated the differentiation
ability toward insulin producing cells (IPCs) of human dental pulp stem cells
(hDPSCs) and human periodontal ligament stem cells (hPDLSCs). These cells
expressed mesenchymal stem cell surface markers and were able to differentiate
toward osteogenic and adipogenic lineages. Upon 3 step-IPCs induction, hDPSCs
exhibited more colony number than hPDLSCs. The mRNA upregulation of pancreatic
endoderm/islet markers was noted. However, the significant increase was noted
only for PDX-1, NGN-3, and INSULIN mRNA expression of hDPSCs. The hDPSCs-derived 
IPCs expressed PRO-INSULIN and released C-PEPTIDE upon glucose stimulation in
dose-dependent manner. After IPCs induction, the Notch target, HES-1 and HEY-1,
mRNA expression was markedly noted. Notch inhibition during the last induction
step or throughout the protocol disturbed the ability of C-PEPTIDE release upon
glucose stimulation. The results suggested that hDPSCs had better differentiation
potential toward IPCs than hPDLSCs. In addition, the Notch signalling might
involve in the differentiation regulation of hDPSCs into IPCs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25181343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Gut Liver. 2015 Mar;9(2):202-7. doi: 10.5009/gnl13352.

The role of the CpG island methylator phenotype on survival outcome in colon
cancer.

Kang KJ(1), Min BH(2), Ryu KJ(2), Kim KM(3), Chang DK(2), Kim JJ(2), Rhee JC(2), 
Kim YH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym
University College of Medicine, Anyang, Korea. (2)Departments of Medicine,
Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Departments of Pathology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Comment in
    Gut Liver. 2015 Mar;9(2):139-40.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)- high colorectal cancers 
(CRCs) have distinct clinicopathologi-cal features from their CIMP-low/negative
CRC counterparts. However, controversy exists regarding the prognosis of CRC
according to the CIMP status. Therefore, this study examined the prognosis of
Korean patients with colon cancer according to the CIMP status.
METHODS: Among a previous cohort pop-ulation with CRC, a total of 154 patients
with colon cancer who had available tissue for DNA extraction were included in
the study. CIMP-high was defined as =3/5 methylated mark-ers using the
five-marker panel (CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1).
RESULTS: CIMP-high and CIMP-low/neg-ative cancers were observed in 27 patients
(17.5%) and 127 patients (82.5%), respectively. Multivariate analysis adjust-ing 
for age, gender, tumor location, tumor stage and CIMP and microsatellite
instability (MSI) statuses indicated that CIMP-high colon cancers were associated
with a significant increase in colon cancer-specific mortality (hazard ratio
[HR], 3.23; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.20 to 8.69; p=0.02). In
microsatellite stable cancers, CIMP-high cancer had a poor survival outcome
compared to CIMP-low/negative cancer (HR, 2.91; 95% CI, 1.02 to 8.27; p=0.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Re-gardless of the MSI status, CIMP-high cancers had poor sur-vival 
outcomes in Korean patients. (Gut Liver, 2015;9202-207).

PMCID: PMC4351027
PMID: 25167802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Science. 2014 Jul 4;345(6192):87-90. doi: 10.1126/science.1253286. Epub 2014 Jun 
12.

Neurodevelopment. Parasympathetic ganglia derive from Schwann cell precursors.

Espinosa-Medina I(1), Outin E(1), Picard CA(1), Chettouh Z(1), Dymecki S(2),
Consalez GG(3), Coppola E(1), Brunet JF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de l'École Normale Supérieure, Inserm U1024, and CNRS UMR
8197, 75005 Paris, France. (2)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Milan, Italy. (4)Institut de Biologie de l'École Normale Supérieure,
Inserm U1024, and CNRS UMR 8197, 75005 Paris, France. jfbrunet@biologie.ens.fr.

Comment in
    Science. 2014 Jul 4;345(6192):32-3.
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2014 Aug;15(8):494.

Neural crest cells migrate extensively and give rise to most of the peripheral
nervous system, including sympathetic, parasympathetic, enteric, and dorsal root 
ganglia. We studied how parasympathetic ganglia form close to visceral organs and
what their precursors are. We find that many cranial nerve-associated crest cells
coexpress the pan-autonomic determinant Paired-like homeodomain 2b (Phox2b)
together with markers of Schwann cell precursors. Some give rise to Schwann cells
after down-regulation of PHOX2b. Others form parasympathetic ganglia after being 
guided to the site of ganglion formation by the nerves that carry preganglionic
fibers, a parsimonious way of wiring the pathway. Thus, cranial Schwann cell
precursors are the source of parasympathetic neurons during normal development.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 24925912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Gastroenterology. 2014 Sep;147(3):637-45. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.05.009. Epub
2014 May 21.

CpG island methylator phenotype is associated with response to adjuvant
irinotecan-based therapy for stage III colon cancer.

Shiovitz S(1), Bertagnolli MM(2), Renfro LA(3), Nam E(4), Foster NR(3),
Dzieciatkowski S(5), Luo Y(6), Lao VV(7), Monnat RJ Jr(8), Emond MJ(9), Maizels
N(10), Niedzwiecki D(11), Goldberg RM(12), Saltz LB(13), Venook A(14), Warren
RS(14), Grady WM(15); Alliance for Clinical Trials in Oncology.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington;
Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington. (2)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Alliance Statistics and Data Center, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota. (4)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Ewha Womans University 
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (5)Clinical Research Division, Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington. (6)Clinical Research
Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington; Department
of Colorectal Surgery, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, PR 
China. (7)Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington; Department of Surgery, University of Washington Medical
School, Seattle, Washington. (8)Departments of Pathology and Genome Science,
University of Washington Medical School, Seattle, Washington. (9)Department of
Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. (10)Departments of 
Immunology and Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington.
(11)Alliance Statistics and Data Center, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
North Carolina. (12)The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH. (13)Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York. (14)University of
California-San Francisco and the Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center,
San Francisco, CA. (15)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle,
Washington; Clinical Research Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington. Electronic address: wgrady@fhcrc.org.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), defined by a high 
frequency of aberrantly methylated genes, is a characteristic of a subclass of
colon tumors with distinct clinical and molecular features. Cohort studies have
produced conflicting results on responses of CIMP-positive tumors to
chemotherapy. We assessed the association between tumor CIMP status and survival 
of patients receiving adjuvant fluorouracil and leucovorin alone or with
irinotecan (IFL).
METHODS: We analyzed data from patients with stage III colon adenocarcinoma
randomly assigned to groups given fluorouracil and leucovorin or IFL after
surgery, from April 1999 through April 2001. The primary end point of the trial
was overall survival and the secondary end point was disease-free survival. DNA
isolated from available tumor samples (n = 615) was used to determine CIMP status
based on methylation patterns at the CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1
loci. The effects of CIMP on survival were modeled using Kaplan-Meier and Cox
proportional hazards; interactions with treatment and BRAF, KRAS, and mismatch
repair (MMR) status were also investigated.
RESULTS: Of the tumor samples characterized for CIMP status, 145 were CIMP
positive (23%). Patients with CIMP-positive tumors had shorter overall survival
times than patients with CIMP-negative tumors (hazard ratio = 1.36; 95%
confidence interval: 1.01-1.84). Treatment with IFL showed a trend toward
increased overall survival for patients with CIMP-positive tumors, compared with 
treatment with fluorouracil and leucovorin (hazard ratio = 0.62; 95% CI:
0.37-1.05; P = .07), but not for patients with CIMP-negative tumors (hazard
ratio = 1.38; 95% CI: 1.00-1.89; P = .049). In a 3-way interaction analysis,
patients with CIMP-positive, MMR-intact tumors benefited most from the addition
of irinotecan to fluorouracil and leucovorin therapy (for the interaction, P =
.01). CIMP was more strongly associated with response to IFL than MMR status.
Results for disease-free survival times were comparable among all analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with stage III, CIMP-positive, MMR-intact colon tumors have
longer survival times when irinotecan is added to combination therapy with
fluorouracil and leucovorin.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4143495
PMID: 24859205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. PLoS One. 2014 May 15;9(5):e94408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094408. eCollection
2014.

Tcf3 represses Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and maintains neural stem cell population 
during neocortical development.

Kuwahara A(1), Sakai H(1), Xu Y(1), Itoh Y(1), Hirabayashi Y(1), Gotoh Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

During mouse neocortical development, the Wnt-ß-catenin signaling pathway plays
essential roles in various phenomena including neuronal differentiation and
proliferation of neural precursor cells (NPCs). Production of the appropriate
number of neurons without depletion of the NPC population requires precise
regulation of the balance between differentiation and maintenance of NPCs.
However, the mechanism that suppresses Wnt signaling to prevent premature
neuronal differentiation of NPCs is poorly understood. We now show that the HMG
box transcription factor Tcf3 (also known as Tcf7l1) contributes to this
mechanism. Tcf3 is highly expressed in undifferentiated NPCs in the mouse
neocortex, and its expression is reduced in intermediate neuronal progenitors
(INPs) committed to the neuronal fate. We found Tcf3 to be a repressor of Wnt
signaling in neocortical NPCs in a reporter gene assay. Tcf3 bound to the
promoter of the proneural bHLH gene Neurogenin1 (Neurog1) and repressed its
expression. Consistent with this, Tcf3 repressed neuronal differentiation and
increased the self-renewal activity of NPCs. We also found that Wnt signal
stimulation reduces the level of Tcf3, and increases those of Tcf1 (also known as
Tcf7) and Lef1, positive mediators of Wnt signaling, in NPCs. Together, these
results suggest that Tcf3 antagonizes Wnt signaling in NPCs, thereby maintaining 
their undifferentiated state in the neocortex and that Wnt signaling promotes the
transition from Tcf3-mediated repression to Tcf1/Lef1-mediated enhancement of Wnt
signaling, constituting a positive feedback loop that facilitates neuronal
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4022625
PMID: 24832538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Biotechnol J. 2014 Jul;9(7):934-43. doi: 10.1002/biot.201300555. Epub 2014 May
15.

Biologically synthesized silver nanoparticles induce neuronal differentiation of 
SH-SY5Y cells via modulation of reactive oxygen species, phosphatases, and kinase
signaling pathways.

Dayem AA(1), Kim B, Gurunathan S, Choi HY, Yang G, Saha SK, Han D, Han J, Kim K, 
Kim JH, Cho SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biotechnology, Animal Resources Research Center, and
Incurable Disease Animal model and Stem cell Institute (IDASI), Konkuk
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Nano-scale materials are noted for unique properties, distinct from those of
their bulk material equivalents. In this study, we prepared spherical silver
nanoparticles (AgNPs) with an average size of about 30 nm and tested their
potency to induce neuronal differentiation of SH-SY5Y cells. Human neuroblastoma 
SH-SY5Y cells are considered an ideal in vitro model for studying neurogenesis,
as they can be maintained in an undifferentiated state or be induced to
differentiate into neuron-like phenotypes in vitro by several
differentiation-inducing agents. Treatment of SH-SY5Y cells by biologically
synthesized AgNPs led to cell morphological changes and significant increase in
neurite length and enhanced the expression of neuronal differentiation markers
such as Map-2, ß-tubulin III, synaptophysin, neurogenin-1, Gap-43, and Drd-2.
Furthermore, we observed an increase in generation of intracellular reactive
oxygen species (ROS), activation of several kinases such as ERK and AKT, and
downregulation of expression of dual-specificity phosphatases (DUSPs) in
AgNPs-exposed SH-SY5Y cells. Our results suggest that AgNPs modulate the
intracellular signaling pathways, leading to neuronal differentiation, and could 
be applied as promising nanomaterials for stem cell research and therapy.

Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24827677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Development. 2014 Apr;141(8):1726-36. doi: 10.1242/dev.099002.

Msx1 and Msx2 act as essential activators of Atoh1 expression in the murine
spinal cord.

Duval N(1), Daubas P, Bourcier de Carbon C, St Cloment C, Tinevez JY, Lopes M,
Ribes V, Robert B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Morphogenesis Molecular Genetics, CNRS URA 2578, 75015
Paris, France.

Dorsal spinal neurogenesis is orchestrated by the combined action of signals
secreted from the roof plate organizer and a downstream transcriptional cascade. 
Within this cascade, Msx1 and Msx2, two homeodomain transcription factors (TFs), 
are induced earlier than bHLH neuralizing TFs. Whereas bHLH TFs have been shown
to specify neuronal cell fate, the function of Msx genes remains poorly defined. 
We describe dramatic alterations of neuronal patterning in Msx1/Msx2
double-mutant mouse embryos. The most dorsal spinal progenitor pool fails to
express the bHLH neuralizing TF Atoh1, which results in a lack of Lhx2-positive
and Barhl2-positive dI1 interneurons. Neurog1 and Ascl1 expression territories
are dorsalized, leading to ectopic dorsal differentiation of dI2 and dI3
interneurons. In proportion, the amount of Neurog1-expressing progenitors appears
unaffected, whereas the number of Ascl1-positive cells is increased. These
defects occur while BMP signaling is still active in the Msx1/Msx2 mutant
embryos. Cell lineage analysis and co-immunolabeling demonstrate that
Atoh1-positive cells derive from progenitors expressing both Msx1 and Msx2. In
vitro, Msx1 and Msx2 proteins activate Atoh1 transcription by specifically
interacting with several homeodomain binding sites in the Atoh1 3' enhancer. In
vivo, Msx1 and Msx2 are required for Atoh1 3' enhancer activity and ChIP
experiments confirm Msx1 binding to this regulatory sequence. These data support 
a novel function of Msx1 and Msx2 as transcriptional activators. Our study
provides new insights into the transcriptional control of spinal cord patterning 
by BMP signaling, with Msx1 and Msx2 acting upstream of Atoh1.

PMID: 24715462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. BMC Cancer. 2014 Apr 8;14:245. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-245.

Circulating cell-free methylated DNA and lactate dehydrogenase release in
colorectal cancer.

Philipp AB, Nagel D, Stieber P, Lamerz R, Thalhammer I, Herbst A, Kolligs FT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Marchioninistr, 15, 81377 Munich, Germany. Frank.Kolligs@med.uni-muenchen.de.

BACKGROUND: Hypermethylation of DNA is an epigenetic alteration commonly found in
colorectal cancer (CRC) and can also be detected in blood samples of cancer
patients. Methylation of the genes helicase-like transcription factor (HLTF) and 
hyperplastic polyposis 1 (HPP1) have been proposed as prognostic, and neurogenin 
1 (NEUROG1) as diagnostic biomarker. However the underlying mechanisms leading to
the release of these genes are unclear. This study aimed at examining the
possible correlation of the presence of methylated genes NEUROG1, HLTF and HPP1
in serum with tissue breakdown as a possible mechanism using serum lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) as a surrogate marker. Additionally the prognostic impact of 
these markers was examined.
METHODS: Pretherapeutic serum samples from 259 patients from all cancer stages
were analyzed. Presence of hypermethylation of the genes HLTF, HPP1, and NEUROG1 
was examined using methylation-specific quantitative PCR (MethyLight). LDH was
determined using an UV kinetic test.
RESULTS: Hypermethylation of HLTF and HPP1 was detected significantly more often 
in patients with elevated LDH levels (32% vs. 12% [p = 0.0005], and 68% vs. 11%
[p < 0.0001], respectively). Also, higher LDH values correlated with a higher
percentage of a fully methylated reference in a linear fashion (Spearman
correlation coefficient 0.18 for HLTF [p = 0.004]; 0.49 [p < .0001] for HPP1). No
correlation between methylation of NEUROG1 and LDH was found in this study.
Concerning the clinical characteristics, high levels of LDH as well as
methylation of HLTF and HPP1 were significantly associated with larger and more
advanced stages of CRC. Accordingly, these three markers were correlated with
significantly shorter survival in the overall population. Moreover, all three
identified patients with a worse prognosis in the subgroup of stage IV patients.
CONCLUSIONS: We were able to provide evidence that methylation of HLTF and
especially HPP1 detected in serum is strongly correlated with cell death in CRC
using LDH as surrogate marker. Additionally, we found that prognostic information
is given by both HLTF and HPP1 as well as LDH. In sum, determining the
methylation of HLTF and HPP1 in serum might be useful in order to identify
patients with more aggressive tumors.

PMCID: PMC4021086
PMID: 24708595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2014 Aug;52(8):1235-45. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2013-0780.

Frequent methylation of HOXA9 gene in tumor tissues and plasma samples from human
hepatocellular carcinomas.

Kuo CC, Lin CY, Shih YL, Hsieh CB, Lin PY, Guan SB, Hsieh MS, Lai HC, Chen CJ,
Lin YW.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is associated with the development of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), suggesting that gene methylation could be a
potential biomarker for detection of HCC. The aim of this study is to identify
potential biomarkers in HCC.
METHODS: We used the Infinium methylation array and a DNA-pooling strategy to
analyze the genome-wide methylation profile in HCC. Quantitative
methylation-specific PCR (Q-MSP) was used to validate homeobox A9 (HOXA9)
methylation in 29 normal controls, 100 HCC samples and adjacent non-tumor tissues
and in 74 plasma samples, including 40 patients with HCC.
RESULTS: Ten genes (HOXA9, NEUROG1, TNFRSF10C, IRAK3, GFPT2, ZNF177, DPYSL4,
ELOVL4, FSD1, and CACNA1G) showed differences in methylation between controls and
HCCs. Of these, HOXA9 was significantly hypermethylated in HCCs (76.7%; 23/30)
compared with controls (3.4%; 1/29). In addition, combination analysis of two-
and three-gene sets for HCC detection showed greater sensitivity (90%-96.7%) and 
comparable specificity (93.1%-96.6%) to each individual gene (33.3%-76.7% and
55.2%-100.0%). HOXA9 methylation was further validated by Q-MSP in two
independent set of clinical samples including 100 HCC and paired non-tumor
tissues. Further, HOXA9 methylation could be detected in plasma from HCC patients
(n=40) but not in normal plasma (n=34) (p<0.0005). Combined testing (either
parameter positive) for a-fetoprotein (AFP, a plasma protein biomarker) and HOXA9
methylation showed greater sensitivity (94.6%) for detection of HCC than AFP
alone (75.7%).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that methylation of HOXA9 could be a helpful
biomarker to assist in HCC detection.

PMID: 24681432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Br J Dermatol. 2014 Jun;170(6):1266-75. doi: 10.1111/bjd.12717. Epub 2014 Jun 6.

A specific DNA methylation profile correlates with a high risk of disease
progression in stage I classical (Alibert-Bazin type) mycosis fungoides.

Ferrara G(1), Pancione M, Votino C, Quaglino P, Tomasini C, Santucci M,
Pimpinelli N, Cusano F, Sabatino L, Colantuoni V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Pathology Unit, "Gaetano Rummo" General Hospital,
Benevento, Italy.

Comment in
    Br J Dermatol. 2014 Jun;170(6):1216.

BACKGROUND: Mycosis fungoides (MF) is the most common type of cutaneous T-cell
lymphoma; in its classical presentation it evolves slowly, but it can have an
aggressive course in a subset of patients.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the impact of epigenetic mechanisms on the progression
of early stage MF.
METHODS: We analysed DNA methylation at 12 different loci and long interspersed
nucleotide elements-1 (LINE-1), as a surrogate marker of global methylation, on
tissue samples from 41 patients with stage I MF followed up for at least 12 years
or until disease progression. The methylation profiles were also analysed in two 
T-cell lymphoma cell lines and correlated with gene expression.
RESULTS: The selected loci were methylated in a tumour-specific manner;
concomitant hypermethylation of at least four loci was more frequent in cases
progressing within 1-3 and 3-6 years than in late-progressive or non-progressive 
cases. LINE-1 methylation was significantly lower in rapidly progressive MF at
3 years (61%, P < 0·001) than in those at 12 years (67%). PPARG, SOCS1 and
NEUROG1 methylation showed remarkable differences among the prognostic groups,
but only PPARG was a significant predictor of disease progression within 6 years,
after adjustment for patients' age or gender. Strikingly, a methylation profile
similar to progressive cases was found in highly proliferative Sézary-derived
HUT78 cells but not in MF-derived HUT102 cells. Exposure to a DNA demethylating
agent restored sensitivity to apoptosis and cell cycle arrest.
CONCLUSIONS: Epigenetic silencing of specific biomarkers can predict the risk of 
disease progression in early-stage MF, providing insights into its pathogenesis, 
prognosis and therapy.

© 2013 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 24641245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 21;9(1):e86657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0086657. eCollection
2014.

Comparison of CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) frequency in colon cancer
using different probe- and gene-specific scoring alternatives on recommended
multi-gene panels.

Berg M(1), Hagland HR(2), Søreide K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Stavanger University Hospital,
Stavanger, Norway ; Centre of Organelle Research, University of Stavanger,
Stavanger, Norway. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Stavanger
University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway. (3)Department of Gastrointestinal
Surgery, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway ; Department of
Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: In colorectal cancer a distinct subgroup of tumours demonstrate the
CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). However, a consensus of how to score CIMP
is not reached, and variation in definition may influence the reported CIMP
prevalence in tumours. Thus, we sought to compare currently suggested definitions
and cut-offs for methylation markers and how they influence CIMP classification
in colon cancer.
METHODS: Methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MS-MLPA), with subsequent fragment analysis, was used to investigate methylation
of tumour samples. In total, 31 CpG sites, located in 8 different genes (RUNX3,
MLH1, NEUROG1, CDKN2A, IGF2, CRABP1, SOCS1 and CACNA1G) were investigated in 64
distinct colon cancers and 2 colon cancer cell lines. The Ogino gene panel
includes all 8 genes, in addition to the Weisenberger panel of which only 5 of
the 8 genes included were investigated. In total, 18 alternative combinations of 
scoring of CIMP positivity on probe-, gene-, and panel-level were analysed and
compared.
RESULTS: For 47 samples (71%), the CIMP status was constant and independent of
criteria used for scoring; 34 samples were constantly scored as CIMP negative,
and 13 (20%) consistently scored as CIMP positive. Only four of 31 probes (13%)
investigated showed no difference in the numbers of positive samples using the
different cut-offs. Within the panels a trend was observed that increasing the
gene-level stringency resulted in a larger difference in CIMP positive samples
than increasing the probe-level stringency. A significant difference between
positive samples using 'the most stringent' as compared to 'the least stringent' 
criteria (20% vs 46%, respectively; p<0.005) was demonstrated.
CONCLUSIONS: A statistical significant variation in the frequency of CIMP
depending on the cut-offs and genes included in a panel was found, with twice as 
many positives samples by least compared to most stringent definition used.

PMCID: PMC3897740
PMID: 24466191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Neurosci. 2014 Jan 8;34(2):539-53. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0614-13.2014.

Neurog1 and Neurog2 control two waves of neuronal differentiation in the piriform
cortex.

Dixit R(1), Wilkinson G, Cancino GI, Shaker T, Adnani L, Li S, Dennis D, Kurrasch
D, Chan JA, Olson EC, Kaplan DR, Zimmer C, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Medical Genetics,
Hotchkiss Brain Institute and Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Southern Alberta Cancer Research
Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta T2N 4N1, Canada, Programs in Cell
Biology, and Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto M5G 1L7, Canada, Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, SUNY Upstate 
Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210, Institute of Medical Science and
Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto M5S 1A8, Canada,
and Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research, 
Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

The three-layered piriform cortex, an integral part of the olfactory system,
processes odor information relayed by olfactory bulb mitral cells. Specifically, 
mitral cell axons form the lateral olfactory tract (LOT) by targeting lateral
olfactory tract (lot) guidepost cells in the piriform cortex. While lot cells and
other piriform cortical neurons share a pallial origin, the factors that specify 
their precise phenotypes are poorly understood. Here we show that in mouse, the
proneural genes Neurog1 and Neurog2 are coexpressed in the ventral pallium, a
progenitor pool that first gives rise to Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells, which populate
layer I of all cortical domains, and later to layer II/III neurons of the
piriform cortex. Using loss-of-function and gain-of-function approaches, we find 
that Neurog1 has a unique early role in reducing CR cell neurogenesis by
tempering Neurog2's proneural activity. In addition, Neurog1 and Neurog2 have
redundant functions in the ventral pallium, acting in two phases to first specify
a CR cell fate and later to specify layer II/III piriform cortex neuronal
identities. In the early phase, Neurog1 and Neurog2 are also required for lot
cell differentiation, which we reveal are a subset of CR neurons, the loss of
which prevents mitral cell axon innervation and LOT formation. Consequently,
mutation of Trp73, a CR-specific cortical gene, results in lot cell and LOT axon 
displacement. Neurog1 and Neurog2 thus have unique and redundant functions in the
piriform cortex, controlling the timing of differentiation of early-born CR/lot
cells and specifying the identities of later-born layer II/III neurons.

PMID: 24403153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Dec 26;7:141. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-141.

Systems biology approach to stage-wise characterization of epigenetic genes in
lung adenocarcinoma.

Pradhan MP, Desai A, Palakal MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis IN, USA. mpalakal@iupui.edu.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetics refers to the reversible functional modifications of the 
genome that do not correlate to changes in the DNA sequence. The aim of this
study is to understand DNA methylation patterns across different stages of lung
adenocarcinoma (LUAD).
RESULTS: Our study identified 72, 93 and 170 significant DNA methylated genes in 
Stages I, II and III respectively. A set of common 34 significant DNA methylated 
genes located in the promoter section of the true CpG islands were found across
stages, and these were: HOX genes, FOXG1, GRIK3, HAND2, PRKCB, etc. Of the total 
significant DNA methylated genes, 65 correlated with transcription function. The 
epigenetic analysis identified the following novel genes across all stages:
PTGDR, TLX3, and POU4F2. The stage-wise analysis observed the appearance of
NEUROG1 gene in Stage I and its re-appearance in Stage III. The analysis showed
similar epigenetic pattern across Stage I and Stage III. Pathway analysis
revealed important signaling and metabolic pathways of LUAD to correlate with
epigenetics. Epigenetic subnetwork analysis identified a set of seven conserved
genes across all stages: UBC, KRAS, PIK3CA, PIK3R3, RAF1, BRAF, and RAP1A. A
detailed literature analysis elucidated epigenetic genes like FOXG1, HLA-G, and
NKX6-2 to be known as prognostic targets.
CONCLUSION: Integrating epigenetic information for genes with expression data can
be useful for comprehending in-depth disease mechanism and for the ultimate goal 
of better target identification.

PMCID: PMC3882327
PMID: 24369052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Nat Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;15(12):1495-506. doi: 10.1038/ncb2879. Epub 2013 Nov 24.

Senescent cells harbour features of the cancer epigenome.

Cruickshanks HA(1), McBryan T, Nelson DM, Vanderkraats ND, Shah PP, van Tuyn J,
Singh Rai T, Brock C, Donahue G, Dunican DS, Drotar ME, Meehan RR, Edwards JR,
Berger SL, Adams PD.

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Cancer Sciences, University of Glasgow and Beatson Institute
for Cancer Research, Glasgow, G61 1BD, UK [2] [3].

Altered DNA methylation and associated destabilization of genome integrity and
function is a hallmark of cancer. Replicative senescence is a tumour suppressor
process that imposes a limit on the proliferative potential of normal cells that 
all cancer cells must bypass. Here we show by whole-genome single-nucleotide
bisulfite sequencing that replicative senescent human cells exhibit widespread
DNA hypomethylation and focal hypermethylation. Hypomethylation occurs
preferentially at gene-poor, late-replicating, lamin-associated domains and is
linked to mislocalization of the maintenance DNA methyltransferase (DNMT1) in
cells approaching senescence. Low-level gains of methylation are enriched in CpG 
islands, including at genes whose methylation and silencing is thought to promote
cancer. Gains and losses of methylation in replicative senescence are thus
qualitatively similar to those in cancer, and this 'reprogrammed' methylation
landscape is largely retained when cells bypass senescence. Consequently, the DNA
methylome of senescent cells might promote malignancy, if these cells escape the 
proliferative barrier.

PMCID: PMC4106249
PMID: 24270890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 2014 Jan;141(1):187-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.092536. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Asymmetric activation of Dll4-Notch signaling by Foxn4 and proneural factors
activates BMP/TGFß signaling to specify V2b interneurons in the spinal cord.

Misra K(1), Luo H, Li S, Matise M, Xiang M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine and Department of Pediatrics,
Rutgers University-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, 679 Hoes Lane West,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

During development of the ventral spinal cord, the V2 interneurons emerge from p2
progenitors and diversify into two major subtypes, V2a and V2b, that play key
roles in locomotor coordination. Dll4-mediated Notch activation in a subset of p2
precursors constitutes the crucial first step towards generating neuronal
diversity in this domain. The mechanism behind the asymmetric Notch activation
and downstream signaling events are, however, unknown at present. We show here
that the Ascl1 and Neurog basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proneural factors are
expressed in a mosaic pattern in p2 progenitors and that Foxn4 is required for
setting and maintaining this expression mosaic. By binding directly to a
conserved Dll4 enhancer, Foxn4 and Ascl1 activate Dll4 expression, whereas Neurog
proteins prevent this effect, thereby resulting in asymmetric activation of Dll4 
expression in V2 precursors expressing different combinations of proneural and
Foxn4 transcription factors. Lineage tracing using the Cre-LoxP system reveals
selective expression of Dll4 in V2a precursors, whereas Dll4 expression is
initially excluded from V2b precursors. We provide evidence that BMP/TGFß
signaling is activated in V2b precursors and that Dll4-mediated Notch signaling
is responsible for this activation. Using a gain-of-function approach and by
inhibiting BMP/TGFß signal transduction with pathway antagonists and RNAi
knockdown, we further demonstrate that BMP/TGFß signaling is both necessary and
sufficient for V2b fate specification. Our data together thus suggest that the
mosaic expression of Foxn4 and proneural factors may serve as the trigger to
initiate asymmetric Dll4-Notch and subsequent BMP/TGFß signaling events required 
for neuronal diversity in the V2 domain.

PMCID: PMC3865758
PMID: 24257627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Feb 1;23(3):602-17. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt448. Epub 2013 Sep
18.

Differential, dominant activation and inhibition of Notch signalling and APP
cleavage by truncations of PSEN1 in human disease.

Newman M(1), Wilson L, Verdile G, Lim A, Khan I, Moussavi Nik SH, Pursglove S,
Chapman G, Martins RN, Lardelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Genetics, School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, University
of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.

PRESENILIN1 (PSEN1) is the major locus for mutations causing familial Alzheimer's
disease (FAD) and is also mutated in Pick disease of brain, familial acne inversa
and dilated cardiomyopathy. It is a critical facilitator of Notch signalling and 
many other signalling pathways and protein cleavage events including production
of the Amyloidß (Aß) peptide from the AMYLOID BETA A4 PRECURSOR PROTEIN (APP). We
previously reported that interference with splicing of transcripts of the
zebrafish orthologue of PSEN1 creates dominant negative effects on Notch
signalling. Here, we extend this work to show that various truncations of human
PSEN1 (or zebrafish Psen1) protein have starkly differential effects on Notch
signalling and cleavage of zebrafish Appa (a paralogue of human APP). Different
truncations can suppress or stimulate Notch signalling but not Appa cleavage and 
vice versa. The G183V mutation possibly causing Pick disease causes production of
aberrant transcripts truncating the open reading frame after exon 5 sequence. We 
show that the truncated protein potentially translated from these transcripts
avidly incorporates into very stable Psen1-dependent higher molecular weight
complexes and suppresses cleavage of Appa but not Notch signalling. In contrast, 
the truncated protein potentially produced by the P242LfsX11 acne inversa
mutation has no effect on Appa cleavage but, unexpectedly, enhances Notch
signalling. Our results suggest novel hypotheses for the pathological mechanisms 
underlying these diseases and illustrate the importance of investigating the
function of dominant mutations at physiologically relevant expression levels and 
in the normally heterozygous state in which they cause human disease rather than 
in isolation from healthy alleles.

PMID: 24101600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Neuroscience. 2013 Dec 3;253:256-73. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.08.029.
Epub 2013 Aug 30.

Proneural genes in neocortical development.

Wilkinson G(1), Dennis D, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes arise from CNS progenitor cells at
defined times and locations during development, with transcription factors
serving as key determinants of these different neural cell fates. An emerging
theme is that the transcription factors that specify CNS cell fates function in a
context-dependent manner, regulated by post-translational modifications and
epigenetic alterations that partition the genome (and hence target genes) into
active or silent domains. Here we profile the critical roles of the proneural
genes, which encode basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, in
specifying neural cell identities in the developing neocortex. In particular, we 
focus on the proneural genes Neurogenin 1 (Neurog1), Neurog2 and Achaete
scute-like 1 (Ascl1), which are each expressed in a distinct fashion in the
progenitor cell pools that give rise to all of the neuronal and glial cell types 
of the mature neocortex. Notably, while the basic functions of these proneural
genes have been elucidated, it is becoming increasingly evident that tight
regulatory controls dictate when, where and how they function. Current efforts to
better understand how proneural gene function is regulated will not only improve 
our understanding of neocortical development, but are also critical to the future
development of regenerative therapies for the treatment of neuronal degeneration 
or disease.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23999125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Jul 16;54(7):4766-75. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-11936.

Photoreceptor-like cells in transgenic mouse eye.

Yan RT(1), Li X, Wang SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alabama at Birmingham School of
Medicine, Birmingham, Alabama 35294-0019, USA. rtyan@uab.edu

PURPOSE: Recent success of rescuing vision by photoreceptor replacement in mouse 
models of photoreceptor degeneration intensifies the need to identify approaches 
to generate photoreceptors cells for future replacement therapies. We explored
the possibility of whether in the mouse eye photoreceptor-like cells could arise 
from the RPE experimentally manipulated to express a regulatory gene
participating in transcriptional networks leading to photoreceptor genesis during
retinal development.
METHODS: Transgenic mice were generated with a DNA construct that would express
neurogenin1 from RPE bestrophin-1 promoter or neurogenin3 from RPE65 promoter.
Transgenic mice were examined with histology and immunohistology for the presence
of photoreceptor-like cells and for the presence of cells that might represent
transitional stages in RPE-to-photoreceptor reprogramming. Explant culture of
"sclera+choroid+RPE" eyecup was used to examine whether cells with photoreceptor 
traits could arise from the eyecup derived from transgenic mice.
RESULTS: Transgenic animals showed varied degrees of phenotype manifestation.
Approximately 60% of offspring from ~50% of founders contained photoreceptor-like
cells in the subretinal space. These cells expressed photoreceptor proteins
recoverin, red opsin, and rhodopsin, and displayed morphologic similarities to
photoreceptors. In these eyes, the RPE was maintained. Cells seemingly amid
RPE-to-photoreceptor transformation were observed in young and aged mice,
suggesting old animals were responsive to the reprogramming scheme. De novo
generation of photoreceptor-like cells was detected in "sclera+choroid+RPE"
eyecup explants derived from adult animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results point to a potential way to generate photoreceptor cells
in situ in adult mammalian eyes.

PMCID: PMC3719446
PMID: 23847312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Neurosci Res. 2013 Sep-Oct;77(1-2):42-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2013.06.004. Epub 
2013 Jul 4.

Prenatal exposure to suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid perturbs corticogenesis.

Yuniarti N(1), Juliandi B, MuhChyi C, Noguchi H, Sanosaka T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Gene Regulation Research, Graduate School of Biological
Sciences, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara, Japan; Laboratory of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Pharmacy,
Faculty of Pharmacy, Universitas Gadjah Mada (UGM), Yogyakarta, Indonesia.

Suberoylanilide hydroxamic acid (SAHA) is one of the epidrugs developed for
cancer treatment that works epigenetically by inhibiting histone deacetylases
(HDACs). SAHA has been reported to diffuse across the placenta and found in fetal
plasma in preclinical study, implying that it can influence fetus if taken by
pregnant cancer patients. However, report regarding this aspect and the study of 
in utero HDAC inhibition by SAHA especially on fate specification of neural
stem/progenitor cells within the developing mammalian cortex, is yet unavailable.
Here we show that transient exposure of SAHA to mouse embryos during prominent
neurogenic period resulted in an enhancement of cortical neurogenesis, which is
accompanied by an increased expression of proneuronal transcription factor
Neurog1. Neurogenesis was enhanced due to the increase number of proliferating
Tbr2+ intermediate progenitor cells following SAHA exposure. In this relation, we
observed that SAHA perturbed neonatal cortical lamination because of the
increased production of Cux1+ and Satb2+ upper-layer neurons, and decreased that 
of Ctip2+ deep-layer neurons. Furthermore, an upper-layer neuronal lineage
determinant Satb2 was also up-regulated, whereas those of deep-layer ones Fezf2
and Ctip2 were down-regulated by SAHA treatment. Taken together, our study
suggests that proper regulation of HDACs is important for precise embryonic
corticogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd and the Japan Neuroscience Society. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 23831515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2013 Oct;40(10):1607-17. doi:
10.1007/s00259-013-2457-0. Epub 2013 Jun 11.

In vivo bioluminescence reporter gene imaging for the activation of neuronal
differentiation induced by the neuronal activator neurogenin 1 (Ngn1) in neuronal
precursor cells.

Oh HJ(1), Hwang do W, Youn H, Lee DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, College of Medicine, Seoul National
University, 101 Daehak-ro, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Korea.

PURPOSE: Facilitation of the ability of neuronal lineages derived from
transplanted stem cells to differentiate is essential to improve the low efficacy
of neuronal differentiation in stem cell therapy in vivo. Neurogenin 1 (Ngn1), a 
basic helix-loop-helix factor, has been used as an activator of neuronal
differentiation. In this study, we monitored the in vivo activation of neuronal
differentiation by Ngn1 in neuronal precursor cells using neuron-specific
promoter-based optical reporters.
METHODS: The NeuroD promoter coupled with the firefly luciferase reporter system 
(pNeuroD-Fluc) was used to monitor differentiation in F11 neuronal precursor
cells. In vitro luciferase activity was measured and normalized by protein
content. The in vivo-jetPEI(TM) system was used for in vivo transgene delivery.
The IVIS 100 imaging system was used to monitor in vivo luciferase activity.
RESULTS: The Ngn1-induced neuronal differentiation of F11 cells generated neurite
outgrowth within 2 days of Ngn1 induction. Immunofluorescence staining
demonstrated that early and late neuronal marker expression (ßIII-tubulin,
NeuroD, MAP2, NF-M, and NeuN) was significantly increased at 3 days after
treatment with Ngn1. When Ngn1 and the pNeuroD-Fluc vector were cotransfected
into F11 cells, we observed an approximately 11-fold increase in the luciferase
signal. An in vivo study showed that bioluminescence signals were gradually
increased in Ngn1-treated F11 cells for up to 3 days.
CONCLUSION: In this study, we examined the in vivo tracking of neuronal
differentiation induced by Ngn1 using an optical reporter system. This reporter
system could be used effectively to monitor the activation efficiency of neuronal
differentiation in grafted stem cells treated with Ngn1 for stem cell therapy.

PMID: 23754760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e63529. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063529. Print 2013.

Activation of type 1 cannabinoid receptor (CB1R) promotes neurogenesis in murine 
subventricular zone cell cultures.

Xapelli S(1), Agasse F, Sardà-Arroyo L, Bernardino L, Santos T, Ribeiro FF,
Valero J, Bragança J, Schitine C, de Melo Reis RA, Sebastião AM, Malva JO.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology of Coimbra, University of Coimbra,
Coimbra, Portugal.

The endocannabinoid system has been implicated in the modulation of adult
neurogenesis. Here, we describe the effect of type 1 cannabinoid receptor (CB1R) 
activation on self-renewal, proliferation and neuronal differentiation in mouse
neonatal subventricular zone (SVZ) stem/progenitor cell cultures. Expression of
CB1R was detected in SVZ-derived immature cells (Nestin-positive), neurons and
astrocytes. Stimulation of the CB1R by (R)-(+)-Methanandamide (R-m-AEA) increased
self-renewal of SVZ cells, as assessed by counting the number of secondary
neurospheres and the number of Sox2+/+ cell pairs, an effect blocked by Notch
pathway inhibition. Moreover, R-m-AEA treatment for 48 h, increased proliferation
as assessed by BrdU incorporation assay, an effect mediated by activation of
MAPK-ERK and AKT pathways. Surprisingly, stimulation of CB1R by R-m-AEA also
promoted neuronal differentiation (without affecting glial differentiation), at 7
days, as shown by counting the number of NeuN-positive neurons in the cultures.
Moreover, by monitoring intracellular calcium concentrations ([Ca(2+)]i) in
single cells following KCl and histamine stimuli, a method that allows the
functional evaluation of neuronal differentiation, we observed an increase in
neuronal-like cells. This proneurogenic effect was blocked when SVZ cells were
co-incubated with R-m-AEA and the CB1R antagonist AM 251, for 7 days, thus
indicating that this effect involves CB1R activation. In accordance with an
effect on neuronal differentiation and maturation, R-m-AEA also increased neurite
growth, as evaluated by quantifying and measuring the number of MAP2-positive
processes. Taken together, these results demonstrate that CB1R activation induces
proliferation, self-renewal and neuronal differentiation from mouse neonatal SVZ 
cell cultures.

PMCID: PMC3660454
PMID: 23704915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS Genet. 2013 Apr;9(4):e1003459. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003459. Epub 2013 
Apr 25.

SNF5 is an essential executor of epigenetic regulation during differentiation.

You JS(1), De Carvalho DD, Dai C, Liu M, Pandiyan K, Zhou XJ, Liang G, Jones PA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Urology and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angles, California, United States of America.

Nucleosome occupancy controls the accessibility of the transcription machinery to
DNA regulatory regions and serves an instructive role for gene expression.
Chromatin remodelers, such as the BAF complexes, are responsible for establishing
nucleosome occupancy patterns, which are key to epigenetic regulation along with 
DNA methylation and histone modifications. Some reports have assessed the roles
of the BAF complex subunits and stemness in murine embryonic stem cells. However,
the details of the relationships between remodelers and transcription factors in 
altering chromatin configuration, which ultimately affects gene expression during
cell differentiation, remain unclear. Here for the first time we demonstrate that
SNF5, a core subunit of the BAF complex, negatively regulates OCT4 levels in
pluripotent cells and is essential for cell survival during differentiation. SNF5
is responsible for generating nucleosome-depleted regions (NDRs) at the
regulatory sites of OCT4 repressed target genes such as PAX6 and NEUROG1, which
are crucial for cell fate determination. Concurrently, SNF5 closes the NDRs at
the regulatory regions of OCT4-activated target genes such as OCT4 itself and
NANOG. Furthermore, using loss- and gain-of-function experiments followed by
extensive genome-wide analyses including gene expression microarrays and
ChIP-sequencing, we highlight that SNF5 plays dual roles during differentiation
by antagonizing the expression of genes that were either activated or repressed
by OCT4, respectively. Together, we demonstrate that SNF5 executes the switch
between pluripotency and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3636213
PMID: 23637628  [PubMed - in process]


47. J Biol Chem. 2013 May 31;288(22):16155-66. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.438192. Epub
2013 Apr 17.

Ligand-bound thyroid hormone receptor contributes to reprogramming of pancreatic 
acinar cells into insulin-producing cells.

Furuya F(1), Shimura H, Asami K, Ichijo S, Takahashi K, Kaneshige M, Oikawa Y,
Aida K, Endo T, Kobayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of
Medicine and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Chuo-shi, Yamanashi 409-3898, 
Japan.

One goal of diabetic regenerative medicine is to instructively convert mature
pancreatic exocrine cells into insulin-producing cells. We recently reported that
ligand-bound thyroid hormone receptor a (TRa) plays a critical role in expansion 
of the ß-cell mass during postnatal development. Here, we used an adenovirus
vector that expresses TRa driven by the amylase 2 promoter (AdAmy2TRa) to induce 
the reprogramming of pancreatic acinar cells into insulin-producing cells.
Treatment with l-3,5,3-triiodothyronine increases the association of TRa with the
p85a subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K), leading to the
phosphorylation and activation of Akt and the expression of Pdx1, Ngn3, and MafA 
in purified acinar cells. Analyses performed with the lectin-associated cell
lineage tracing system and the Cre/loxP-based direct cell lineage tracing system 
indicate that newly synthesized insulin-producing cells originate from
elastase-expressing pancreatic acinar cells. Insulin-containing secretory
granules were identified in these cells by electron microscopy. The inhibition of
p85a expression by siRNA or the inhibition of PI3K by LY294002 prevents the
expression of Pdx1, Ngn3, and MafA and the reprogramming to insulin-producing
cells. In immunodeficient mice with streptozotocin-induced hyperglycemia,
treatment with AdAmy2TRa leads to the reprogramming of pancreatic acinar cells to
insulin-producing cells in vivo. Our findings suggest that ligand-bound TRa plays
a critical role in ß-cell regeneration during postnatal development via
activation of PI3K signaling.

PMCID: PMC3668771
PMID: 23595988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cancer Res. 2013 May 1;73(9):2863-72. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3462. Epub
2013 Mar 28.

Genomic aberrations occurring in subsets of serrated colorectal lesions but not
conventional adenomas.

Burnett-Hartman AN(1), Newcomb PA, Potter JD, Passarelli MN, Phipps AI, Wurscher 
MA, Grady WM, Zhu LC, Upton MP, Makar KW.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle 98109, USA. aburnett@fhcrc.org

A subset of aggressive colorectal cancers exhibit BRAF mutation, MLH1
methylation, and a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), but precursors are
poorly established. In this study, we determined the status of these markers in
colorectal polyps and evaluated associated risk factors. The study included 771
polyp cases and 1,027 controls who were ages 24 to 80 years, part of a group
health program, received a colonoscopy from 1998 to 2007, and completed a
structured questionnaire assessing risk factors. Following standard pathology
review, polyps were assayed for BRAF mutation (V600E) and tested for MLH1 and
CIMP methylation, the latter including the genes, CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, RUNX3, 
and SOCS1. Polytomous logistic regression was used to estimate ORs and 95%
confidence intervals for the association between molecularly defined subsets of
polyps and potential risk factors. There were 580 conventional adenomas and 419
serrated lesions successfully assayed. For adenomas, the prevalence of each
marker was =1%. In contrast, 55% of serrated lesions harbored mutant BRAF, 26%
were CIMP-high, and 5% had methylated MLH1. In these lesions, the highest
prevalence of markers was in sessile-serrated polyps (SSP) of =10 mm that were in
the right-side/cecal regions of the colon. Risk factors for CIMP-high-serrated
lesions included Caucasian race, current smoking status, and a history of polyps,
whereas for serrated lesions with mutant BRAF, the significant risk factors were 
male sex, current smoking status, obesity, and a history of polyps. Our results
suggest that SSPs and other large, right-sided serrated lesions have a unique
molecular profile that is similar to CIMP-high, BRAF-mutated colorectal cancers.

PMCID: PMC3815695
PMID: 23539450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58731. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058731. Epub 2013 Mar 7.

Somatic mutations, allele loss, and DNA methylation of the Cub and Sushi Multiple
Domains 1 (CSMD1) gene reveals association with early age of diagnosis in
colorectal cancer patients.

Shull AY(1), Clendenning ML, Ghoshal-Gupta S, Farrell CL, Vangapandu HV, Dudas L,
Wilkerson BJ, Buckhaults PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Georgia Health Sciences University Cancer Center, Georgia Health Sciences
University, Augusta, Georgia, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The Cub and Sushi Multiple Domains 1 (CSMD1) gene, located on the
short arm of chromosome 8, codes for a type I transmembrane protein whose
function is currently unknown. CSMD1 expression is frequently lost in many
epithelial cancers. Our goal was to characterize the relationships between CSMD1 
somatic mutations, allele imbalance, DNA methylation, and the clinical
characteristics in colorectal cancer patients.
METHODS: We sequenced the CSMD1 coding regions in 54 colorectal tumors using the 
454FLX pyrosequencing platform to interrogate 72 amplicons covering the entire
coding sequence. We used heterozygous SNP allele ratios at multiple CSMD1 loci to
determine allelic balance and infer loss of heterozygosity. Finally, we performed
methylation-specific PCR on 76 colorectal tumors to determine DNA methylation
status for CSMD1 and known methylation targets ALX4, RUNX3, NEUROG1, and CDKN2A.
RESULTS: Using 454FLX sequencing and confirming with Sanger sequencing, 16 CSMD1 
somatic mutations were identified in 6 of the 54 colorectal tumors (11%). The
nonsynonymous to synonymous mutation ratio of the 16 somatic mutations was 15:1, 
a ratio significantly higher than the expected 2:1 ratio (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.014). This ratio 
indicates a presence of positive selection for mutations in the CSMD1 protein
sequence. CSMD1 allelic imbalance was present in 19 of 37 informative cases
(56%). Patients with allelic imbalance and CSMD1 mutations were significantly
younger (average age, 41 years) than those without somatic mutations (average
age, 68 years). The majority of tumors were methylated at one or more CpG loci
within the CSMD1 coding sequence, and CSMD1 methylation significantly correlated 
with two known methylation targets ALX4 and RUNX3. C:G>T:A substitutions were
significantly overrepresented (47%), suggesting extensive cytosine methylation
predisposing to somatic mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Deep amplicon sequencing and methylation-specific PCR reveal that
CSMD1 alterations can correlate with earlier clinical presentation in colorectal 
tumors, thus further implicating CSMD1 as a tumor suppressor gene.

PMCID: PMC3591376
PMID: 23505554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):424-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.02.006.
Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Epigenetic regulation of neural stem cell fate during corticogenesis.

MuhChyi C(1), Juliandi B, Matsuda T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Takayama 8916-5, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, 
Japan.

The cerebral cortex comprises over three quarters of the brain, and serves as
structural basis for the sophisticated perceptual and cognitive functions. It
develops from common multipotent neural stem cells (NSCs) that line the neural
tube. Development of the NSCs encompasses sequential phases of progenitor
expansion, neurogenesis, and gliogenesis along with the progression of
developmental stages. Interestingly, NSCs steadfastly march through all of these 
phases and give rise to specific neural cell types in a temporally defined and
highly predictable manner. Herein, we delineate the intrinsic and extrinsic
factors that dictate the progression and tempo of NSC differentiation during
cerebral cortex development, and how epigenetic modifications contribute to the
dynamic properties of NSCs.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Neurosci. 2013 Feb 27;33(9):3879-90. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4030-12.2013.

Progression of neurogenesis in the inner ear requires inhibition of Sox2
transcription by neurogenin1 and neurod1.

Evsen L(1), Sugahara S, Uchikawa M, Kondoh H, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, Rockville,
Maryland 20850, USA.

Sox2 is required for proper neuronal formation in the CNS, but the molecular
mechanisms involved are not well characterized. Here, we addressed the role of
Sox2 in neurogenesis of the developing chicken inner ear. Overexpressing Sox2
from a constitutive (ß-actin) promoter induces the expression of the proneural
gene, Neurogenin1 (Ngn1); however, the expression of a downstream target of Ngn1,
Neurod1, is unchanged. As a result, there is a reduction of neural precursors to 
delaminate and populate the developing cochleo-vestibular ganglion. In contrast, 
overexpression of either Ngn1 or Neurod1 is sufficient to promote the neural fate
in this system. These results suggest that high levels of Sox2 inhibit
progression of neurogenesis in the developing inner ear. Furthermore, we provide 
evidence that Ngn1 and Neurod1 inhibit Sox2 transcription through a
phylogenetically conserved Sox2 enhancer to mediate neurogenesis. We propose that
Sox2 confers neural competency by promoting Ngn1 expression, and that negative
feedback inhibition of Sox2 by Ngn1 is an essential step in the progression from 
neural precursor to nascent neuron.

PMCID: PMC3865497
PMID: 23447599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Behav Brain Funct. 2013 Feb 18;9:7. doi: 10.1186/1744-9081-9-7.

A boy with homozygous microdeletion of NEUROG1 presents with a congenital cranial
dysinnervation disorder [Moebius syndrome variant].

Schröder JC(1), Läßig AK, Galetzka D, Peters A, Castle JC, Diederich S, Zechner
U, Müller-Forell W, Keilmann A, Bartsch O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre of the Johannes
Gutenberg University Mainz, Langenbeckstrasse 1, D-55101, Mainz, Germany.
julia.cornelia.schroeder@gmx.net

BACKGROUND: We report on a 6-year-old Turkish boy with profound sensorineural
deafness, balance disorder, severe disorder of oral motor function, and mild
developmental delay. Further findings included scaphocephaly, plagiocephaly, long
palpebral fissures, high narrow palate, low-set posteriorly rotated ears,
torticollis, hypoplastic genitalia and faulty foot posture. Parents were
consanguineous.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging showed
bilateral single widened cochlear turn, narrowing of the internal auditory canal,
and bilateral truncation of the vestibulo-cochlear nerve. Microarray analysis and
next generation sequencing showed a homozygous deletion of chromosome 5q31.1
spanning 115.3 kb and including three genes: NEUROG1 (encoding neurogenin 1),
DCNP1 (dendritic cell nuclear protein 1, C5ORF20) and TIFAB (TIFA-related
protein). The inability to chew and swallow, deafness and balance disorder
represented congenital palsies of cranial nerves V (trigeminal nerve) and VIII
(vestibulo-cochlear nerve) and thus a congenital cranial dysinnervation disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on reported phenotypes of neurog1 null mutant mice and other
vertebrates, we strongly propose NEUROG1 as the causative gene in this boy. The
human NEUROG1 resides within the DFNB60 locus for non-syndromic autosomal
recessive deafness on chromosome 5q22-q31, but linkage data have excluded it from
being causative in the DFNB60 patients. Given its large size (35 Mb, >100 genes),
the 5q22-q31 area could harbor more than one deafness gene. We propose NEUROG1 as
a new gene for syndromic autosomal recessive hearing loss and congenital cranial 
dysinnervation disorder including cranial nerves V and VIII.

PMCID: PMC3599919
PMID: 23419067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jun 1;22(11):1693-708. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0161. Epub 2013
Mar 1.

Galanin promotes neuronal differentiation in murine subventricular zone cell
cultures.

Agasse F(1), Xapelli S, Coronas V, Christiansen SH, Rosa AI, Sardá-Arroyo L,
Santos T, Ferreira R, Schitine C, Harnois T, Bourmeyster N, Bragança J,
Bernardino L, Malva JO, Woldbye DP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Largo Marquês
de Pombal, Coimbra, Portugal.

Neural stem cells of the subventricular zone (SVZ) represent a potentially
important source of surrogate cells for the treatment of brain damage. Proper use
of these cells for neuronal replacement depends on the ability to drive neuronal 
differentiation. Several neuromodulators stimulate neurogenesis. Here we examined
the effects of the neuropeptide galanin, on neuronal differentiation in murine
SVZ cultures. SVZ neurospheres obtained from early postnatal mice were treated
with 10<U+2009>nM to 2<U+2009>µM galanin. Galanin promoted neuronal differentiation, increasing
numbers of NeuN-, vesicular GABA transporter- and tyrosine hydroxylase-expressing
neurons. In contrast, galanin neither affected cell proliferation assessed by
BrdU incorporation nor cell death evaluated by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP nick-end labeling (TUNEL). Neuronal differentiation was further 
confirmed at the functional level by measuring [Ca(2+)]i variations in single SVZ
cells after KCl and histamine stimulations to distinguish neurons from immature
cells. Galanin treatment increased the numbers of neuronal-like responding cells 
compared to immature cells. Using selective agonists (M617, AR-M1896) and
antagonists (galantide, M871) for galanin receptors 1 and 2, we showed that both 
galanin receptors mediated neuronal differentiation. Early proneuronal effects of
galanin included positive regulation of the transcription factor neurogenin-1
(Ngn1). In addition, galanin promoted axonogenesis and dendritogenesis,
increasing both the length of phosphorylated stress-activated protein kinase- and
Tau-positive axons and the numbers of microtubule associated protein-2
(MAP-2)-labelled dendrites. Moreover, galanin inhibited SVZ cell migration in the
transwell assay. Our results show a proneurogenic effect of galanin and open new 
perspectives for future applications in stem cell-based therapies for neuronal
replacement.

PMID: 23327619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Dyn. 2013 Mar;242(3):230-53. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23920. Epub 2013 Feb 8.

Expression of Neurogenin 1 in mouse embryonic stem cells directs the
differentiation of neuronal precursors and identifies unique patterns of
down-stream gene expression.

Velkey JM(1), O'Shea KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan Medical
School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

BACKGROUND: Delineating the cascades of growth and transcription factor
expression that shape the developing nervous system will improve our
understanding of its molecular histogenesis and suggest strategies for cell
replacement therapies. In the current investigation, we examined the ability of
the proneural gene, Neurogenin1 (Neurog1; also Ngn1, Neurod3), to drive
differentiation of pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESC).
RESULTS: Transient expression of Neurog1 in ESC was sufficient to initiate
neuronal differentiation, and produced neuronal subtypes reflecting its
expression pattern in vivo. To begin to address the molecular mechanisms
involved, we used microarray analysis to identify potential down-stream targets
of Neurog1 expressed at sequential stages of neuronal differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: ESC expressing Neurogenin1 begin to withdraw from cycle and form
precursors that differentiate exclusively into neurons. This work identifies
unique patterns of gene expression following expression of Neurog1, including
genes and signaling pathways involved in process outgrowth and cell migration,
regional differentiation of the nervous system, and cell cycle.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4646168
PMID: 23288605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Hear Res. 2013 Mar;297:30-41. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.11.008. Epub 2012 Nov
27.

Beyond generalized hair cells: molecular cues for hair cell types.

Jahan I(1), Pan N, Kersigo J, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa, Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts and
Sciences, 143 BB, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors (TFs) are crucial for inner
ear neurosensory development. The proneural TF Atoh1 regulates the
differentiation of hair cells (HCs) whereas Neurog1 and Neurod1 regulate
specification and differentiation of neurons, respectively, but also affect HC
development. Expression of Delta and Jagged ligands in nascent HCs and Notch
receptors in supporting cells induce supporting cell differentiation through the 
regulation of neurogenic bHLH TFs (such as Hes1, Hes5) and suppression of limited
Atoh1 expression. In sensorineural hearing loss, HCs are lost followed by
supporting cells and progressive degeneration of neurons, at least in rodents.
Regaining complete hearing may require reconstituting the organ of Corti from
scratch, including the two types of HCs, inner and outer hair cells with the
precise sorting of two types of afferent (type I and II) and efferent (lateral
and medial olivo-cochlear) innervation. We review effects of bHLH TF dosage and
their cross-regulation to differentiate HC types in the organ of Corti. We
categorize findings of specific gene expressions in HCs: 1. as markers without
meaning for the regeneration task, 2. as stabilizers who are needed to maintain
or complete differentiation, and 3. as decision-making genes, expressed and
acting early enough to be useful in this process. Only one TF has been
characterized that fits the last aspect: Atoh1. We propose that temporal and
intensity variations of Atoh1 are naturally modulated to differentiate specific
types of HCs. Importantly, the molecular means to modify the Atoh1 expression are
at least partially understood and can be readily implemented in the attempts to
regenerate specific types of HCs.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3624765
PMID: 23201032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. ACS Nano. 2012 Dec 21;6(12):10463-74. doi: 10.1021/nn304541h. Epub 2012 Nov 29.

Polymeric nanoparticles to control the differentiation of neural stem cells in
the subventricular zone of the brain.

Santos T(1), Ferreira R, Maia J, Agasse F, Xapelli S, Cortes L, Bragança J, Malva
JO, Ferreira L, Bernardino L.

Author information: 
(1)CNC - Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra,
3004-517 Coimbra, Portugal.

Herein, we report the use of retinoic acid-loaded polymeric nanoparticles as a
potent tool to induce the neuronal differentiation of subventricular zone neural 
stem cells. The intracellular delivery of retinoic acid by the nanoparticles
activated nuclear retinoic acid receptors, decreased stemness, and increased
proneurogenic gene expression. Importantly, this work reports for the first time 
a nanoparticle formulation able to modulate in vivo the subventricular zone
neurogenic niche. The work further compares the dynamics of initial stages of
differentiation between SVZ cells treated with retinoic acid-loaded polymeric
nanoparticles and solubilized retinoic acid. The nanoparticle formulation
developed here may ultimately offer new perspectives to treat neurodegenerative
diseases.

PMID: 23176155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Regen Med. 2012 Nov;7(6):757-67. doi: 10.2217/rme.12.58.

Inner ear progenitor cells can be generated in vitro from human bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells.

Boddy SL(1), Chen W, Romero-Guevara R, Kottam L, Bellantuono I, Rivolta MN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Biology & Department of Biomedical Sciences, University
of Sheffield, Alfred Denny Building, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

AIM: Mouse mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can generate sensory neurons and produce
inner ear hair cell-like cells. An equivalent source from humans is highly
desirable, given their potential application in patient-specific regenerative
therapies for deafness. In this study, we explored the ability of human MSCs
(hMSCs) to differentiate into otic lineages.
MATERIALS & METHODS: hMSCs were exposed to culture media conditioned by human
fetal auditory stem cells.
RESULTS: Conditioned media induced the expression of otic progenitor markers
PAX8, PAX2, GATA3 and SOX2. After 4 weeks, cells coexpressed ATOH1, MYO7A and
POU4F3 (indicators of hair cell lineage) or neuronal markers NEUROG1, POU4F1 and 
NEFH. Inhibition of WNT signaling prevented differentiation into otic
progenitors, while WNT activation partially phenocopied results seen with the
conditioned media.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates that hMSCs can be driven to express key genes
found in the otic lineages and thereby promotes their status as candidates for
regenerative therapies for deafness.

PMID: 23164077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Neurosci. 2012 Nov 14;32(46):16424-34. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3686-12.2012.

Cell lineage analysis reveals three different progenitor pools for neurosensory
elements in the otic vesicle.

Sapède D(1), Dyballa S, Pujades C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Health Sciences, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Barcelona Biomedical Research Park, 08003 Barcelona, Spain.

In the inner ear, sensory versus neuronal specification is achieved through few
well-defined bHLH transcription factors. However, the molecular mechanisms
regulating the generation of the appropriate cell type in the correct place and
at the correct time are not completely understood yet. Various studies have shown
that hair cell- and neuron-specifying genes partially overlap in the otic
territory, suggesting that mutual interactions among these bHLH factors could
direct the generation of the two cell types from a common neurosensory
progenitor. Although there is little evidence for a clonal relationship between
macular hair cells and sensory neurons, the existence of a single progenitor able
to give both sensory and neuronal cell types remains an open question. Here, we
identified a population of common neurosensory progenitors in the zebrafish inner
ear and studied the proneural requirement for cell fate decision within this
population. Expression analysis reveals that proneural genes for hair cells and
neurons overlap within the posteromedial otic epithelium. Combined results from
single-cell lineage and functional studies on neurog1 and neuroD1 further
demonstrate the following: (1) in the anterior region of the ear, neuronal and
sensory lineages have already segregated at the onset of proneural gene
expression and are committed to a given fate very early; (2) in contrast, the
posteromedial part of the ear harbors a population of common progenitors giving
both neurons and hair cells until late stages; and finally (3) neuroD1 is
required within this pool of bipotent progenitors to generate the hair cell fate.

PMID: 23152625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Jan;10(1):29-35. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2012.08.005. Epub 2012
Sep 5.

BDNF profoundly and specifically increases KCNQ4 expression in neurons derived
from embryonic stem cells.

Purcell EK(1), Yang A, Liu L, Velkey JM, Morales MM, Duncan RK.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. erinfred@umich.edu

Neurons resembling the spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs) of the auditory nerve can
be generated from embryonic stem cells through induced overexpression of the
transcription factor Neurogenin-1 (Neurog1). While recapitulating this
developmental pathway produces glutamatergic, bipolar neurons reminiscent of
SGNs, these neurons are functionally immature, being characterized by a
depolarized resting potential and limited excitability. We explored the effects
of two neurotrophins known to be present in the inner ear, brain derived
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and neurotrophin-3 (NT-3), on the electrophysiology of
neurons following Neurog1 induction. Our data reveal a significant reduction in
resting membrane potential (RMP) following neurotrophin exposure, with BDNF
producing a more robust effect than NT-3. This effect was accompanied by a
profound and specific upregulation of the KCNQ4 subtype, where a 9-fold increase 
was observed with quantitative PCR. The other neuronally expressed KCNQ subtypes 
(2, 3, and 5) exhibited upregulation which was 3-fold or less in magnitude.
Quantitative immunohistochemistry confirmed the increase in KCNQ4 expression at
the protein level. The present data show a novel link between BDNF and KCNQ4
expression, yielding insight into the restricted expression pattern of a channel 
known to play special roles in setting the resting potential of auditory cells
and in the etiology of progressive high-frequency hearing loss.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3525722
PMID: 23089626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Glia. 2013 Feb;61(2):225-39. doi: 10.1002/glia.22429. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Cell death and neuronal differentiation of glioblastoma stem-like cells induced
by neurogenic transcription factors.

Guichet PO(1), Bieche I, Teigell M, Serguera C, Rothhut B, Rigau V, Scamps F,
Ripoll C, Vacher S, Taviaux S, Chevassus H, Duffau H, Mallet J, Susini A, Joubert
D, Bauchet L, Hugnot JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U1051, Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hôpital St Eloi, 80
av Augustin, Fliche 34091, Montpellier, Cedex 05, France.
pierre-olivier.guichet@inserm.fr

Glioblastoma multiform (GBM) are devastating brain tumors containing a fraction
of multipotent stem-like cells which are highly tumorigenic. These cells are
resistant to treatments and are likely to be responsible for tumor recurrence.
One approach to eliminate GBM stem-like cells would be to force their terminal
differentiation. During development, neurons formation is controlled by
neurogenic transcription factors such as Ngn1/2 and NeuroD1. We found that in
comparison with oligodendrogenic genes, the expression of these neurogenic genes 
is low or absent in GBM tumors and derived cultures. We thus explored the effect 
of overexpressing these neurogenic genes in three CD133(+) Sox2(+) GBM stem-like 
cell cultures and the U87 glioma line. Introduction of Ngn2 in CD133(+) cultures 
induced massive cell death, proliferation arrest and a drastic reduction of
neurosphere formation. Similar effects were observed with NeuroD1. Importantly,
Ngn2 effects were accompanied by the downregulation of Olig2, Myc, Shh and
upregulation of Dcx and NeuroD1 expression. The few surviving cells adopted a
typical neuronal morphology and some of them generated action potentials. These
cells appeared to be produced at the expense of GFAP(+) cells which were
radically reduced after differentiation with Ngn2. In vivo, Ngn2-expressing cells
were unable to form orthotopic tumors. In the U87 glioma line, Ngn2 could not
induce neuronal differentiation although proliferation in vitro and tumoral
growth in vivo were strongly reduced. By inducing cell death, cell cycle arrest
or differentiation, this work supports further exploration of neurogenic proteins
to oppose GBM stem-like and non-stem-like cell growth.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23047160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Int J Cancer. 2013 May 1;132(9):2209-16. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27888. Epub 2012 Oct
29.

Methylation and microsatellite status and recurrence following adjuvant FOLFOX in
colorectal cancer.

Han SW(1), Lee HJ, Bae JM, Cho NY, Lee KH, Kim TY, Oh DY, Im SA, Bang YJ, Jeong
SY, Park KJ, Park JG, Kang GH, Kim TY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul,
Korea.

The prognostic impact of CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) and
microsatellite instability (MSI) on the treatment outcome of colon cancer
patients receiving adjuvant 5-fluorouracil/leucovorin/oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) is
unclear. We investigated CIMP and MSI status in colorectal cancer patients
treated with adjuvant FOLFOX. Stages II and III sporadic colorectal cancer
patients who underwent curative resection followed by adjuvant FOLFOX were
included. Eight CpG island loci (CACNA1G, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, CDKN2A
(p16), RUNX3 and SOCS1) and five microsatellite markers were examined.
Disease-free survival (DFS) was analyzed according to CIMP and MSI status. A
total of 322 patients were included: male/female 192/130, median age 61 years
(range 30-78), proximal/distal location 118/204 and Stages II/III 43/279. CIMP
status was high in 25 patients (7.8%) and 21 patients (6.5%) had MSI-high tumor. 
CIMP/MSI status was not significantly associated with DFS: 3-year DFS 100% in
CIMP(-)/MSI(+), 84% in CIMP(-)/MSI(-), 82% in CIMP(+)/MSI(-) and 75% in
CIMP(+)/MSI(+) (p = 0.33). Results of exploratory analysis showed that concurrent
methylation at NEUROG1 and CDKN2A (p16) was associated with shorter DFS: 3-year
DFS 69% in NEUROG1(+)/CDKN2A (p16)(+) versus 87% in NEUROG1(-)/CDKN2A (p16)(-) (p
= 0.006). In conclusion, concurrent methylation of NEUROG1 and CDKN2A (p16) is
associated with recurrence following adjuvant FOLFOX in Stages II/III colorectal 
cancer.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 23034738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Oct 16;109(42):16939-44. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1202956109. Epub 2012 Oct 1.

A noncoding RNA regulates the neurogenin1 gene locus during mouse neocortical
development.

Onoguchi M(1), Hirabayashi Y, Koseki H, Gotoh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo
113-0032, Japan.

The proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor neurogenin1
(Neurog1) plays a pivotal role in neuronal differentiation during mammalian
development. The spatiotemporal control of the Neurog1 gene expression is
mediated by several specific enhancer elements, although how these elements
regulate the Neurog1 locus has remained largely unclear. Recently it has been
shown that a large number of enhancer elements are transcribed, but the
regulation and function of the resulting transcripts have been investigated for
only several such elements. We now show that an enhancer element located 5.8-7.0 
kb upstream of the mouse Neurog1 locus is transcribed. The production of this
transcript, designated utNgn1, is highly correlated with that of Neurog1 mRNA
during neuronal differentiation. Moreover, knockdown of utNgn1 by a corresponding
short interfering RNA inhibits the production of Neurog1 mRNA in response to
induction of neuronal differentiation. We also found that production of utNgn1 is
suppressed by polycomb group (PcG) proteins, which inhibit the expression of
Neurog1. Our results thus suggest that a noncoding RNA transcribed from an
enhancer element positively regulates transcription at the Neurog1 locus.

PMCID: PMC3479495
PMID: 23027973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2012 Oct 26;287(44):37171-84. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.389916. Epub
2012 Aug 24.

Olfactomedin 1 interacts with the Nogo A receptor complex to regulate axon
growth.

Nakaya N(1), Sultana A, Lee HS, Tomarev SI.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Mechanisms of Glaucoma, Laboratory of Retinal Cell and
Molecular Biology, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0606, USA.

Olfm1, a secreted highly conserved glycoprotein, is detected in peripheral and
central nervous tissues and participates in neural progenitor maintenance, cell
death in brain, and optic nerve arborization. In this study, we identified Olfm1 
as a molecule promoting axon growth through interaction with the Nogo A receptor 
(NgR1) complex. Olfm1 is coexpressed with NgR1 in dorsal root ganglia and retinal
ganglion cells in embryonic and postnatal mice. Olfm1 specifically binds to NgR1,
as judged by alkaline phosphatase assay and coimmunoprecipitation. The addition
of Olfm1 inhibited the growth cone collapse of dorsal root ganglia neurons
induced by myelin-associated inhibitors, indicating that Olfm1 attenuates the
NgR1 receptor functions. Olfm1 caused the inhibition of NgR1 signaling by
interfering with interaction between NgR1 and its coreceptors p75NTR or LINGO-1. 
In zebrafish, inhibition of optic nerve extension by olfm1 morpholino
oligonucleotides was partially rescued by dominant negative ngr1 or lingo-1.
These data introduce Olfm1 as a novel NgR1 ligand that may modulate the functions
of the NgR1 complex in axonal growth.

PMCID: PMC3481317
PMID: 22923615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Neural Dev. 2012 Aug 20;7:28.

Neurog1 and Neurog2 coordinately regulate development of the olfactory system.

Shaker T(1), Dennis D, Kurrasch DM, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Hotchkiss Brain Institute, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
University of Calgary, Health Sciences Centre, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Calgary,
Alberta, T2N 4N1, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Proneural genes encode basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
that specify distinct neuronal identities in different regions of the nervous
system. In the embryonic telencephalon, the proneural genes Neurog1 and Neurog2
specify a dorsal regional identity and glutamatergic projection neuron phenotype 
in the presumptive neocortex, but their roles in cell fate specification in the
olfactory bulb, which is also partly derived from dorsal telencephalic
progenitors, have yet to be assessed. Given that olfactory bulb development is
guided by interactions with the olfactory epithelium in the periphery, where
proneural genes are also expressed, we investigated the roles of Neurog1 and
Neurog2 in the coordinated development of these two olfactory structures.
RESULTS: Neurog1/2 are co-expressed in olfactory bulb progenitors, while only
Neurog1 is widely expressed in progenitors for olfactory sensory neurons in the
olfactory epithelium. Strikingly, only a remnant of an olfactory bulb forms in
Neurog1-/-;Neurog2-/- double mutants, while this structure is smaller but
distinguishable in Neurog1-/- single mutants and morphologically normal in
Neurog2-/- single mutants. At the cellular level, fewer glutamatergic mitral and 
juxtaglomerular cells differentiate in Neurog1-/-;Neurog2-/- double-mutant
olfactory bulbs. Instead, ectopic olfactory bulb interneurons are derived from
dorsal telencephalic lineages in Neurog1-/-;Neurog2-/- double mutants and to a
lesser extent in Neurog2-/- single mutants. Conversely, cell fate specification
is normal in Neurog1-/- olfactory bulbs, but aberrant patterns of cell
proliferation and neuronal migration are observed in Neurog1-/- single and
Neurog1-/-;Neurog2-/- double mutants, probably contributing to their altered
morphologies. Finally, in Neurog1-/- and Neurog1-/-;Neurog2-/- embryos, olfactory
sensory neurons in the epithelium, which normally project to the olfactory bulb
to guide its morphogenesis, fail to innervate the olfactory bulb.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a cell autonomous role for Neurog1/2 in
specifying the glutamatergic identity of olfactory bulb neurons. Furthermore,
Neurog1 (and not Neurog2) is required to guide olfactory sensory neuron
innervation of the olfactory bulb, the loss of which results in defects in
olfactory bulb proliferation and tissue morphogenesis. We thus conclude that
Neurog1/2 together coordinate development of the olfactory system, which depends 
on tissue interactions between the olfactory bulb and epithelium.

PMCID: PMC3444899
PMID: 22906231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Neurosci. 2012 Aug 8;32(32):10940-8. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2216-12.2012.

Fezf2 regulates multilineage neuronal differentiation through activating basic
helix-loop-helix and homeodomain genes in the zebrafish ventral forebrain.

Yang N(1), Dong Z, Guo S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai
200433, People's Republic of China.

Transcription factors of the achaete-scute and atonal bHLH proneural gene family 
play important roles in neuronal differentiation. They are also involved in
neuronal subtype specification through collaboration with homeodomain (HD)
transcription factors. However, concerted regulation of these genes and in turn
progenitor fate toward distinct lineages within the developing vertebrate brain
is not well understood. Fezf2 is an evolutionarily conserved zinc finger protein 
important for monoaminergic neuronal development in zebrafish. Here, we show that
Fezf2 is also critical for GABAergic neuronal fate and investigate how a single
transcription factor regulates the identity of multiple neuronal lineages in the 
developing ventral forebrain. First, our genetic analyses reveal the requirement 
of the achaete-scute-like genes ascl1a and 1b in serotonergic and GABAergic
neuron development, but they are dispensable for the specification of
dopaminergic neurons, which is dependent on the atonal-like gene neurog1. Second,
the expression of fezf2, ascl1a/1b, and neurog1 demarcates distinct progenitor
subpopulations, where fezf2 is required for activating but not maintaining the
expression of bHLH genes. Third, Fezf2 is required to activate HD genes otpb and 
dlx2, which are involved in dopaminergic and GABAergic neuronal development,
respectively. Finally, we uncover that Fezf2 is sufficient to increase
dopaminergic neuronal numbers but not serotonergic or GABAergic lineages.
Together, these findings reveal new mechanisms by which multilineage
differentiation is coordinately regulated by a single transcription factor in the
vertebrate ventral forebrain.

PMCID: PMC3478895
PMID: 22875928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Mar 1;521(4):833-59. doi: 10.1002/cne.23204.

Global expression profiling of globose basal cells and neurogenic progression
within the olfactory epithelium.

Krolewski RC(1), Packard A, Schwob JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Tufts University School of
Medicine, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Ongoing, lifelong neurogenesis maintains the neuronal population of the olfactory
epithelium in the face of piecemeal neuronal turnover and restores it following
wholesale loss. The molecular phenotypes corresponding to different stages along 
the progression from multipotent globose basal cell (GBC) progenitor to
differentiated olfactory sensory neuron are poorly characterized. We used the
transgenic expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein (eGFP) and cell
surface markers to FACS-isolate <U+0394>Sox2-eGFP(+) GBCs, Neurog1-eGFP(+) GBCs and
immature neurons, and <U+0394>OMP-eGFP(+) mature neurons from normal adult mice. In
addition, the latter two populations were also collected 3 weeks after olfactory 
bulb ablation, a lesion that results in persistently elevated neurogenesis.
Global profiling of mRNA from the populations indicates that all stages of
neurogenesis share a cohort of >2,100 genes that are upregulated compared to
sustentacular cells. A further cohort of >1,200 genes are specifically
upregulated in GBCs as compared to sustentacular cells and differentiated
neurons. The increased rate of neurogenesis caused by olfactory bulbectomy had
little effect on the transcriptional profile of the Neurog1-eGFP(+) population.
In contrast, the abbreviated lifespan of <U+0394>OMP-eGFP(+) neurons born in the absence
of the bulb correlated with substantial differences in gene expression as
compared to the mature neurons of the normal epithelium. Detailed examination of 
the specific genes upregulated in the different progenitor populations revealed
that the chromatin modifying complex proteins LSD1 and coREST were expressed
sequentially in upstream <U+0394>Sox2-eGFP(+) GBCs and Neurog1-eGFP(+) GBCs/immature
neurons. The expression patterns of these proteins are dynamically regulated
after activation of the epithelium by methyl bromide lesion.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3887395
PMID: 22847514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Development. 2012 Aug;139(15):2692-702. doi: 10.1242/dev.072314. Epub 2012 Jun
28.

ß-Catenin signaling specifies progenitor cell identity in parallel with Shh
signaling in the developing mammalian thalamus.

Bluske KK(1), Vue TY, Kawakami Y, Taketo MM, Yoshikawa K, Johnson JE, Nakagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Developmental Biology Center and Stem Cell
Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Neural progenitor cells within the developing thalamus are spatially organized
into distinct populations. Their correct specification is critical for generating
appropriate neuronal subtypes in specific locations during development. Secreted 
signaling molecules, such as sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Wnts, are required for the 
initial formation of the thalamic primordium. Once thalamic identity is
established and neurogenesis is initiated, Shh regulates the positional identity 
of thalamic progenitor cells. Although Wnt/ß-catenin signaling also has
differential activity within the thalamus during this stage of development, its
significance has not been directly addressed. In this study, we used conditional 
gene manipulations in mice and explored the roles of ß-catenin signaling in the
regional identity of thalamic progenitor cells. We found ß-catenin is required
during thalamic neurogenesis to maintain thalamic fate while suppressing
prethalamic fate, demonstrating that regulation of regional fate continues to
require extrinsic signals. These roles of ß-catenin appeared to be mediated at
least partly by regulating two basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription
factors, Neurog1 and Neurog2. ß-Catenin and Shh signaling function in parallel to
specify two progenitor domains within the thalamus, where individual
transcription factors expressed in each progenitor domain were regulated
differently by the two signaling pathways. We conclude that ß-catenin has
multiple functions during thalamic neurogenesis and that both Shh and ß-catenin
pathways are important for specifying distinct types of thalamic progenitor
cells, ensuring that the appropriate neuronal subtypes are generated in the
correct locations.

PMCID: PMC3392701
PMID: 22745311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Oncol Lett. 2012 Apr 1;3(4):901-906. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Methylation status of NEUROG2 and NID2 improves the diagnosis of stage I NSCLC.

Geng J(1), Sun J, Lin Q, Gu J, Zhao Y, Zhang H, Feng X, He Y, Wang W, Zhou X, Yu 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China.

In our previous study, we attempted to develop a tool for the early diagnosis of 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) using DNA methylation biomarkers. With the aim
of improving the diagnostic potential by optimizing the composition of the target
set, in this study, 13 candidate genes (ACTA1, AIDH1A2, CBX8, CDH8, EVX1,
MGC16275, NEUROG1, NEUROG2, NID2, OTX2OS1, PGAM2, PHOX2B and TOX) were analyzed
by methylation-specific PCR to determine the methylation status of each gene in 5
NSCLC cell lines and in lung tissue samples from 15 healthy volunteers,
103 stage I NSCLC patients and 26 non-cancerous control patients. Results showed 
that NEUROG2 and NID2 were hypermethylated in stage I NSCLC tissues (31.07 and
46.60%, respectively) and unmethylated in normal lung tissues (0/15) and
non-cancerous tissues (0/26). Following recombination, an optimized 5-gene panel 
(NEUROG2, NID2, RASSF1A, APC and HOXC9) achieved a sensitivity of 91.26% with a
specificity of 84.62% in the detection of stage I NSCLC. The optimized 5-gene
panel greatly improved the diagnostic power for stage I NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3362429
PMID: 22741015  [PubMed]


69. Cell Tissue Res. 2012 Aug;349(2):415-32. doi: 10.1007/s00441-012-1454-0. Epub
2012 Jun 13.

Understanding the evolution and development of neurosensory transcription factors
of the ear to enhance therapeutic translation.

Pan N(1), Kopecky B, Jahan I, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, College of Liberal Arts and
Sciences, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Reconstructing a functional organ of Corti is the ultimate target towards curing 
hearing loss. Despite the impressive technical gains made over the last few
years, many complications remain ahead for the two main restoration avenues: in
vitro transformation of pluripotent cells into hair cell-like cells and
adenovirus-mediated gene therapy. Most notably, both approaches require a more
complete understanding of the molecular networks that ensure specific cell types 
form in the correct places to allow proper function of the restored organ of
Corti. Important to this understanding are the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors (TFs) that are highly diverse and serve to increase
functional complexity but their evolutionary implementation in the inner ear
neurosensory development is less conspicuous. To this end, we review the
evolutionary and developmentally dynamic interactions of the three bHLH TFs that 
have been identified as the main players in neurosensory evolution and
development, Neurog1, Neurod1 and Atoh1. These three TFs belong to the
neurogenin/atonal family and evolved from a molecular precursor that likely
regulated single sensory cell development in the ectoderm of metazoan ancestors
but are now also expressed in other parts of the body, including the brain. They 
interact extensively via intracellular and intercellular cross-regulation to
establish the two main neurosensory cell types of the ear, the hair cells and
sensory neurons. Furthermore, the level and duration of their expression affect
the specification of hair cell subtypes (inner hair cells vs. outer hair cells). 
We propose that appropriate manipulation of these TFs through their characterized
binding sites may offer a solution by itself, or in conjunction with the two
other approaches currently pursued by others, to restore the organ of Corti.

PMCID: PMC3508675
PMID: 22688958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Front Oncol. 2012 Feb 27;2:7. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2012.00007. eCollection 2012.

Stratification and Prognostic Relevance of Jass's Molecular Classification of
Colorectal Cancer.

Zlobec I(1), Bihl MP, Foerster A, Rufle A, Terracciano L, Lugli A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Bern Bern, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: The current proposed model of colorectal tumorigenesis is based
primarily on CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), microsatellite instability
(MSI), KRAS, BRAF, and methylation status of 0-6-Methylguanine DNA
Methyltransferase (MGMT) and classifies tumors into five subgroups. The aim of
this study is to validate this molecular classification and test its prognostic
relevance.
METHODS: Three hundred two patients were included in this study. Molecular
analysis was performed for five CIMP-related promoters (CRABP1, MLH1, p16INK4a,
CACNA1G, NEUROG1), MGMT, MSI, KRAS, and BRAF. Methylation in at least 4 promoters
or in one to three promoters was considered CIMP-high and CIMP-low (CIMP-H/L),
respectively.
RESULTS: CIMP-H, CIMP-L, and CIMP-negative were found in 7.1, 43, and 49.9%
cases, respectively. One hundred twenty-three tumors (41%) could not be
classified into any one of the proposed molecular subgroups, including 107
CIMP-L, 14 CIMP-H, and two CIMP-negative cases. The 10<U+2009>year survival rate for
CIMP-high patients [22.6% (95%CI: 7-43)] was significantly lower than for CIMP-L 
or CIMP-negative (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0295). Only the combined analysis of BRAF and CIMP
(negative versus L/H) led to distinct prognostic subgroups.
CONCLUSION: Although CIMP status has an effect on outcome, our results underline 
the need for standardized definitions of low- and high-level CIMP, which clearly 
hinders an effective prognostic and molecular classification of colorectal
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3356027
PMID: 22655257  [PubMed]


71. Development. 2012 Jun;139(11):1965-77. doi: 10.1242/dev.071670. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

EYA1 and SIX1 drive the neuronal developmental program in cooperation with the
SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complex and SOX2 in the mammalian inner ear.

Ahmed M(1), Xu J, Xu PX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of Medicine of
NYU, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Inner ear neurogenesis depends upon the function of the proneural basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors NEUROG1 and NEUROD1. However, the
transcriptional regulation of these factors is unknown. Here, using loss- and
gain-of-function models, we show that EYA1 and SIX1 are crucial otic neuronal
determination factors upstream of NEUROG1 and NEUROD1. Overexpression of both
Eya1 and Six1 is sufficient to convert non-neuronal epithelial cells within the
otocyst and cochlea as well as the 3T3 fibroblast cells into neurons. Strikingly,
all the ectopic neurons express not only Neurog1 and Neurod1 but also mature
neuronal markers such as neurofilament, indicating that Eya1 and Six1 function
upstream of, and in the same pathway as, Neurog1 and Neurod1 to not only induce
neuronal fate but also regulate their differentiation. We demonstrate that EYA1
and SIX1 interact directly with the SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling subunits BRG1
and BAF170 to drive neurogenesis cooperatively in 3T3 cells and cochlear
nonsensory epithelial cells, and that SOX2 cooperates with these factors to
mediate neuronal differentiation. Importantly, we show that the ATPase BRG1
activity is required for not only EYA1- and SIX1-induced ectopic neurogenesis but
also normal neurogenesis in the otocyst. These findings indicate that EYA1 and
SIX1 are key transcription factors in initiating the neuronal developmental
program, probably by recruiting and interacting with the SWI/SNF
chromatin-remodeling complex to specifically mediate Neurog1 and Neurod1
transcription.

PMCID: PMC3347689
PMID: 22513373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Oct 10;21(15):2827-37. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0437. Epub 2012
Jun 4.

Netrin-1-mediated axon guidance in mouse embryonic stem cells overexpressing
neurogenin-1.

Hill GW 3rd(1), Purcell EK, Liu L, Velkey JM, Altschuler RA, Duncan RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Kresge Hearing Research Institute, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-5616, USA.

Stem cell therapy holds great promise for treating neurodegenerative disease, but
major barriers to effective therapeutic strategies remain. A complete
understanding of the derived phenotype is required for predicting cell response
once introduced into the host tissue. We sought to identify major axonal guidance
cues present in neurons derived from the transient overexpression of neurogenin-1
(Neurog1) in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs). Neurog1 upregulated the netrin-1 
axon guidance receptors DCC (deleted in colorectal cancer) and neogenin (NEO1).
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction results showed a 2-fold increase in NEO1
mRNA and a 36-fold increase in DCC mRNA in Neurog1-induced compared with control 
ESCs. Immunohistochemistry indicated that DCC was primarily expressed on cells
positive for the neuronal marker TUJ1. DCC was preferentially localized to the
cell soma and growth-cones of induced neurons. In contrast, NEO1 expression
showed less specificity, labeling both TUJ1-positive and TUJ1-negative cells as
well as uninduced control cells. Axonal outgrowth was directed preferentially
toward aggregates of HEK293 cells secreting a recombinant active fragment of
netrin-1. These data indicate that DCC and NEO1 are downstream products of
Neurog1 and may guide the integration of Neurog1-induced ESCs with target cells
secreting netrin-1. Differential expression profiles for netrin receptors could
indicate different roles for this guidance cue on neuronal and non-neuronal
cells.

PMCID: PMC3464074
PMID: 22512716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Neurooncol. 2012 Jul;108(3):513-9. doi: 10.1007/s11060-012-0853-0. Epub 2012
Apr 3.

FABP4 is a candidate marker of cerebellar liponeurocytomas.

Anghileri E(1), Eoli M, Paterra R, Ferroli P, Pollo B, Cuccarini V, Maderna E,
Tringali G, Saini M, Salsano E, Finocchiaro G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Neuro-oncology, Fondazione IRCCS C. Besta, Via Celoria 11,
20133, Milan, Italy. anghileri.e@istituto-besta.it

Cerebellar liponeurocytoma (cLPN) is a very rare central nervous system (CNS)
tumour recently recognized as a clinical and pathological entity distinct from
medulloblastoma (MB), and included in the WHO classification of CNS tumours under
the heading "glioneuronal tumours". cLPN typically develop in adult age and have 
a favourable prognosis compared with MB. In this work, we reviewed the clinical
and neuroradiological data of two novel cases of adult cLPN diagnosed at our
institution; one patient developed distant metastases. We tried to identify novel
molecular markers for this malignancy. We found that the transcription factor
NEUROG1 (but not ATOH1) is expressed in cLPN, unlike normal adult cerebellum, and
that fatty acid binding protein 4 (FABP4), typically found in adipocytes, is
significantly overexpressed compared with both normal adult cerebellum and human 
MB. These findings suggest cLPN occur as a result of transformation of cerebellar
progenitors, which are distinct from cerebellar granule progenitors, and
aberrantly differentiate into adipocyte-like tumour cells. They also suggest that
analysis of FABP4 expression is of help to differentiate cLPN from MB.

PMID: 22476608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell Transplant. 2013;22(5):855-70.

Neural induction with neurogenin 1 enhances the therapeutic potential of
mesenchymal stem cells in an amyotrophic lateral sclerosis mouse model.

Chan-Il C(1), Young-Don L, Heejaung K, Kim SH, Suh-Kim H, Kim SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South Korea.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by progressive dysfunction
and degeneration of motor neurons in the central nervous system (CNS). In the
absence of effective drug treatments for ALS, stem cell treatment has emerged as 
a candidate therapy for this disease. To date, however, there is no consensus
protocol that stipulates stem cell types, transplantation timing, or frequency.
Using an ALS mouse model carrying a high copy number of a mutant human superoxide
dismutase-1 (SOD1)(G93A) transgene, we investigated the effect of neural
induction on the innate therapeutic potential of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) in
relation to preclinical transplantation parameters. In our study, the expression 
of monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) was elevated in the ALS mouse
spinal cord. Neural induction of MSCs with neurogenin 1 (Ngn1) upregulated the
expression level of the MCP-1 receptor, CCR2, and enhanced the migration activity
toward MCP-1 in vitro. Ngn1-expressing MSCs (MSCs-Ngn1) showed a corresponding
increase in tropism to the CNS after systemic transplantation in ALS mice.
Notably, MSCs-Ngn1 delayed disease onset if transplanted during preonset
ages,whereas unprocessed MSCs failed to do so. If transplanted near the onset
ages, a single treatment with MSCs-Ngn1 was sufficient to enhance motor functions
during the symptomatic period (1517 weeks), whereas unprocessed MSCs required
repeated transplantation to achieve similar levels of motor function improvement.
Our data indicate that systemically transplanted MSCs-Ngn1 can migrate to the CNS
and exert beneficial effects on host neural cells for an extended period of time 
through paracrine functions, suggesting a potential benefit of neural induction
of transplanted MSCs in long-term treatment of ALS.

PMID: 22472631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2012 Jun;13(3):281-93. doi: 10.1007/s10162-012-0317-4.
Epub 2012 Feb 28.

Atoh1, an essential transcription factor in neurogenesis and intestinal and inner
ear development: function, regulation, and context dependency.

Mulvaney J(1), Dabdoub A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Otolaryngology, Department of Surgery, School of Medicine,
University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0666,
USA.

Atoh1 (also known as Math1, Hath1, and Cath1 in mouse, human, and chicken,
respectively) is a proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
that is required in a variety of developmental contexts. Atoh1 is involved in
differentiation of neurons, secretory cells in the gut, and mechanoreceptors
including auditory hair cells. Together with the two closely related bHLH genes, 
Neurog1 and NeuroD1, Atoh1 regulates neurosensory development in the ear as well 
as neurogenesis in the cerebellum. Atoh1 activity in the cochlea is both
necessary and sufficient to drive auditory hair cell differentiation, in keeping 
with its known role as a regulator of various genes that are markers of terminal 
differentiation. Atoh1 is known in other fields as an oncogene and a tumor
suppressor involved in regulation of cell cycle control and apoptosis. Aberrant
Atoh1 activity in adult tissue is implicated in cancer progression, specifically 
in medullablastoma and adenomatous polyposis carcinoma. We demonstrate through
protein sequence comparison that Atoh1 contains conserved phosphorylation sites
outside the bHLH domain, which may allow regulation through post-translational
modification. With such diverse roles, tight regulation of Atoh1 at both the
transcriptional and protein level is essential.

PMCID: PMC3346892
PMID: 22370966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Sep 1;21(13):2395-409. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0483. Epub 2012
Apr 16.

Geminin is required for epithelial to mesenchymal transition at gastrulation.

Emmett LS(1), O'Shea KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan, USA.

Geminin is a multifunctional protein previously suggested to both maintain the
bone morphogenetic protein inhibition required for neural induction and to
control cell-cycle progression and cell fate in the early embryo. Since Geminin
is required in the blastocyst on E3.5, we employed shRNA to examine its role
during postimplantation development. Geminin knockdown inhibited the epithelial
to mesenchymal transition (EMT) required at gastrulation and neural crest
delamination, resulting in anterior-posterior axis and patterning defects, while 
overexpression promoted EMT at both locations. Geminin was negatively correlated 
with expression of E-cadherin, which is critically involved in controlling
epithelial architecture. In addition, Geminin expression level was correlated
with Wnt signaling and expression of the Wnt target gene Axin2 and with Msx2, and
negatively correlated with the expression of Bmp4 and Neurog1 in quantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis of RNAs from individual 
embryos. These results suggest that in addition to patterning the early embryo,
Geminin plays a previously unrecognized role in EMT via its ability to affect Wnt
signaling and E-cadherin expression.

PMCID: PMC3425164
PMID: 22335560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30853. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030853. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

Expression of Neurog1 instead of Atoh1 can partially rescue organ of Corti cell
survival.

Jahan I(1), Pan N, Kersigo J, Calisto LE, Morris KA, Kopecky B, Duncan JS, Beisel
KW, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)University of Iowa, Department of Biology, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of
America.

In the mammalian inner ear neurosensory cell fate depends on three closely
related transcription factors, Atoh1 for hair cells and Neurog1 and Neurod1 for
neurons. We have previously shown that neuronal cell fate can be altered towards 
hair cell fate by eliminating Neurod1 mediated repression of Atoh1 expression in 
neurons. To test whether a similar plasticity is present in hair cell fate
commitment, we have generated a knockin (KI) mouse line (Atoh1(KINeurog1)) in
which Atoh1 is replaced by Neurog1. Expression of Neurog1 under Atoh1 promoter
control alters the cellular gene expression pattern, differentiation and survival
of hair cell precursors in both heterozygous (Atoh1(+/KINeurog1)) and homozygous 
(Atoh1(KINeurog1/KINeurog1)) KI mice. Homozygous KI mice develop patches of organ
of Corti precursor cells that express Neurog1, Neurod1, several prosensory genes 
and neurotrophins. In addition, these patches of cells receive afferent and
efferent processes. Some cells among these patches form multiple microvilli but
no stereocilia. Importantly, Neurog1 expressing mutants differ from Atoh1 null
mutants, as they have intermittent formation of organ of Corti-like patches,
opposed to a complete 'flat epithelium' in the absence of Atoh1. In heterozygous 
KI mice co-expression of Atoh1 and Neurog1 results in change in fate and
patterning of some hair cells and supporting cells in addition to the abnormal
hair cell polarity in the later stages of development. This differs from
haploinsufficiency of Atoh1 (Pax2cre; Atoh1(f/+)), indicating the effect of
Neurog1 expression in developing hair cells. Our data suggest that
Atoh1(KINeurog1) can provide some degree of functional support for survival of
organ of Corti cells. In contrast to the previously demonstrated fate plasticity 
of neurons to differentiate as hair cells, hair cell precursors can be maintained
for a limited time by Neurog1 but do not transdifferentiate as neurons.

PMCID: PMC3265522
PMID: 22292060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Apr;46(1):59-68. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.12.044. Epub 2012
Jan 8.

Intraspinal transplantation of neurogenin-expressing stem cells generates spinal 
cord neural progenitors.

Lunn JS(1), Pacut C, Stern E, Sakowski SA, Velkey JM, O'Shea S, Feldman EL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells and their derivatives are an important resource for
developing novel cellular therapies for disease. Controlling proliferation and
lineage selection, however, are essential to circumvent the possibility of tumor 
formation and facilitate the safe translation of ES-based therapies to man.
Expression of appropriate transcription factors is one approach to direct the
differentiation of ES cells towards a specific lineage and stop proliferation.
Neural differentiation can be initiated in ES cells by expression of Neurogenin1 
(Ngn1). In this study we investigate the effects of controlled Ngn1 expression on
mouse ES (mES) cell differentiation in vitro and following grafting into the rat 
spinal cord. In vitro, Ngn1 expression in mES cells leads to rapid and specific
neural differentiation, and a concurrent decrease in proliferation. Similarly
transplantation of Ngn1-expressing mES cells into the spinal cord lead to in situ
differentiation and spinal precursor formation. These data demonstrate that Ngn1 
expression in mES cells is sufficient to promote neural differentiation and
inhibit proliferation, thus establishing an approach to safely graft ES cells
into the spinal cord.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3299886
PMID: 22245661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Neuron. 2012 Jan 12;73(1):49-63. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2011.10.029.

Otic mesenchyme cells regulate spiral ganglion axon fasciculation through a
Pou3f4/EphA4 signaling pathway.

Coate TM(1), Raft S, Zhao X, Ryan AK, Crenshaw EB 3rd, Kelley MW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cochlear Development, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. 
coatet@nidcd.nih.gov

Peripheral axons from auditory spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs) form an elaborate
series of radially and spirally oriented projections that interpret complex
aspects of the auditory environment. However, the developmental processes that
shape these axon tracts are largely unknown. Radial bundles are comprised of
dense SGN fascicles that project through otic mesenchyme to form synapses within 
the cochlea. Here, we show that radial bundle fasciculation and synapse formation
are disrupted when Pou3f4 (DFNX2) is deleted from otic mesenchyme. Further, we
demonstrate that Pou3f4 binds to and directly regulates expression of Epha4,
Epha4<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice present similar SGN defects, and exogenous EphA4 promotes SGN
fasciculation in the absence of Pou3f4. Finally, Efnb2 deletion in SGNs leads to 
similar fasciculation defects, suggesting that ephrin-B2/EphA4 interactions are
critical during this process. These results indicate a model whereby Pou3f4 in
the otic mesenchyme establishes an Eph/ephrin-mediated fasciculation signal that 
promotes inner radial bundle formation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3259535
PMID: 22243746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Hum Gene Ther. 2012 May;23(5):508-20. doi: 10.1089/hum.2011.121. Epub 2012 Apr
23.

Silencing of miR20a is crucial for Ngn1-mediated neuroprotection in injured
spinal cord.

Jee MK(1), Jung JS, Im YB, Jung SJ, Kang SK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Department of Biotechnology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, Korea.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) compose a relatively new discipline in biomedical research,
and many physiological processes in disease have been associated with changes in 
miRNA expression. Several studies report that miRNAs participate in biological
processes such as the control of secondary injury in several disease models.
Recently, we identified novel miRNAs that were abnormally up-regulated in a
traumatic spinal cord injury (SCI). In the current study, we focused on miR20a,
which causes continuing motor neuron degeneration when overexpressed in SCI
lesions. Blocking miR20a in SCI animals led to neural cell survival and eventual 
neurogenesis with rescued expression of the key target gene, neurogenin 1 (Ngn1).
Infusion of siNgn1 resulted in functional deficit in the hindlimbs caused by
aggressive secondary injury and actively enhanced the inflammation involved in
secondary injury progression. The events involving miR20a underlie motor neuron
and myelin destruction and pathophysiology and ultimately block regeneration in
injured spinal cords. Inhibition of miR20a expression effectively induced
definitive motor neuron survival and neurogenesis, and SCI animals showed
improved functional deficit. In this study, we showed that abnormal expression of
miR20a induces secondary injury, which suggests that miR20a could be a potential 
target for therapeutic intervention following SCI.

PMID: 22182208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Analyst. 2012 Jan 21;137(2):496-501. doi: 10.1039/c1an15875a. Epub 2011 Nov 24.

Silver nanoparticle based label-free colorimetric immunosensor for rapid
detection of neurogenin 1.

Yuan Y(1), Zhang J, Zhang H, Yang X.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of
Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, 130022, Jilin, China.

Neurogenin 1 (ngn1), with the functions of controlling the differentiation of
neurons, determining specific neuronal subtype, and inhibiting glial
differentiation, is quantitatively detected for the first time. By using
specifically modified silver nanoparticles (AgNP) as the signaling element, a
label-free, rapid and sensitive colorimetric immunoassay for the synthetic
peptide fragment of ngn1 (amino acid sequence: AQDDEQERRRRRGRTR) is reported. The
detection procedure is based on an anti-aggregation mechanism, by which ngn1
inhibits the aggregation of the probe in the presence of salt (NaClO(4)). The
anti-ngn1 antibody conjugated AgNP (denoted as AgNP-Ab) is negatively charged,
and mono-binding of the like-charged ngn1 to the probe will increase the surface 
charge density, hence enhancing the interparticular electrostatic repulsion.
Along with the increase of ngn1 concentration, the color of the solution varies
from red to yellow, thereby developing a feasible approach for the detection of
ngn1. Using a UV/vis spectrophotometer, this assay exhibits a linear response
range of two orders of magnitude, from 50 to 800 ng mL(-1), and a detection limit
of 30 ng mL(-1). On the basis of these qualities, the antibody-conjugated AgNP
may become a useful tool for point-of-care diagnosis of ngn1 and such a method
offers a new insight on the detection of the analogous antigen fragment as well.

PMID: 22114758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Dev Dyn. 2012 Feb;241(2):229-41. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22785. Epub 2011 Nov 18.

Differential contribution of Neurog1 and Neurog2 on the formation of cranial
ganglia along the anterior-posterior axis.

Takano-Maruyama M(1), Chen Y, Gaufo GO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 
78249, USA.

BACKGROUND: The neural crest (NC) and placode are transient neurogenic cell
populations that give rise to cranial ganglia of the vertebrate head. The
formation of the anterior NC- and placode-derived ganglia has been shown to
depend on the single activity of either Neurog1 or Neurog2. The requirement of
the more posterior cranial ganglia on Neurog1 and Neurog2 is unknown.
RESULTS: Here we show that the formation of the NC-derived parasympathetic otic
ganglia and placode-derived visceral sensory petrosal and nodose ganglia are
dependent on the redundant activities of Neurog1 and Neurog2. Tamoxifen-inducible
Cre lineage labeling of Neurog1 and Neurog2 show a dynamic spatiotemporal
expression profile in both NC and epibranchial placode that correlates with the
phenotypes of the Neurog-mutant embryos.
CONCLUSION: Our data, together with previous studies, suggest that the formation 
of cranial ganglia along the anterior-posterior axis is dependent on the dynamic 
spatiotemporal activities of Neurog1 and/or Neurog2 in both NC and epibranchial
placode.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3467003
PMID: 22102600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Differentiation. 2012 Jan;83(1):17-25. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.08.006. Epub 2011
Oct 5.

Stem cell factor and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor promote neuronal
lineage commitment of neural stem cells.

Piao CS(1), Li B, Zhang LJ, Zhao LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center,
Shreveport, LA 71130, USA.

Stem cell factor (SCF) and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) were
originally discovered as growth factors for hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). It
has been well defined that SCF and G-CSF contribute to regulation of lineage
commitment for HSCs. However, little is known about whether SCF and G-CSF play
roles in the determination and differentiation of neural stem cells (NSCs). Here 
we demonstrate the novel function of SCF and G-CSF in controlling cell cycle and 
cell fate determination of NSCs. We also observe that SCF and G-CSF promote
neuronal differentiation and inhibit astroglial differentiation at the early
stage of differentiation. In addition, our research data reveal that SCF in
combination with G-CSF has a dual function in promoting cell cycle exit and
directing neuronal fate commitment at the stage of NSC dividing. This
coordination effect of SCF+G-CSF on cell cycle arrest and neuronal
differentiation is through enhancing neurogenin 1 (Ngn1) activity. These findings
extend current knowledge regarding the role of SCF and G-CSF in the regulation of
neurogenesis and provide insights into the contribution of hematopoietic growth
factors to brain development and remodeling.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 22099173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Neural Dev. 2011 Nov 11;6:35. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-35.

Basal progenitor cells in the embryonic mouse thalamus - their molecular
characterization and the role of neurogenins and Pax6.

Wang L(1), Bluske KK, Dickel LK, Nakagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Developmental Biology Center and Stem Cell
Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. nakagawa@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: The size and cell number of each brain region are influenced by the
organization and behavior of neural progenitor cells during embryonic
development. Recent studies on developing neocortex have revealed the presence of
neural progenitor cells that divide away from the ventricular surface and undergo
symmetric divisions to generate either two neurons or two progenitor cells. These
'basal' progenitor cells form the subventricular zone and are responsible for
generating the majority of neocortical neurons. However, not much has been
studied on similar types of progenitor cells in other brain regions.
RESULTS: We have identified and characterized basal progenitor cells in the
embryonic mouse thalamus. The progenitor domain that generates all of the
cortex-projecting thalamic nuclei contained a remarkably high proportion of
basally dividing cells. Fewer basal progenitor cells were found in other
progenitor domains that generate non-cortex projecting nuclei. By using
intracellular domain of Notch1 (NICD) as a marker for radial glial cells, we
found that basally dividing cells extended outside the lateral limit of radial
glial cells, indicating that, similar to the neocortex and ventral telencephalon,
the thalamus has a distinct subventricular zone. Neocortical and thalamic basal
progenitor cells shared expression of some molecular markers, including Insm1,
Neurog1, Neurog2 and NeuroD1. Additionally, basal progenitor cells in each region
also expressed exclusive markers, such as Tbr2 in the neocortex and Olig2 and
Olig3 in the thalamus. In Neurog1/Neurog2 double mutant mice, the number of
basally dividing progenitor cells in the thalamus was significantly reduced,
which demonstrates the roles of neurogenins in the generation and/or maintenance 
of basal progenitor cells. In Pax6 mutant mice, the part of the thalamus that
showed reduced Neurog1/2 expression also had reduced basal mitosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our current study establishes the existence of a unique and
significant population of basal progenitor cells in the thalamus and their
dependence on neurogenins and Pax6. These progenitor cells may have important
roles in enhancing the generation of neurons within the thalamus and may also be 
critical for generating neuronal diversity in this complex brain region.

PMCID: PMC3234181
PMID: 22077982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Genes Cells. 2011 Nov;16(11):1097-109. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01555.x.

Zebrafish Dmrta2 regulates neurogenesis in the telencephalon.

Yoshizawa A(1), Nakahara Y, Izawa T, Ishitani T, Tsutsumi M, Kuroiwa A, Itoh M,
Kikuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima
University, Kagamiyama 1-3-1, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8526 Japan.

Although recent findings showed that some Drosophila doublesex and Caenorhabditis
elegans mab-3 related genes are expressed in neural tissues during development,
their functions have not been fully elucidated. Here, we isolated a zebrafish
mutant, ha2, that shows defects in telencephalic neurogenesis and found that ha2 
encodes Doublesex and MAB-3 related transcription factor like family A2 (Dmrta2).
dmrta2 expression is restricted to the telencephalon, diencephalon and olfactory 
placode during somitogenesis. We found that the expression of the proneural gene,
neurogenin1, in the posterior and dorsal region of telencephalon
(posterior-dorsal telencephalon) is markedly reduced in this mutant at the
14-somite stage without any defects in cell proliferation or cell death. In
contrast, the telencephalic expression of her6, a Hes-related gene that is known 
to encode a negative regulator of neurogenin1, expands dramatically in the ha2
mutant. Based on over-expression experiments and epistatic analyses, we propose
that zebrafish Dmrta2 controls neurogenin1 expression by repressing her6 in the
posterior-dorsal telencephalon. Furthermore, the expression domains of the
telencephalic marker genes, foxg1 and emx3, and the neuronal differentiation
gene, neurod, are downregulated in the ha2 posterior-dorsal telencephalon during 
somitogenesis. These results suggest that Dmrta2 plays important roles in the
specification of the posterior-dorsal telencephalic cell fate during
somitogenesis.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22023386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Surgery. 2012 Apr;151(4):564-70. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2011.08.013. Epub 2011 Oct
14.

CpG island methylator phenotype infers a poor disease-free survival in locally
advanced rectal cancer.

Jo P(1), Jung K, Grade M, Conradi LC, Wolff HA, Kitz J, Becker H, Rüschoff J,
Hartmann A, Beissbarth T, Müller-Dornieden A, Ghadimi M, Schneider-Stock R,
Gaedcke J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, University Medicine Göttingen,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Locally advanced rectal cancers are treated with preoperative
radiochemotherapy (RCT). However, subsets of patients have no benefit from
preoperative treatment. Since epigenetic modifications, including DNA
methylation, may influence response to neoadjuvant treatment we studied the CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in patients who received a 5-fluouracil based 
RCT.
METHODS: One hundred fifty patients with locally advanced rectal cancer, treated 
within a phase III clinical trial (CAO/ARO/AIO-94 and -04), were included in this
analysis. CIMP was assessed by methylation specific PCR (MSP) using RUNX3, SOCS1,
NEUROG1, IGF2, and CACNA1G as a marker panel. Loss of mismatch repair gene (MMR) 
expression was assessed by immunohistochemistry for a subset of patients. KRAS
and BRAF mutation status were assessed using Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: The CIMP status could be established in all 150 patients. Fifteen (10%) 
revealed CIMP positivity (=3 methylated promoters), whereas 135 patients (90%)
where classified as CIMP negative. Analysis for MMR status did not reveal any
microsatellite instability (MSI). A single mutation of the BRAF gene (D594G) was 
detected. The KRAS gene (exon 1, 2, and 3) was mutated in 65 tumors (43%) but was
not correlated to a specific CIMP status. Three- and 5-year disease-free survival
was notably worse in CIMP positive patients (56% and 0% vs 80% and 75%; P < .01) 
suggesting an increased likelihood of poor clinical outcome (HR 5.5; 95%CI: [2.1,
13.9]).
CONCLUSION: CIMP positivity, defined by methylation of at least 3 specific gene
promoters, is an infrequent event in locally advanced rectal cancer. However, it 
increases the likelihood of distant metastases. Therefore, the CIMP status may be
included as a molecular marker for the identification of high-risk patients and
might contribute to individual treatment stratification.

Copyright Â© 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22001634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Cell Transplant. 2012;21(6):1225-33. doi: 10.3727/096368911X600966. Epub 2011 Sep
22.

Radiofrequency energy loop primes cardiac, neuronal, and skeletal muscle
differentiation in mouse embryonic stem cells: a new tool for improving tissue
regeneration.

Maioli M(1), Rinaldi S, Santaniello S, Castagna A, Pigliaru G, Gualini S, Fontani
V, Ventura C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

Radiofrequency (RF) waves from Wi-Fi (wireless fidelity) technologies have become
ubiquitous, with Internet access spreading into homes, and public areas. The
human body harbors multipotent stem cells with various grading of potentiality.
Whether stem cells may be affected by Wi-Fi RF energy remains unknown. We exposed
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells to a Radio Electric Asymmetric Conveyer (REAC),
an innovative device delivering Wi-Fi RF of 2.4 GHz with its conveyer electrodes 
immersed into the culture medium. Cell responses were investigated by real-time
PCR, Western blot, and confocal microscopy. Single RF burst duration, radiated
power, electric and magnetic fields, specific absorption rate, and current
density in culture medium were monitored. REAC stimulation primed transcription
of genes involved in cardiac (GATA4, Nkx-2.5, and prodynorphin), skeletal muscle 
(myoD) and neuronal (neurogenin1) commitment, while downregulating the self
renewal/pluripotency-associated genes Sox2, Oct4, and Nanog. REAC exposure
enhanced the expression of cardiac, skeletal, and neuronal lineage-restricted
marker proteins. The number of spontaneously beating ES-derived myocardial cells 
was also increased. In conclusion, REAC stimulation provided a "physical milieu" 
optimizing stem cell expression of pluripotentiality and the attainment of three 
major target lineages for regenerative medicine, without using chemical agonists 
or vector-mediated gene delivery.

PMID: 21975035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Development. 2011 Nov;138(21):4753-62. doi: 10.1242/dev.066563. Epub 2011 Sep 28.

Partially redundant proneural function reveals the importance of timing during
zebrafish olfactory neurogenesis.

Madelaine R(1), Garric L, Blader P.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, UPS, Centre de Biologie du Développement (CBD), 118
route de Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse, France.

Little is known about proneural gene function during olfactory neurogenesis in
zebrafish. Here, we show that the zebrafish Atonal genes neurogenin1 (neurog1)
and neurod4 are redundantly required for development of both early-born olfactory
neurons (EONs) and later-born olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs). We show that
neurod4 expression is initially absent in neurog1 mutant embryos but recovers and
is sufficient for the delayed development of OSN. By contrast, EON numbers are
significantly reduced in neurog1 mutant embryos despite the recovery of neurod4
expression. Our results suggest that a shortened time window for EON development 
causes this reduction; the last S-phase of EON is delayed in neurog1 mutant
embryos but mutant EONs are all post-mitotic at the same stage as EONs in
wild-type embryos. Finally, we show that expression of certain genes, such as
robo2, is never detected in neurog1 mutant EONs. Failure of robo2 expression to
recover correlates with defects in the fasciculation of neurog1 mutant olfactory 
axonal projections and in the organisation of proto-glomeruli because projections
arrive at the olfactory bulb that are reminiscent of those in robo2 mutant
embryos. We conclude that the duration of proneural expression in EON progenitors
is crucial for correct development of the zebrafish olfactory system.

PMID: 21965609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 1;360(1):77-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.09.007. Epub 2011
Sep 16.

The transcription factor Cux2 marks development of an A-delta sublineage of TrkA 
sensory neurons.

Bachy I(1), Franck MC, Li L, Abdo H, Pattyn A, Ernfors P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Medical Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

The developmental process and unique molecular identity between the many
different types of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) sensory neurons generated during
embryogenesis provide the cellular basis for the distinct perceptual modalities
of somatosensation. The mechanisms leading to the generation of different types
of nociceptive sensory neurons remain only partly understood. Here, we show that 
the transcription factor Cux2 is a novel marker of sensory neuron subpopulations 
of three main sublineages as defined by the expression of neurotrophic factor
receptors TrkA, TrkB and TrkC. In particular, it is expressed in a subpopulation 
of early TrkA(+) neurons that arise during the early, Ngn1-independent initiated 
neurogenesis in the DRG. Postnatally, Cux2 marks a specific subtype of A-delta
nociceptors as seen by expression of TrkA and NF200 but absence of TrpV1.
Analysis of Cux2 mutant mice shows that Cux2 is not required for specification of
Trk(+) neuronal subpopulations. However, Cux2 mutant mice are hypersensitive to
mechanical, but not to heat or cold stimuli, consistent with a requirement in the
process of specification of the mechanoreceptive neuron circuit. Hence, our
results show that Cux2 is expressed and may participate in development of a
specific subtype of myelinated TrkA(+) nociceptors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21945863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. AAPS J. 2011 Dec;13(4):606-14. doi: 10.1208/s12248-011-9300-y. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Epigenetic CpG demethylation of the promoter and reactivation of the expression
of Neurog1 by curcumin in prostate LNCaP cells.

Shu L(1), Khor TO, Lee JH, Boyanapalli SS, Huang Y, Wu TY, Saw CL, Cheung KL,
Kong AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Ernest Mario School of Pharmacy, Rutgers, The
State University of New Jersey, Piscataway, 08854, USA.

Curcumin (CUR), a major bioactive polyphenolic component from turmeric curry,
Curcuma longa, has been shown to be a potent anti-cancer phytochemical with
well-established anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative stress effects. Chromatin
remodeling-related epigenetic regulation has emerged as an important mechanism of
carcinogenesis, chemoprevention, and chemotherapy. CUR has been found to inhibit 
histone acetyltransferase activity, and it was also postulated to be a potential 
DNA methyltransferase (DNMT) and histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor. In this
study, we show that when human prostate LNCaP cells were treated with CUR, it led
to demethylation of the first 14 CpG sites of the CpG island of the Neurog1 gene 
and restored the expression of this cancer-related CpG-methylation epigenome
marker gene. At the protein level, CUR treatment had limited effects on the
expression of epigenetic modifying proteins MBD2, MeCP2, DNMT1, and DNMT3a. Using
ChIP assay, CUR decreased MeCP2 binding to the promoter of Neurog1 dramatically. 
CUR treatment showed different effects on the protein expression of HDACs,
increasing the expression of HDAC1, 4, 5, and 8 but decreasing HDAC3. However,
the total HDAC activity was decreased upon CUR treatment. Further analysis of the
tri-methylation of histone 3 at lysine 27 (H3K27me3) showed that CUR decreased
the enrichment of H3K27me3 at the Neurog1 promoter region as well as at the
global level. Taken together, our present study provides evidence on the CpG
demethylation ability of CUR on Neurog1 while activating its expression,
suggesting a potential epigenetic modifying role for this phytochemical compound 
in human prostate cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3231852
PMID: 21938566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Comp Neurol. 2011 Dec 1;519(17):3580-96. doi: 10.1002/cne.22726.

Progenitor cell capacity of NeuroD1-expressing globose basal cells in the mouse
olfactory epithelium.

Packard A(1), Giel-Moloney M, Leiter A, Schwob JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology, Tufts University, Boston, Massachusetts 
02111, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NeuroD1 is expressed in embryonic
and adult mouse olfactory epithelium (OE), as well as during epithelial
regeneration, suggesting that it plays an important role in olfactory
neurogenesis. We characterized NEUROD1-expressing progenitors, determined their
progeny in the adult OE, and identified a subtle phenotype in <U+0394>NeuroD1-knockout
mice. All olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs) derive from a NeuroD1-expressing
progenitor as shown by recombination-mediated lineage tracing, as do other
sensory receptors of the nose, including vomeronasal, nasal septal, and
Grunenberg ganglion neurons. NEUROD1-expressing cells are found among the globose
basal cell population: they are actively proliferating and frequently coexpress
Neurog1, but not the transit amplifying cell marker MASH1, nor the neuronal
marker NCAM. As a consequence, NEUROD1-expressing globose basal cells are best
classified as immediate neuronal precursors. In adolescent <U+0394>NeuroD1-LacZ knock-in
null mice the OE displays subtle abnormalities, as compared to wildtype and
heterozygous littermates. In some areas of the OE, mature neurons are absent, or 
sparse, although those same areas retain immature OSNs and LacZ-expressing
progenitors, albeit both of these populations are smaller than expected. Our
results support the conclusion that most, if not all, nasal chemosensory neurons 
derive from NeuroD1-expressing globose basal cells of the immediate neuronal
precursor variety. Moreover, elimination of NeuroD1 by gene knockout, while it
does not disrupt initial OSN differentiation, does compromise the integrity of
parts of the olfactory epithelium by altering proliferation, neuronal
differentiation, or neuronal survival there.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4005605
PMID: 21800309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Neurosci. 2011 Jul 27;31(30):10859-71. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0445-11.2011.

In vivo neuronal subtype-specific targets of Atoh1 (Math1) in dorsal spinal cord.

Lai HC(1), Klisch TJ, Roberts R, Zoghbi HY, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Neural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are crucial in
regulating the differentiation and neuronal subtype specification of neurons.
Precisely how these transcription factors direct such processes is largely
unknown due to the lack of bona fide targets in vivo. Genetic evidence suggests
that bHLH factors have shared targets in their common differentiation role, but
unique targets with respect to their distinct roles in neuronal subtype
specification. However, whether neuronal subtype-specific targets exist remains
an unsolved question. To address this question, we focused on Atoh1 (Math1), a
bHLH transcription factor that specifies distinct neuronal subtypes of the
proprioceptive pathway in mammals including the dI1 (dorsal interneuron 1)
population of the developing spinal cord. We identified transcripts unique to the
Atoh1-derived lineage using microarray analyses of specific bHLH-sorted
populations from mouse. Chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing experiments
followed by enhancer reporter analyses identified five direct neuronal
subtype-specific targets of Atoh1 in vivo along with their Atoh1-responsive
enhancers. These targets, Klf7, Rab15, Rassf4, Selm, and Smad7, have diverse
functions that range from transcription factors to regulators of endocytosis and 
signaling pathways. Only Rab15 and Selm are expressed across several different
Atoh1-specified neuronal subtypes including external granule cells (external
granule cell layer) in the developing cerebellum, hair cells of the inner ear,
and Merkel cells. Our work establishes on a molecular level that neuronal
differentiation bHLH transcription factors have distinct lineage-specific
targets.

PMCID: PMC3153066
PMID: 21795538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Int J Surg Pathol. 2012 Apr;20(2):185-90. doi: 10.1177/1066896911415405. Epub
2011 Jul 26.

Rhabdoid carcinoma of the colon: a distinct entity with a very aggressive
behavior: a case report associated with a polyposis coli and review of the
literature.

Remo A(1), Zanella C, Molinari E, Talamini A, Tollini F, Piacentini P, Battaglia 
P, Baritono E, Bonetti A, Lanza F, Fasolin A, Manfrin E, Vendraminelli R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Mater Salutis Hospital, ULSS 21 Legnago, Verona,
Italy. remino76@yahoo.it

Rhabdoid colon tumors (RCTs) are rare lesions whose existence as an independent
distinct entity remains controversial. To date, 6 RCTs have been reported. This
study reports a novel case associated with polyposis coli in a 73-year-old woman.
Histologically, the neoplasia was heterogeneous consisting of an adenocarcinoma
associated with rhabdoid features. In rhabdoid component, an intense expression
of MSH2 was noted but MLH1 was negative. A BRAF V600E mutation and no KRAS
mutations were identified. The promoter regions of subset of genes highly
specific to characterize the CIMP status (NEUROG1, IGF2, RUNX3, SOCS1, including 
MLH1) were hypermethylated, suggesting the presence of CIMP+ and MSI high tumor. 
In conclusion, all RCTs have similar clinical features. The presence of polyposis
and adenocarcinoma component as well as the expression of mesenchymal marker
suggests a sarcomatous dedifferentiation. It is argued that RCT could be a very
aggressive entity of colon, which could benefit from new biological colonic
treatments.

PMID: 21791485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21102. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021102. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

B vitamins, methionine and alcohol intake and risk of colon cancer in relation to
BRAF mutation and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP).

Schernhammer ES(1), Giovannucci E, Baba Y, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
eva.schernhammer@channing.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: One-carbon metabolism appears to play an important role in DNA
methylation reaction. Evidence suggests that a low intake of B vitamins or high
alcohol consumption increases colorectal cancer risk. How one-carbon nutrients
affect the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) or BRAF mutation status in
colon cancer remains uncertain.
METHODS: Utilizing incident colon cancers in a large prospective cohort of women 
(the Nurses' Health Study), we determined BRAF status (N<U+200A>=<U+200A>386) and CIMP status
(N<U+200A>=<U+200A>375) by 8 CIMP-specific markers [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, 
NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1], and 8 other CpG islands (CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT,
MINT-1, MINT-31, p14, and WRN). We examined the relationship between intake of
one-carbon nutrients and alcohol and colon cancer risk, by BRAF mutation or CIMP 
status.
RESULTS: Higher folate intake was associated with a trend towards low risk of
CIMP-low/0 tumors [total folate intake =400 µg/day vs. <200 µg/day; the
multivariate relative risk<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.73; 95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.53-1.02], whereas total folate
intake had no influence on CIMP-high tumor risks (P(heterogeneity)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.73).
Neither vitamin B(6), methionine or alcohol intake appeared to differentially
influence risks for CIMP-high and CIMP-low/0 tumors. Using the 16-marker CIMP
panel did not substantially alter our results. B vitamins, methionine or alcohol 
intake did not affect colon cancer risk differentially by BRAF status.
CONCLUSIONS: This molecular pathological epidemiology study suggests that low
level intake of folate may be associated with an increased risk of CIMP-low/0
colon tumors, but not that of CIMP-high tumors. However, the difference between
CIMP-high and CIMP-low/0 cancer risks was not statistically significant, and
additional studies are necessary to confirm these observations.

PMCID: PMC3124479
PMID: 21738611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Aquat Toxicol. 2011 Sep;105(1-2):127-35. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2011.05.017. Epub
2011 Jun 6.

Generation and characterization of neurogenin1-GFP transgenic medaka with
potential for rapid developmental neurotoxicity screening.

Fan CY(1), Simmons SO, Law SH, Jensen K, Cowden J, Hinton D, Padilla S,
Ramabhadran R.

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Systems Toxicology and Toxicity Assessment Divisions, National
Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, US EPA, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27711, USA.

Fish models such as zebrafish and medaka are increasingly used as alternatives to
rodents in developmental and toxicological studies. These developmental and
toxicological studies can be facilitated by the use of transgenic reporters that 
permit the real-time, noninvasive observation of the fish. Here we report the
construction and characterization of transgenic medaka lines expressing green
fluorescent protein (GFP) under the control of the zebrafish neurogenin 1 (ngn1) 
gene promoter. Neurogenin (ngn1) is a helix-loop-helix transcription factor
expressed in proliferating neuronal progenitor cells early in neuronal
differentiation and plays a crucial role in directing neurogenesis. GFP
expression was detected from 24 h post-fertilization until hatching, in a spatial
pattern consistent with the previously reported zebrafish ngn1 expression.
Temporal expression of the transgene parallels the expression profile of the
endogenous medaka ngn1 transcript. Further, we demonstrate that embryos from the 
transgenic line permit the non-destructive, real-time screening of ngn1
promoter-directed GFP expression in a 96-well format, enabling higher throughput 
studies of developmental neurotoxicants. This strain has been deposited with and 
maintained by the National BioResource Project and is available on request
(http://www.shigen.nig.ac.jp/medaka/strainDetailAction.do?quickSearch=true&strain
Id=5660).

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21718657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Tumour Biol. 2011 Aug;32(4):653-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-011-0165-6. Epub 2011 Apr 
6.

Detection of viral DNA sequences in sporadic colorectal cancers in relation to
CpG island methylation and methylator phenotype.

Karpinski P(1), Myszka A, Ramsey D, Kielan W, Sasiadek MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, ul. Marcinkowskiego 1,
50-368, Wroclaw, Poland. polemiraza@poczta.fm

There is evidence that insertion of viral DNA into a mammalian genome can lead to
alterations of methylation patterns. The aim of the present study was to examine 
the presence of DNA sequences of five human DNA viruses (assessed by PCR): JC
polyoma virus (JCV), human adenovirus (AdV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), Kaposi
sarcoma-associated herpesvirus (KSHV/HHV8) and human papillomavirus (HPV) in a
cohort of 186 sporadic colorectal cancers (CRCs) and related these data with the 
methylation status of six CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)-specific genes
(MLH1, CACNA1G, NEUROG1, IGF2, SOCS1, RUNX3) and seven cancer-related genes
markers (p16, MINT1, MINT2, MINT31, EN1, SCTR and INHBB) assessed by
methylation-specific PCR in 186 and 134 CRC cases, respectively. The AdV, KSHV
and HPV were detected in four (2%), two (1%) and zero CRC cases, respectively,
and thus were excluded from further analyses. Although 19% and 9% of the CRCs
were positive for EBV and JCV, respectively, no associations between virus
presence and CpG island methylation were found after correction for multiple
testing. Our results demonstrate that the presence of DNA sequences of JCV and
EBV in CRC is unrelated to the methylation of the 13 cancer-related CpG islands
and CIMP.

PMCID: PMC3131518
PMID: 21625944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. BMC Neurosci. 2011 May 26;12:50. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-12-50.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors SAHA and sodium butyrate block G1-to-S cell cycle 
progression in neurosphere formation by adult subventricular cells.

Zhou Q(1), Dalgard CL, Wynder C, Doughty ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, Center for Neuroscience and
Regenerative Medicine, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA.

BACKGROUND: Histone deacetylases (HDACs) are enzymes that modulate gene
expression and cellular processes by deacetylating histones and non-histone
proteins. While small molecule inhibitors of HDAC activity (HDACi) are used
clinically in the treatment of cancer, pre-clinical treatment models suggest they
also exert neuroprotective effects and stimulate neurogenesis in
neuropathological conditions. However, the direct effects of HDACi on cell cycle 
progression and proliferation, two properties required for continued
neurogenesis, have not been fully characterized in adult neural stem cells
(NSCs). In this study, we examined the effects of two broad class I and class II 
HDACi on adult mouse NSCs, the hydroxamate-based HDACi suberoylanilide hydroxamic
acid (vorinostat, SAHA) and the short chain fatty acid HDACi sodium butyrate.
RESULTS: We show that both HDACi suppress the formation of neurospheres by adult 
mouse NSCs grown in proliferation culture conditions in vitro. DNA synthesis is
significantly inhibited in adult mouse NSCs exposed to either SAHA or sodium
butyrate and inhibition is associated with an arrest in the G1 phase of the cell 
cycle. HDACi exposure also resulted in transcriptional changes in adult mouse
NSCs. Cdk inhibitor genes p21 and p27 transcript levels are increased and
associated with elevated H3K9 acetylation levels at proximal promoter regions of 
p21 and p27. mRNA levels for notch effector Hes genes and Spry-box stem cell
transcription factors are downregulated, whereas pro-neural transcription factors
Neurog1 and Neurod1 are upregulated. Lastly, we show HDAC inhibition under
proliferation culture conditions leads to long-term changes in cell fate in adult
mouse NSCs induced to differentiate in vitro.
CONCLUSION: SAHA and sodium butyrate directly regulate cdk inhibitor
transcription to control cell cycle progression in adult mouse NSCs. HDAC
inhibition results in G1 arrest in adult mouse NSCs and transcriptional changes
associated with activation of neuronal lineage commitment programs and a
reduction of stem/progenitor state. Changes in differentiated cell state in adult
mouse NSCs treated with HDACi under proliferation culture conditions suggests an 
intrinsic relationship between multipotency, cell cycle progression and HDAC
activity in these cells.

PMCID: PMC3123242
PMID: 21615950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 29;6(4):e19174. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019174.

Ascl1/Mash1 is a novel target of Gli2 during Gli2-induced neurogenesis in P19 EC 
cells.

Voronova A(1), Fischer A, Ryan T, Al Madhoun A, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

The Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is important for neurogenesis in vivo.
Gli transcription factors, effector proteins of the Shh signaling pathway, have
neurogenic properties in vivo, which are still poorly understood. To study the
molecular basis of neurogenic properties of Gli2, we used a well-established
embryonic stem cell model, the P19 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell line, which can 
be induced to differentiate into neurons in the presence of retinoic acid (RA).
We found that, in the absence of RA, overexpression of Gli2 induced P19 EC cells 
to differentiate into neurons, but not astrocytes during the first ten days of
differentiation. To our knowledge, this is the first indication that the
expression of Gli factors can convert EC cells into neurons. Furthermore, Gli2
upregulated expression of the neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) factors,
such as NeuroD, Neurog1 and Ascl1/Mash1 in P19 EC cells. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we showed that Gli2 bound to multiple regulatory
regions in the Ascl1 gene, including promoter and enhancer regions during
Gli2-induced neurogenesis. In addition, Gli2 activated the Ascl1/Mash1 promoter
in vitro. Using the expression of a dominant-negative form of Gli2, fused to the 
Engrailed repression domain, we observed a reduction in gliogenesis and a
significant downregulation of the bHLH factors Ascl1/Mash1, Neurog1 and NeuroD,
leading to delayed neurogenesis in P19 EC cells, further supporting the
hypothesis that Ascl1/Mash1 is a direct target of Gli2. In summary, Gli2 is
sufficient to induce neurogenesis in P19 stem cells at least in part by directly 
upregulating Ascl1/Mash1. Our results provide mechanistic insight into the
neurogenic properties of Gli2 in vitro, and offer novel plausible explanations
for its in vivo neurogenic properties.

PMCID: PMC3084770
PMID: 21559470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 May 6;8(5):538-51. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.03.011.

Human ESC-derived neural crest model reveals a key role for SOX2 in sensory
neurogenesis.

Cimadamore F(1), Fishwick K, Giusto E, Gnedeva K, Cattarossi G, Miller A,
Pluchino S, Brill LM, Bronner-Fraser M, Terskikh AV.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, 10901 North Torrey Pines Road, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA. flavioc@burnham.org

The transcription factor SOX2 is widely known to play a critical role in the
central nervous system; however, its role in peripheral neurogenesis remains
poorly understood. We recently developed an hESC-based model in which migratory
cells undergo epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) to acquire properties of
neural crest (NC) cells. In this model, we found that migratory NC progenitors
downregulate SOX2, but then start re-expressing SOX2 as they differentiate to
form neurogenic dorsal root ganglion (DRG)-like clusters. SOX2 downregulation was
sufficient to induce EMT and resulted in massive apoptosis when neuronal
differentiation was induced. In vivo, downregulation of SOX2 in chick and mouse
NC cells significantly reduced the numbers of neurons within DRG. We found that
SOX2 binds directly to NGN1 and MASH1 promoters and is required for their
expression. Our data suggest that SOX2 plays a key role for NGN1-dependent
acquisition of neuronal fates in sensory ganglia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4110917
PMID: 21549328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Hum Genet. 2011 Nov;130(5):645-55. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-0999-4. Epub 2011 May 
5.

Neurologic and ocular phenotype in Pitt-Hopkins syndrome and a zebrafish model.

Brockschmidt A(1), Filippi A, Charbel Issa P, Nelles M, Urbach H, Eter N, Driever
W, Weber RG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University,
Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53105 Bonn, Germany.

In this study, we performed an in-depth analysis of the neurologic and
ophthalmologic phenotype in a patient with Pitt-Hopkins syndrome (PTHS), a
disorder characterized by severe mental and motor retardation, carrying a
uniallelic TCF4 deletion, and studied a zebrafish model. The PTHS-patient was
characterized by high-resolution magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) with diffusion 
tensor imaging to analyze the brain structurally, spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography to visualize the retinal layers, and electroretinography to 
evaluate retinal function. A zebrafish model was generated by knockdown of
tcf4-function by injection of morpholino antisense oligos into zebrafish embryos 
and the morphant phenotype was characterized for expression of neural
differentiation genes neurog1, ascl1b, pax6a, zic1, atoh1a, atoh2b. Data from
PTHS-patient and zebrafish morphants were compared. While a cerebral MRI-scan
showed markedly delayed myelination and ventriculomegaly in the 1-year-old
PTHS-patient, no structural cerebral anomalies including no white matter tract
alterations were detected at 9 years of age. Structural ocular examinations
showed highly myopic eyes and an increase in ocular length, while retinal layers 
were normal. Knockdown of tcf4-function in zebrafish embryos resulted in a
developmental delay or defects in terminal differentiation of brain and eyes,
small eyes with a relative increase in ocular length and an enlargement of the
hindbrain ventricle. In summary, tcf4-knockdown in zebrafish embryos does not
seem to affect early neural patterning and regionalization of the forebrain, but 
may be involved in later aspects of neurogenesis and differentiation. We provide 
evidence for a role of TCF4/E2-2 in ocular growth control in PTHS-patients and
the zebrafish model.

PMID: 21544580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Jun 22;497(2):74-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.04.033. Epub
2011 Apr 22.

Myt/NZF family transcription factors regulate neuronal differentiation of P19
cells.

Kameyama T(1), Matsushita F, Kadokawa Y, Marunouchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Expression Mechanisms, Institute for Comprehensive Medical
Science, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi 470-1192, Japan.
tkame@fujita-hu.ac.jp

During mammalian central nervous system development, neural stem cells
differentiate and then mature into various types of neurons. Myelin transcription
factor (Myt)/neural zinc finger (NZF) family proteins were first identified as
myelin proteolipid protein promoter binding factors and were shown to be involved
in oligodendrocyte development. In this study, we found that Myt/NZF family
molecules were expressed during neuronal differentiation in vivo and in vitro.
Transient over-expression of Myt/NZF family genes could convert undifferentiated 
P19 cells into neurons without induction by retinoic acid (RA), and the ability
of these genes to induce neuronal differentiation was comparable to that of
Neurog1 and Neurod1. Additionally, we found that St18 (or NZF-3) was induced by
several bHLH transcription factors. When NZF-3 and Neurog1 were co-expressed in
P19 cells, the rate of neuronal differentiation was significantly increased.
These data suggest not only that NZF-3 works downstream of Neurog1 but also that 
it plays a crucial role together with Neurog1 in neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21540077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Comp Neurol. 2011 May 1;519(7):1355-70. doi: 10.1002/cne.22574.

Spatiotemporal fate map of neurogenin1 (Neurog1) lineages in the mouse central
nervous system.

Kim EJ(1), Hori K, Wyckoff A, Dickel LK, Koundakjian EJ, Goodrich LV, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
75390-9111, USA.

Neurog1 (Ngn1, Neurod3, neurogenin1) is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factor essential for neuronal differentiation and subtype
specification during embryogenesis. Due to the transient expression of Neurog1
and extensive migration of neuronal precursors, it has been challenging to
understand the full complement of Neurog1 lineage cells throughout the central
nervous system (CNS). Here we labeled and followed Neurog1 lineages using
inducible Cre-flox recombination systems with Neurog1-Cre and Neurog1-CreER(T2)
BAC (bacterial artificial chromosome) transgenic mice. Neurog1 lineage cells are 
restricted to neuronal fates and contribute to diverse but discrete populations
in each brain region. In the forebrain, Neurog1 lineages include mitral cells and
glutamatergic interneurons in the olfactory bulb, pyramidal and granule neurons
in the hippocampus, and pyramidal cells in the cortex. In addition, most of the
thalamus, but not the hypothalamus, arises from Neurog1 progenitors. Although
Neurog1 lineages are largely restricted to glutamatergic neurons, there are
multiple exceptions including Purkinje cells and other GABAergic neurons in the
cerebellum. This study provides the first overview of the spatiotemporal fate map
of Neurog1 lineages in the CNS.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4010191
PMID: 21452201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Hear Res. 2011 Aug;278(1-2):21-33. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2011.03.002. Epub 2011
Mar 21.

The molecular basis of making spiral ganglion neurons and connecting them to hair
cells of the organ of Corti.

Yang T(1), Kersigo J, Jahan I, Pan N, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of
Iowa, 143 BB, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

The bipolar spiral ganglion neurons apparently delaminate from the growing
cochlear duct and migrate to Rosenthal's canal. They project radial fibers to
innervate the organ of Corti (type I neurons to inner hair cells, type II neurons
to outer hair cells) and also project tonotopically to the cochlear nuclei. The
early differentiation of these neurons requires transcription factors to regulate
migration, pathfinding and survival. Neurog1 null mice lack formation of neurons.
Neurod1 null mice show massive neuronal death combined with aberrant central and 
peripheral projections. Prox1 protein is necessary for proper type II neuron
process navigation, which is also affected by the neurotrophins Bdnf and Ntf3.
Neurotrophin null mutants show specific patterns of neuronal loss along the
cochlea but remaining neurons compensate by expanding their target area. All
neurotrophin mutants have reduced radial fiber growth proportional to the degree 
of loss of neurotrophin alleles. This suggests a simple dose response effect of
neurotrophin concentration. Keeping overall concentration constant, but
misexpressing one neurotrophin under regulatory control of another one results in
exuberant fiber growth not only of vestibular fibers to the cochlea but also of
spiral ganglion neurons to outer hair cells suggesting different effectiveness of
neurotrophins for spiral ganglion neurite growth. Finally, we report here for the
first time that losing all neurons in double null mutants affects extension of
the cochlear duct and leads to formation of extra rows of outer hair cells in the
apex, possibly by disrupting the interaction of the spiral ganglion with the
elongating cochlea.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3130837
PMID: 21414397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Brain Res. 2011 May 4;1388:12-21. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2011.02.087. Epub 2011 
Mar 5.

Altered gene expression in the emerging cerebellar primordium of Neurog1-/- mice.

Dalgard CL(1), Zhou Q, Lundell TG, Doughty ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,
4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Expression of the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Neurogenin1 
(Neurog1) coincides with the emergence of the cerebellum and Neurog1-expressing
progenitors are fated to become Purkinje cells and later interneurons. However,
the gene regulatory functions of Neurog1 in cerebellar development have not been 
characterized. We performed a genome-wide analysis of gene expression in the
cerebellar primordium of E11.5 Neurog1 null (Neurog1-/-) mice to identify the
Neurog1 transcriptome in the emerging cerebellum. This screen identified 117
genes differentially enriched in Neurog1-/- versus control sample sets with a
high presence of gene sets enriched for functions in nervous system development. 
Hierarchical clustering revealed complete stratification of differentially
expressed genes based on Neurog1 gene deletion status. In silico analysis of
promoter regions identifies high probability Neurog1 regulatory (E-box) binding
sites in 94 of the 117 differentially expressed genes and Pax6 binding motifs in 
25 of these 94 promoters. Our data provide a framework for investigating Neurog1 
transcriptional programs in early cerebellar development and suggest functional
Neurog1-Pax6 cross-talk in the activation of downstream targets.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 21382351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Gastroenterol. 2011 Jun;106(6):1110-8. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2011.6. Epub 2011
Feb 15.

Methylation of NEUROG1 in serum is a sensitive marker for the detection of early 
colorectal cancer.

Herbst A(1), Rahmig K, Stieber P, Philipp A, Jung A, Ofner A, Crispin A, Neumann 
J, Lamerz R, Kolligs FT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, University of Munich, Munich, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Colorectal cancer is the third most common cancer and a major cause
of cancer-related deaths. Early detection of colonic lesions can reduce the
incidence and mortality of colorectal cancer. Colonoscopy is the screening test
for colorectal cancer with the highest efficacy, but its acceptance in the
general public is rather low. To identify suitable tumor-derived markers that
could detect colorectal cancer in blood samples, we analyzed the methylation
status of a panel of genes in sera of affected patients.
METHODS: Using methylation-specific quantitative PCR, we analyzed the methylation
of ten marker genes in sera of healthy individuals and patients with colorectal
cancer.
RESULTS: Only HLTF, HPP1/TPEF, and NEUROG1 DNA methylation was detectable in at
least 50% of patients with colorectal cancers. Whereas HLTF and HPP1/TPEF
preferentially detected advanced and metastasized colorectal cancers, NEUROG1
methylation was detectable in UICC stages I-IV at a similar rate. Compared with
other methylation markers, such as ALX4, SEPT9, and vimentin, NEUROG1 shows a
higher sensitivity for colorectal cancer at UICC stages I and II. At a
specificity of 91%, NEUROG1 reached a sensitivity of 61% (confidence interval,
50.4-70.6%) for the detection of colorectal cancers. Furthermore, detection of
NEUROG1 methylation was independent of age and gender.
CONCLUSIONS: Methylation of the NEUROG1 gene is frequently found in sera of
patients with colorectal cancers independent of tumor stage. The quantitative
detection of NEUROG1 DNA methylation in serum is a suitable approach for the
non-invasive screening for asymptomatic colorectal cancer.

PMID: 21326223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(10):1453-64. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.093041ki.

Six1 is indispensable for production of functional progenitor cells during
olfactory epithelial development.

Ikeda K(1), Kageyama R, Suzuki Y, Kawakami K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Center for Molecular Medicine, Jichi Medical University, 
Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.

The rodent olfactory epithelium (OE) is a good model system for studying the
principles of stem and progenitor cell biology, because of its capacity for
continuous neurogenesis throughout life and relatively well-characterized
neuronal lineage. The development of mouse OE is divided into two stages, early
and established neurogenesis. In established neurogenesis, which starts at
embryonic day (E) 12.5, sustentacular cells and olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs)
are produced from apical and basal progenitors, respectively. We previously
reported that Six1(-/-) shows a lack of mature ORNs throughout development and
disorganization of OE after E12.5. However, the molecular bases for these defects
have not been addressed. Here, we show that Six1 is expressed in both apical and 
basal progenitors. In Six1(-/-) mice, apical proliferating cells were absent and 
no morphologically identifiable sustentacular cells were observed. Consistently, 
the expression of Notch2 and Jagged1 in the apical layer was absent in Six1(-/-) 
mice. On the other hand, basal proliferating cells were observed in Six1(-/-)
animals, but the expression of Ngn1, NeuroD, Notch1, and Jagged2 in the basal
layer was absent. The expression of Mash1, the determination gene for ORNs, and
Hes genes was enhanced in Six1(-/-) mice. The present findings suggest that Six1 
regulates production of functional apical and basal progenitors during OE
development, through the regulation of various genes, such as neuronal basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH), neuronal repressor bHLH, and genes involved in the Notch
signaling pathway.

PMID: 21302255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Gastroenterology. 2011 Apr;140(4):1174-81. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.12.035.
Epub 2010 Dec 24.

5-Fluorouracil adjuvant chemotherapy does not increase survival in patients with 
CpG island methylator phenotype colorectal cancer.

Jover R(1), Nguyen TP, Pérez-Carbonell L, Zapater P, Payá A, Alenda C, Rojas E,
Cubiella J, Balaguer F, Morillas JD, Clofent J, Bujanda L, Reñé JM, Bessa X,
Xicola RM, Nicolás-Pérez D, Castells A, Andreu M, Llor X, Boland CR, Goel A.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Gastroenterología, Hospital General Universitario de Alicante,
Alicante, Spain. jover_rod@gva.es

BACKGROUND & AIMS: 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU)-based adjuvant chemotherapy does not
increase survival times of patients with colorectal tumors with microsatellite
instability. We determined the response of patients with colorectal tumors with
the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) to 5-FU-based therapy.
METHODS: We analyzed a population-based cohort of 302 patients with colorectal
cancer (CRC) for a median follow-up time of 50.7 months. CIMP status was
determined by analysis of the CACNAG1, SOCS1, RUNX3, NEUROG1, and MLH1 promoters;
tumors were considered to be CIMP positive if at least 3 promoters were
methylated.
RESULTS: Tumors from 29.5% of patients (89/302) were CIMP positive; CIMP status
did not influence disease-free survival (DFS; log-rank = 0.3). Of tumors of TNM
stages II-III (n = 196), 32.7% were CIMP positive. Among patients with stages
II-III CRC who did not receive adjuvant 5-FU chemotherapy, those with
CIMP-positive tumors had longest times of DFS (log-rank = 0.04); In patients who 
received chemotherapy, those with CIMP-positive tumors had shorter times of DFS
(log-rank = 0.02). In patients with CIMP-negative tumors, adjuvant 5-FU
chemotherapy significantly increased time of DFS (log-rank = 0.00001). However,
in patients with CIMP-positive tumors, adjuvant 5-FU chemotherapy did not affect 
time of DFS (log-rank = 0.7). Multivariate analysis showed a significant,
independent interaction between 5-FU treatment and CIMP status (hazard ratio
[HR], 0.6; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.5-0.8). Among patients with
CIMP-positive tumors, adjuvant chemotherapy was not an independent predictor of
outcome (HR, 0.8; 95% CI, 0.3-2.0). In patients who did not receive adjuvant 5-FU
chemotherapy, CIMP status was the only independent predictor of survival (HR,
2.0; 95% CI, 1.1-3.8).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with CIMP-positive colorectal tumors do not benefit from
5-FU-based adjuvant chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3073650
PMID: 21185836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):496-510. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.017. Epub 2010
Dec 21.

Fgf15-mediated control of neurogenic and proneural gene expression regulates
dorsal midbrain neurogenesis.

Fischer T(1), Faus-Kessler T, Welzl G, Simeone A, Wurst W, Prakash N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Genetics, Helmholtz Centre Munich, Technical
University Munich, Neuherberg, Germany.

The balanced proliferation and cell cycle exit of neural progenitors, by
generating the appropriate amount of postmitotic progeny at the correct time and 
in the proper location, is required for the establishment of the highly ordered
structure of the adult brain. Little is known about the extrinsic signals
regulating these processes, particularly in the midbrain. Fibroblast growth
factor (Fgf) 15, the mouse ortholog of FGF19 and member of an atypical Fgf
subfamily, is prominently expressed in the dorsolateral midbrain of the
midgestational mouse embryo. In the absence of Fgf15, dorsal midbrain neural
progenitors fail to exit the cell cycle and to generate the proper amount of
postmitotic neurons. We show here that this is due to the altered expression of
inhibitory/neurogenic and proneural/neuronal differentiation helix-loop-helix
transcription factor (TF) genes. The expression of Id1, Id3, and Hes5 was
strongly increased and ectopically expanded, whereas the expression of Ascl1
(Mash1), Neurog1 (Ngn1) and Neurog2 (Ngn2) was strongly decreased and
transcription of Neurod1 (NeuroD) was completely abolished in the dorsolateral
midbrain of Fgf15(-/-) mice. These abnormalities were not caused by the
mis-expression of cell cycle regulatory proteins such as cyclin-dependent kinase 
inhibitors or retinoblastoma proteins. Furthermore, human FGF19 promotes cell
cycle exit of murine dorsal neural progenitors in vitro. Therefore, our data
suggest that Fgf15 is a crucial signaling molecule regulating the postmitotic
transition of dorsal neural progenitors and thus the initiation and proper
progression of dorsal midbrain neurogenesis in the mouse, by controlling the
expression of neurogenic and proneural TFs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21172336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cancer Causes Control. 2011 Feb;22(2):301-9. doi: 10.1007/s10552-010-9698-z. Epub
2010 Dec 8.

MGMT promoter methylation, loss of expression and prognosis in 855 colorectal
cancers.

Shima K(1), Morikawa T, Baba Y, Nosho K, Suzuki M, Yamauchi M, Hayashi M,
Giovannucci E, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, MA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) is a DNA repair enzyme. 
MGMT promoter hypermethylation and epigenetic silencing often occur as early
events in carcinogenesis. However, prognostic significance of MGMT alterations in
colorectal cancer remains uncertain.
METHODS: Utilizing a database of 855 colon and rectal cancers in two prospective 
cohort studies (the Nurses' Health Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up
Study), we detected MGMT promoter hypermethylation in 325 tumors (38%) by
MethyLight and loss of MGMT expression in 37% (247/672) of tumors by
immunohistochemistry. We assessed the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)
using eight methylation markers [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1,
NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1], and LINE-1 (L1) hypomethylation, TP53 (p53), and
microsatellite instability (MSI).
RESULTS: MGMT hypermethylation was not associated with colorectal cancer-specific
mortality in univariate or multivariate Cox regression analysis [adjusted hazard 
ratio (HR) = 1.03; 95% confidence interval (CI), 0.79-1.36] that adjusted for
clinical and tumor features, including CIMP, MSI, and BRAF mutation. Similarly,
MGMT loss was not associated with patient survival. MGMT loss was associated with
G>A mutations in KRAS (p = 0.019) and PIK3CA (p = 0.0031).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite a well-established role of MGMT aberrations in
carcinogenesis, neither MGMT promoter methylation nor MGMT loss serves as a
prognostic biomarker in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC3278857
PMID: 21140203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Gut. 2011 Apr;60(4):499-508. doi: 10.1136/gut.2010.223602. Epub 2010 Nov 10.

Sequential DNA methylation changes are associated with DNMT3B overexpression in
colorectal neoplastic progression.

Ibrahim AE(1), Arends MJ, Silva AL, Wyllie AH, Greger L, Ito Y, Vowler SL, Huang 
TH, Tavaré S, Murrell A, Brenton JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular Histopathology, University of
Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge, UK. aeki2@cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Although aberrant methylation of key genes in the
progression of colorectal neoplasia has been reported, no model-based analysis of
the incremental changes through the intermediate adenoma stage has been
described. In addition, the biological drivers for these methylation changes have
yet to be defined. Linear mixed-effects modelling was used in this study to
understand the onset and patterns of the methylation changes of SFRP2, IGF2 DMR0,
H19, LINE-1 and a CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) marker panel, and they
were correlated with DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B) levels of expression in a 
sample set representative of colorectal neoplastic progression.
METHODS: Methylation of the above CpG islands was measured using quantitative
pyrosequencing assays in 261 tissue samples. This included a prospective
collection of 44 colectomy specimens with concurrent normal mucosa, adenoma and
invasive cancer tissues. Tissue microarrays from a subset of 64 cases were used
for immunohistochemical analysis of DNMT3B expression.
RESULTS: It is shown that the onset and pattern of methylation changes during
colorectal neoplastic progression are locus dependent. The CIMP marker RUNX3 was 
the earliest CpG island showing significant change, followed by the CIMP markers 
NEUROG1 and CACNA1G at the hyperplastic polyp stage. SFRP2 and IGF2 DMR0 showed
significant methylation changes at the adenomatous polyp stage, followed by the
CIMP markers CDKN2A and hMLH1 at the adenocarcinoma stage. DNMT3B levels of
immunohistochemical expression increased significantly (p < 0.001) from normal to
hyperplastic and from adenomatous polyps to carcinoma samples. DNMT3B expression 
correlated positively with SFRP2 methylation (r = 0.42, p < 0.001, 95% CI 0.25 to
0.56), but correlated negatively with IGF2 DMR0 methylation (r = 0.26, p = 0.01, 
95% CI -0.45 to -0.05). A subset of the CIMP panel (NEUROG1, CACNA1G and CDKN2A) 
positively correlated with DNMT3B levels of expression (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Hierarchical epigenetic alterations occur at transition points during
colorectal neoplastic progression. These cumulative changes are closely
correlated with a gain of DNMT3B expression, suggesting a causal relationship.

PMID: 21068132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Pathol. 2010 Dec;177(6):2731-40. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.100361. Epub 2010 
Oct 29.

Novel application of structural equation modeling to correlation structure
analysis of CpG island methylation in colorectal cancer.

Tanaka N(1), Huttenhower C, Nosho K, Baba Y, Shima K, Quackenbush J, Haigis KM,
Giovannucci E, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.

The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP-high, CIMP1) is a distinct phenotype
associated with microsatellite instability (MSI) and BRAF mutation in colon
cancer. Recent evidence suggests the presence of KRAS mutation-associated CIMP
subtype (CIMP-low, CIMP2). We used cluster analysis, principal component analysis
(PCA), and structural equation modeling (SEM), a novel strategy, to decipher the 
correlation structure of CpG island hypermethylation. Using a database of 861
colon and rectal cancers, DNA methylation at 16 CpG islands [CACNA1G, CDKN2A
(p16/ink4a), CHFR, CRABP1, HIC1, IGF2, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT-1, MINT-31, MLH1,
NEUROG1, p14 (CDKN2A/arf), RUNX3, SOCS1, and WRN] was quantified by real-time
PCR. Tumors were categorized into three groups: Group 1 with wild-type KRAS/BRAF 
(N = 440); Group 2 with mutant KRAS and wild-type BRAF (N = 308); and Group 3
with wild-type KRAS and mutant BRAF (N = 107). Tumors with mutant KRAS/BRAF (N = 
6) were excluded. In unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, all but six
markers (CACNA1G, IGF2, RUNX3, MGMT, MINT-1, and SOCS1) were differentially
clustered with CIMP-high and CIMP-low according to KRAS and BRAF status. In SEM, 
the correlation structures between CIMP, locus-specific CpG island methylation,
and MSI differed according to KRAS and BRAF status, which was consistent with PCA
results. In conclusion, KRAS and BRAF mutations appear to differentially
influence correlation structure of CpG island methylation. Our novel data suggest
two distinct perturbations, resulting in differential locus-specific propensity
of CpG methylation.

PMCID: PMC2993288
PMID: 21037082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 1;350(1):198-207. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.10.025. Epub 2010 
Oct 27.

A cluster of non-redundant Ngn1 binding sites is required for regulation of
deltaA expression in zebrafish.

Madelaine R(1), Blader P.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Toulouse, UPS, Centre de Biologie du Développement, 118 route de
Narbonne, F-31062 Toulouse, France.

Proneural genes encode bHLH transcription factors that are key regulator of
neurogenesis in both vertebrates and invertebrates. How these transcription
factors regulate targets required for neural determination and/or specification
is beginning to be understood. In this study, we show that zebrafish deltaA is a 
transcriptional target of proneural factors. Using a combination of transient and
stable transgenic reporters, we show that regulation of deltaA by one such
proneural factor, Ngn1, requires three clustered E-box binding sites that act in 
a non-redundant manner. Furthermore, we show that as for other proneural targets,
members of the different proneural families regulate deltaA expression via
distinct cis-regulatory modules (CRMs). Interestingly, however, while the deltaA 
CRM regulated by a second proneural factor, Ascl1, has been conserved between
delta genes of different species, we show that the Ngn1 CRM has not. These
results suggest that evolutionary constraints on the mechanism by which Ngn1
regulates gene expression appear less strict than for Ascl1.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21034732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2010 Dec;299(6):C1335-44. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00207.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 22.

The intrinsic electrophysiological properties of neurons derived from mouse
embryonic stem cells overexpressing neurogenin-1.

Tong M(1), Hernandez JL, Purcell EK, Altschuler RA, Duncan RK.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109-5616, USA.

A mouse embryonic stem (ES) cell line containing an inducible transgene for the
proneural gene Neurog1 has been used to generate glutamatergic neurons at a high 
efficiency. The present study used in vitro electrophysiology to establish the
timeline for acquiring a functional neuronal phenotype in Neurog1-induced cells
exhibiting a neuronal morphology. TTX-sensitive action potentials could be evoked
from over 80% of the cells after only 4.5 days in vitro (DIV). These cells
uniformly showed rapidly adapting responses to current injection, firing one to
three action potentials at the onset of the stimulus. In the absence of Neurog1, 
a limited number of ES cells adopted a neuronal morphology, but these cells
displayed slow calcium depolarizations rather than sodium-based spikes.
Voltage-gated Na(+), K(+), and Ca(2+) currents were present in nearly all induced
cells as early as 4.5 DIV. The voltage-dependent properties of these currents
changed little from 4 to 12 DIV with half-activation voltage varying by <10 mV
for any current type throughout the culture period. This study demonstrates that 
forced expression of proneural genes can induce ES cells to quickly acquire a
functional neuronal phenotype with mature electrophysiological properties.
Transient overexpression of Neurog1 may be used in neural repair strategies that 
require the rapid induction of functional neurons from pluripotent stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3006329
PMID: 20861468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Nov 1;518(21):4395-418. doi: 10.1002/cne.22463.

Expression of pax6 and sox2 in adult olfactory epithelium.

Guo Z(1), Packard A, Krolewski RC, Harris MT, Manglapus GL, Schwob JE.

Author information: 
(1)Cell, Molecular, and Developmental Biology Graduate Program, Sackler School of
Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.

The olfactory epithelium maintains stem and progenitor cells that support the
neuroepithelium's life-long capacity to reconstitute after injury. However, the
identity of the stem cells--and their regulation--remain poorly defined. The
transcription factors Pax6 and Sox2 are characteristic of stem cells in many
tissues, including the brain. Therefore, we assessed the expression of Pax6 and
Sox2 in normal olfactory epithelium and during epithelial regeneration after
methyl bromide lesion or olfactory bulbectomy. Sox2 is found in multiple kinds of
cells in normal epithelium, including sustentacular cells, horizontal basal
cells, and some globose basal cells. Pax6 is co-expressed with Sox2 in all these,
but is also found in duct/gland cells as well as olfactory neurons that innervate
necklace glomeruli. Most of the Sox2/Pax6-positive globose basal cells are
actively cycling, but some express the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
p27(Kip1), and are presumably mitotically quiescent. Among globose basal cells,
Sox2 and Pax6 are co-expressed by putatively multipotent progenitors (labeled by 
neither anti-Mash1 nor anti-Neurog1) and neuron-committed transit amplifying
cells (which express Mash1). However, Sox2 and Pax6 are expressed by only a
minority of immediate neuronal precursors (Neurog1- and NeuroD1-expressing). The 
assignment of Sox2 and Pax6 to these categories of globose basal cells is
confirmed by a temporal analysis of transcription factor expression during the
recovery of the epithelium from methyl bromide-induced injury. Each of the
Sox2/Pax6-colabeled cell types is at a remove from the birth of neurons; thus,
suppressing their differentiation may be among the roles of Sox2/Pax6 in the
olfactory epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2940252
PMID: 20852734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Dec;45(4):398-407. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.07.013. Epub
2010 Aug 6.

Uncx regulates proliferation of neural progenitor cells and neuronal survival in 
the olfactory epithelium.

Sammeta N(1), Hardin DL, McClintock TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0298,
USA.

Uncx (Phd1, Chx4) is a paired homeobox transcription factor gene. It and its
probable functional partners, Tle co-repressors, were expressed by neurally-fated
basal progenitor cells and olfactory sensory neurons of the olfactory epithelium.
Uncx expression was rare in olfactory epithelia of Ascl1(-/-) mice, but common in
Neurog1(-/-) mice. In Uncx(-/-) mice olfactory progenitor cell proliferation,
progenitor cell number, olfactory sensory neuron survival, and Umodl1 and Kcnc4
mRNAs were reduced. Evidence of sensory neuron activity and functional
connections to the olfactory bulb argue that decreased neuronal survival was not 
due to loss of trophic support or activity-dependent mechanisms. These data
suggest that UNCX acts downstream of neural determination factors to broadly
control transcriptional mechanisms used by neural progenitor cells to specify
neural phenotypes.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2962766
PMID: 20692344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 22;5(7):e11661. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011661.

Neurod1 suppresses hair cell differentiation in ear ganglia and regulates hair
cell subtype development in the cochlea.

Jahan I(1), Pan N, Kersigo J, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: At least five bHLH genes regulate cell fate determination and
differentiation of sensory neurons, hair cells and supporting cells in the
mammalian inner ear. Cross-regulation of Atoh1 and Neurog1 results in hair cell
changes in Neurog1 null mice although the nature and mechanism of the
cross-regulation has not yet been determined. Neurod1, regulated by both Neurog1 
and Atoh1, could be the mediator of this cross-regulation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used Tg(Pax2-Cre) to conditionally delete
Neurod1 in the inner ear. Our data demonstrate for the first time that the
absence of Neurod1 results in formation of hair cells within the inner ear
sensory ganglia. Three cell types, neural crest derived Schwann cells and
mesenchyme derived fibroblasts (neither expresses Neurod1) and inner ear derived 
neurons (which express Neurod1) constitute inner ear ganglia. The most
parsimonious explanation is that Neurod1 suppresses the alternative fate of
sensory neurons to develop as hair cells. In the absence of Neurod1, Atoh1 is
expressed and differentiates cells within the ganglion into hair cells. We
followed up on this effect in ganglia by demonstrating that Neurod1 also
regulates differentiation of subtypes of hair cells in the organ of Corti. We
show that in Neurod1 conditional null mice there is a premature expression of
several genes in the apex of the developing cochlea and outer hair cells are
transformed into inner hair cells.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data suggest that the long noted cross-regulation
of Atoh1 expression by Neurog1 might actually be mediated in large part by
Neurod1. We suggest that Neurod1 is regulated by both Neurog1 and Atoh1 and
provides a negative feedback for either gene. Through this and other feedback,
Neurod1 suppresses alternate fates of neurons to differentiate as hair cells and 
regulates hair cell subtypes.

PMCID: PMC2908541
PMID: 20661473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Dig Dis Sci. 2011 Feb;56(2):387-96. doi: 10.1007/s10620-010-1312-4. Epub 2010 Jul
16.

DNA methylation in the rectal mucosa is associated with crypt proliferation and
fecal short-chain fatty acids.

Worthley DL(1), Whitehall VL, Le Leu RK, Irahara N, Buttenshaw RL, Mallitt KA,
Greco SA, Ramsnes I, Winter J, Hu Y, Ogino S, Young GP, Leggett BA.

Author information: 
(1)Conjoint Gastroenterology Laboratory, Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital
Research Foundation Clinical Research Centre, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.
daniel.worthley@uqconnect.edu.au

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation varies throughout the normal colorectal mucosa and
DNA methylation in normal appearing mucosa is associated with serrated and
adenomatous neoplasia elsewhere within the colorectum.
AIMS: The purpose of this study was to measure luminal chemistry, rectal
proliferation and mucosal DNA methylation and thus determine whether regional and
pathological patterns of DNA methylation could be explained by luminal and
epithelial factors.
METHODS: Twenty healthy subjects had normal rectal mucosal biopsies and a 24-h
fecal collection. Rectal biopsies were analyzed for epithelial proliferation
(Ki67 immunohistochemistry) and DNA methylation at 17 different markers,
including "type A" markers (ESR1, GATA5, HIC1, HPP1, SFRP1), "type C" markers
(MGMT, MLH1, CDKN2A, MINT1, MINT2, MINT31, IGF2, CACNA1G, NEUROG1, SOCS1, RUNX3),
and LINE-1. Fecal analysis included short-chain fatty acids (SCFA), pH and
ammonia. Mean "type A" and CIMP panel methylation Z-scores were calculated.
RESULTS: Rectal proliferation was significantly correlated with methylation at
ESR1 (<U+03C1> = 0.81, P = 0.003) and GATA5 (<U+03C1> = 0.78, P = 0.012). LINE-1 methylation
was 71.7 vs. 74.1%, in patients with "low" and "high" fecal total SCFA
concentration (defined by the median value), respectively (P = 0.0019). On
multivariate linear regression "type A" methylation was independently associated 
with rectal proliferation (P = 0.001). LINE-1 methylation was directly associated
with rectal proliferation (P = 0.038) and total fecal SCFA concentration (P =
0.002), and inversely associated with fecal NH(3) concentrations (P = 0.003).
CONCLUSIONS: DNA methylation in normal rectal mucosa is associated with crypt
proliferation and fecal SCFA concentration. These associations may help to
explain regional differences in DNA methylation as well as providing a possible
link between the colorectal lumen and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 20635146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2010 Jun;5(6):608-14. doi: 10.3171/2010.2.PEDS1065.

Upregulation of SOX2, NOTCH1, and ID1 in supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal
tumors: a distinct differentiation pattern from that of medulloblastomas.

Phi JH(1), Kim JH, Eun KM, Wang KC, Park KH, Choi SA, Kim YY, Park SH, Cho BK,
Kim SK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Seoul National University Children's
Hospital, 101 Daehangno, Jongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Republic of Korea.

OBJECT: Supratentorial primitive neuroectodermal tumor (PNET) and medulloblastoma
are highly malignant embryonal brain tumors. They share morphological
similarities, but differ in their differentiation patterns and global gene
expression. The authors compared the expression of specific genes involved in
neuroglial differentiation in supratentorial PNETs and medulloblastomas to define
the distinct characters of these tumors.
METHODS: The mRNA expression of 8 genes (SOX2, NOTCH1, ID1, ASCL-1, NEUROD1,
NEUROG1, NEUROG2, and NRG1) was evaluated in 25 embryonal tumors (12
supratentorial PNETs and 13 medulloblastomas) by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction. The expression levels of the transcripts of these
genes were compared between the tumor groups. Activation of the JAK/STAT3 pathway
was assessed by immunoblotting. Relative expression levels of STAT3 and
phosphorylated STAT3 proteins were compared.
RESULTS: Supratentorial PNETs expressed significantly higher levels of SOX2,
NOTCH1, ID1, and ASCL-1 transcripts, whereas the transcription of proneural basic
helix-loop-helix factors, NEUROD1, NEUROG1 (significantly), and NEUROG2 (not
significantly) was upregulated in medulloblastomas. The proportion of
phosphorylated STAT3alpha relative to STAT3alpha was significantly greater in
supratentorial PNETs than in medulloblastomas, indicating activation of the
JAK/STAT3 pathway in supratentorial PNETs.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that supratentorial PNET predominantly has
glial features and medulloblastoma largely follows a neuronal differentiation
pattern. These divergent differentiation patterns may be related to the location 
and origin of each tumor.

PMID: 20515335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cell Tissue Res. 2010 Jul;341(1):95-110. doi: 10.1007/s00441-010-0984-6. Epub
2010 May 30.

Neurod1 regulates survival and formation of connections in mouse ear and brain.

Jahan I(1), Kersigo J, Pan N, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

The developing sensory neurons of the mammalian ear require two sequentially
activated bHLH genes, Neurog1 and Neurod1, for their development. Neurons never
develop in Neurog1 null mice, and most neurons die in Neurod1 null mutants, a
gene upregulated by Neurog1. The surviving neurons of Neurod1 null mice are
incompletely characterized in postnatal mice because of the early lethality of
mutants and the possible compromising effect of the absence of insulin on
peripheral neuropathies. Using Tg(Pax2-cre), we have generated a conditional
deletion of floxed Neurod1 for the ear; this mouse is viable and allows us to
investigate ear innervation defects of Neurod1 absence only in the ear. We have
compared the defects in embryos and show an ear phenotype in conditional Neurod1 
null mice comparable with the systemic Neurod1 null mouse. By studying postnatal 
animals, we show that Neurod1 not only is necessary for the survival of most
spiral and many vestibular neurons, but is also essential for a segregated
central projection of vestibular and cochlear afferents. In the absence of
Neurod1 in the ear, vestibular and cochlear afferents enter the cochlear nucleus 
as a single mixed nerve. Neurites coming from vestibular and cochlear sensory
epithelia project centrally to both cochlear and vestibular nuclei, in addition
to their designated target projections. The peripheral innervation of the
remaining sensory neurons is disorganized and shows collaterals of single neurons
projecting to multiple endorgans, displaying no tonotopic organization of the
organ of Corti or the cochlear nucleus. Pending elucidation of the molecular
details for these Neurod1 functions, these data demonstrate that Neurod1 is not
only a major factor for the survival of neurons but is crucial for the
development of normal ear connections, both in the ear and in the central nervous
system.

PMCID: PMC3657738
PMID: 20512592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Sep;67(18):3089-99. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0403-x. Epub 
2010 May 22.

The role of bHLH genes in ear development and evolution: revisiting a 10-year-old
hypothesis.

Fritzsch B(1), Eberl DF, Beisel KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of
Iowa, 143 BB, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. bernd-fritzsch@uiowa.edu

In mouse ear development, two bHLH genes, Atoh1 and Neurog1, are essential for
hair cell and sensory neuron differentiation. Evolution converted the original
simple atonal-dependent neurosensory cell formation program of diploblasts into
the derived developmental program of vertebrates that generates two neurosensory 
cell types, the sensory neuron and the sensory hair cell. This transformation was
achieved through gene multiplication in ancestral triploblasts resulting in the
expansion of the atonal bHLH gene family. Novel genes of the Neurogenin and
NeuroD families are upregulated prior to the expression of Atoh1. Recent data
suggest that NeuroD and Neurogenin were lost or their function in neuronal
specification reduced in flies, thus changing our perception of the evolution of 
these genes. This sequence of expression changes was accompanied by modification 
of the E-box binding sites of these genes to regulate different downstream genes 
and to form inhibitory loops among each other, thus fine-tuning expression
transitions.

PMCID: PMC3665285
PMID: 20495996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Int J Cancer. 2011 Mar 1;128(5):1080-94. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25432.

Prognostic significance of CDKN2A (p16) promoter methylation and loss of
expression in 902 colorectal cancers: Cohort study and literature review.

Shima K(1), Nosho K, Baba Y, Cantor M, Meyerhardt JA, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS,
Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

A cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor CDKN2A (p16/Ink4a) is a tumor suppressor and 
upregulated in cellular senescence. CDKN2A promoter methylation and gene
silencing are associated with the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in colon
cancer. However, prognostic significance of CDKN2A methylation or loss of CDKN2A 
(p16) expression independent of CIMP status remains uncertain. Using a database
of 902 colorectal cancers in 2 independent cohort studies (the Nurses' Health
Study and the Health Professionals Follow-up Study), we quantified CDKN2A
promoter methylation and detected hypermethylation in 269 tumors (30%). By
immunohistochemistry, we detected loss of CDKN2A (p16) expression in 25%
(200/804) of tumors. We analyzed for LINE-1 hypomethylation and hypermethylation 
at 7 CIMP-specific CpG islands (CACNA1G, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and
SOCS1); microsatellite instability (MSI); KRAS, BRAF and PIK3CA mutations; and
expression of TP53 (p53), CTNNB1 (ß-catenin), CDKN1A (p21), CDKN1B (p27), CCND1
(cyclin D1), FASN (fatty acid synthase) and PTGS2 (cyclooxygenase-2). CDKN2A
promoter methylation and loss of CDKN2A (p16) were associated with shorter
overall survival in univariate Cox regression analysis [hazard ratio (HR): 1.36, 
95% CI: 1.10-1.66, p = 0.0036 for CDKN2A methylation; HR: 1.30, 95% CI:
1.03-1.63, p = 0.026 for CDKN2A (p16) loss] but not in multivariate analysis that
adjusted for clinical and tumor variables, including CIMP, MSI and LINE-1
methylation. Neither CDKN2A promoter methylation nor loss of CDKN2A (p16) was
associated with colorectal cancer-specific mortality in uni- or multivariate
analysis. Despite its well-established role in carcinogenesis, CDKN2A (p16)
promoter methylation or loss of expression in colorectal cancer is not
independently associated with patient prognosis.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC2958235
PMID: 20473920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. PLoS Genet. 2010 May 6;6(5):e1000936. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000936.

B1 SOX coordinate cell specification with patterning and morphogenesis in the
early zebrafish embryo.

Okuda Y(1), Ogura E, Kondoh H, Kamachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

The B1 SOX transcription factors SOX1/2/3/19 have been implicated in various
processes of early embryogenesis. However, their regulatory functions in stages
from the blastula to early neurula remain largely unknown, primarily because
loss-of-function studies have not been informative to date. In our present study,
we systematically knocked down the B1 sox genes in zebrafish. Only the quadruple 
knockdown of the four B1 sox genes sox2/3/19a/19b resulted in very severe
developmental abnormalities, confirming that the B1 sox genes are functionally
redundant. We characterized the sox2/3/19a/19b quadruple knockdown embryos in
detail by examining the changes in gene expression through in situ hybridization,
RT-PCR, and microarray analyses. Importantly, these phenotypic analyses revealed 
that the B1 SOX proteins regulate the following distinct processes: (1) early
dorsoventral patterning by controlling bmp2b/7; (2) gastrulation movements via
the regulation of pcdh18a/18b and wnt11, a non-canonical Wnt ligand gene; (3)
neural differentiation by regulating the Hes-class bHLH gene her3 and the
proneural-class bHLH genes neurog1 (positively) and ascl1a (negatively), and
regional transcription factor genes, e.g., hesx1, zic1, and rx3; and (4) neural
patterning by regulating signaling pathway genes, cyp26a1 in RA signaling, oep in
Nodal signaling, shh, and mdkb. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis of the
her3, hesx1, neurog1, pcdh18a, and cyp26a1 genes further suggests a direct
regulation of these genes by B1 SOX. We also found an interesting overlap between
the early phenotypes of the B1 sox quadruple knockdown embryos and the
maternal-zygotic spg embryos that are devoid of pou5f1 activity. These findings
indicate that the B1 SOX proteins control a wide range of developmental
regulators in the early embryo through partnering in part with Pou5f1 and
possibly with other factors, and suggest that the B1 sox functions are central to
coordinating cell fate specification with patterning and morphogenetic processes 
occurring in the early embryo.

PMCID: PMC2865518
PMID: 20463883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Biomaterials. 2010 Jul;31(20):5287-96. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2010.03.035.
Epub 2010 Apr 15.

A fusion protein N-cadherin-Fc as an artificial extracellular matrix surface for 
maintenance of stem cell features.

Yue XS(1), Murakami Y, Tamai T, Nagaoka M, Cho CS, Ito Y, Akaike T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, B-57, 4259 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.

N-cadherin is a cell-cell adhesion molecule and plays important roles in neural
development. With conventionally used extracellular matrices (ECMs), maintenance 
of undifferentiated state of stem cells and regulation of their neural
differentiation process is very difficult due to the colony formation through
intercellular interactions. To overcome the above-mentioned problems, we
developed a new artificial ECM to mimic N-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion. In
this study, we constructed a chimeric protein (N-cadherin fused to IgG-Fc,
abbreviated as N-cad-Fc), which contains extracellular domain of N-cadherin and
Fc domain of IgG. We confirmed that N-cad-Fc can stably adsorb to hydrophobic
surface. We checked maintenance of undifferentiated state and neural
differentiation ability of stem cells cultured on N-cad-Fc-coated surface. Both
P19 and MEB5 cells cultured on N-cad-Fc-coated surface showed scattering
morphologies without colony formation and higher proliferating potency than
conventional culture systems with maintenance of undifferentiated state. Both of 
two cell lines cultured on N-cad-Fc-coated surface differentiated into neural
cells at a single cell level when induced with proper conditions. Furthermore,
the expression of neuron-related gene Neurog1 in two cell lines cultured on
N-cad-Fc-coated surface was promoted. Therefore, it will be expected that the
constructed N-cad-Fc can be used as an artificial ECM for stem cells.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 20398934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2010 Jun;28(4):283-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2010.04.001.
Epub 2010 Apr 13.

Ethanol exposure affects cell movement during gastrulation and induces split axes
in zebrafish embryos.

Zhang Y(1), Shao M, Wang L, Liu Z, Gao M, Liu C, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental Biology, College of Life Science, Key Lab of
Experimental Teratology of Ministry of Education, Shandong University, 27 Shanda 
South Road, Jinan, Shandong 250100, China. zhangying9268@163.com

To explore the toxic effects of ethanol on axis formation during embryogenesis,
zebrafish embryos at different developmental stages were treated with 3% ethanol 
for 3h. The effects of ethanol exposure appeared to be stage-dependent. The dome 
stage embryo was most sensible to form posterior split axes upon ethanol
exposure. Morphological and histological observations and whole-mount in situ
hybridization results showed that ethanol exposure at this stage caused a general
gastrulation delay, and induced double notochords, double neural tubes and two
sets of somites in the posterior trunk. Mechanistically, no ectopic organizer was
found by examining the expression patterns of dorsoventral markers including
goosecoid, chordin and eve1 at the onset of gastrulation. However, radial
intercalation, epiboly and convergence extension were inhibited by ethanol
exposure as revealed by cell labeling, phenotypic observation and the expression 
patterns of axial or paraxial markers. Further investigation showed that the cell
aggregation might be affected by ethanol exposure, as indicated by the much more 
scattered expression pattern of chordin, eve1 and wnt11 at the early gastrula
stage, and the discontinuous gsc positive cells during migration. These results
imply that ethanol might affect cell movement before and during gastrulation and 
as a consequence, induces a split axes phenotype.

Copyright 2010 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20394815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Epidemiol. 2010 Jun;34(3):338-44. doi: 10.1016/j.canep.2010.03.002. Epub
2010 Apr 8.

Polymorphisms in methyl-group metabolism genes and risk of sporadic colorectal
cancer with relation to the CpG island methylator phenotype.

Karpinski P(1), Myszka A, Ramsey D, Misiak B, Gil J, Laczmanska I, Grzebieniak Z,
Sebzda T, Smigiel R, Stembalska A, Sasiadek MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Wroclaw Medical University, ul. Marcinkowskiego 1,
Wroclaw, Poland. polemiraza@poczta.fm

BACKGROUND: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), together with extensive
promoter methylation, is regarded as one of the mechanisms involved in colorectal
carcinogenesis. The mechanisms underlying CIMP in sporadic colorectal cancer are 
poorly understood. Genes involved in methyl-group metabolism are likely to affect
DNA methylation and thereby influence an individual's risk of CIMP. The aim of
the present study was to evaluate whether polymorphisms in the genes encoding
methyl-group metabolism pathway predispose to CIMP+ and/or CIMP- CRC.
METHODS: We examined the potential association between the polymorphisms of MTHFR
677C>T, TS 5'UTR 2R/3R, TS 3'UTR 1494del6, DeltaDNMT3B -149C>T and DNMT3B -283T>C
in a group of 46 CIMP+ CRC cases, 140 CIMP- CRC cases and 140 healthy controls.
The CIMP status of the CRC cases was determined by MS-PCR in tumor tissue by a
panel of five markers (CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1), which was also
followed by analyzing hMLH1 methylation and BRAF V600E mutation.
RESULTS: The variant allele homozygote genotype for the DeltaDNMT3B -283T>C
polymorphism was associated with a decreased risk for CIMP+ CRC (OR: 0.31, 95%CI:
0.09-0.73, p=0.009). Individuals with TS 3R/3R had an increased risk of CIMP- CRC
(OR: 2.21, 95%CI: 1.23-4.91, p=0.01). Moreover, the carriers of 3R allele had an 
increased risk of CIMP- CRC (OR: 1.45, 95%CI: 1.10-2.13, p=0.01).
CONCLUSION: This study provides support to the hypothesis that methyl-group
metabolism plays a role in the etiology of both CIMP+ and CIMP- colorectal
cancers but has a different impact on a distinct molecular subgroups of
colorectal cancer.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20381446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Brain Res Bull. 2010 Apr 29;82(1-2):74-82. doi:
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2010.02.010. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

A refined map of early gene expression in the dorsal rhombomere 1 of mouse
embryos.

Liu ZR(1), Shi M, Hu ZL, Zheng MH, Du F, Zhao G, Ding YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Xijng Hospital, Fourth Military Medical University,
15 Changle-xi Road, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710032, China.

Rhombomere 1 (r1), a temporary structure in the early developing brain, is
bounded rostrally by the isthmus organizer and caudally by the r2 domain. Many
genes involved in r1 induction and patterning have been identified. However, our 
knowledge of a comprehensive map of r1 regionalization defined by these genes at 
early embryonic stages remains fragmentary. In the present study, we examined the
expression of a variety of genes in the dorsal r1 of E9.0-E10.5 mouse embryos.
The expression domains within ventricular zone of these genes examined allowed us
to define four distinct regions along the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis of the
dorsal r1: the Wnt1/Lmx1a/Gdf7/Msx1/Msx2-positive roof plate,
Math1/Olig3/Msx1/Msx2-positive, upper rhombic lip, Mash1/Ngn1/Ngn2-positive
intermediate domain, and Mash1/Ngn1/Ngn2-positive rostral domain. Moreover, we
defined the distribution of several genes expressed in the mantle zone of the
dorsal r1, including Lmx1b, Lhx2, Lhx9, Phox2a and Phox2b. Taken together, our
gene expression data identify a refined subdivision of the dorsal r1 with four
distinct domains along the A-P axis and a mantle zone at early embryonic stages.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20206242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Mar;19(3):822-31. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-1154. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

PTGER2 overexpression in colorectal cancer is associated with microsatellite
instability, independent of CpG island methylator phenotype.

Baba Y(1), Nosho K, Shima K, Goessling W, Chan AT, Ng K, Chan JA, Giovannucci EL,
Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-FarberCancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: Prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2, the HUGO Gene
Nomenclature Committee-approved official symbol for cycloxygenase-2, COX-2) and
its enzymatic product prostaglandin E2 have critical roles in inflammation and
carcinogenesis through the G protein-coupled receptor PTGER2 (EP2). The PTGS2
(COX-2) pathway is a promising target for cancer therapy and chemoprevention.
PTGS2 (COX-2) expression in colon cancer has been inversely associated with
survival as well as tumoral microsatellite instability (MSI) and the CpG island
methylator phenotype (CIMP). However, the prognostic significance of PTGER2
expression or its relationship with MSI, CIMP, LINE-1 hypomethylation, or PTGS2
(COX-2) remains uncertain.
METHODS: Using the database of 516 colorectal cancers in two prospective cohort
studies with clinical outcome data, we detected PTGER2 overexpression in 169
(33%) tumors by immunohistochemistry. We analyzed MSI using 10 microsatellite
markers; CIMP by MethyLight (real-time methylation-specific PCR) on an
eight-marker panel [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and
SOCS1]; BRAF, KRAS, PIK3CA, and methylation in LINE-1 by Pyrosequencing; and
CTNNB1 (beta-catenin) and TP53 (p53) by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: PTGER2 overexpression was positively associated with the mucinous
component (P = 0.0016), signet ring cells (P = 0.0024), CIMP-high (P = 0.0023),
and MSI-high (P < 0.0001). In multivariate analysis, the significant relationship
between PTGER2 and MSI-high persisted (adjusted odds ratio, 2.82; 95% confidence 
interval, 1.69-4.72; P < 0.0001). PTGER2 was not significantly associated with
PTGS2 (COX-2), TP53, or CTNNB1 expression, patient survival, or prognosis.
CONCLUSION: PTGER2 overexpression is associated with MSI-high in colorectal
cancer.
IMPACT: Our data imply potential roles of inflammatory reaction by PTGER2
upregulation in carcinogenic process to MSI-high colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2837535
PMID: 20200425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 15;340(2):283-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.012. Epub 2010 
Feb 18.

Neurogenin 1 (Neurog1) expression in the ventral neural tube is mediated by a
distinct enhancer and preferentially marks ventral interneuron lineages.

Quiñones HI(1), Savage TK, Battiste J, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390-9111, USA.

The bHLH transcription factor Neurog1 (Ngn1, Neurod3, neurogenin 1) is involved
in neuronal differentiation and cell-type specification in distinct regions of
the developing nervous system. Here, transgenic mouse models were developed that 
use a Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) containing 208kb flanking the Neurog1
gene to efficiently drive expression of GFP and Cre in all Neurog1 domains. Two
characteristics of Neurog1 gene regulation were uncovered. First, a 4kb region
previously shown to be sufficient for driving expression of a reporter gene to a 
subset of the Neurog1 pattern in the developing midbrain, hindbrain, and spinal
cord is required uniformly for high levels of expression in all Neurog1 domains, 
even those not originally identified as being regulated by this region. Second, a
0.8 kb enhancer was identified that is sufficient to drive Neurog1-like
expression specifically in the ventral neural tube. Furthermore, Neurog1
progenitor cells in the ventral neural tube are largely fated to interneuron
lineages rather than to motoneurons. These studies provide new tools for
directing tissue specific expression in the developing neural tube, define
Neurog1 lineages in the spinal cord, and further define the complex genomic
structure required for obtaining the correct levels and spatial restriction of
the neuronal differentiation gene Neurog1.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854235
PMID: 20171205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Gastroenterology. 2010 May;138(5):1854-62. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.01.035.
Epub 2010 Jan 25.

Aberrant DNA methylation in hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer without
mismatch repair deficiency.

Goel A(1), Xicola RM, Nguyen TP, Doyle BJ, Sohn VR, Bandipalliam P, Rozek LS,
Reyes J, Cordero C, Balaguer F, Castells A, Jover R, Andreu M, Syngal S, Boland
CR, Llor X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Baylor University,
Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Approximately half of the families that fulfill Amsterdam
criteria for Lynch syndrome or hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC) 
do not have evidence of the germline mismatch repair gene mutations that define
this syndrome and result in microsatellite instability (MSI). The carcinogenic
pathways and the best diagnostic approaches to detect microsatellite stable (MSS)
HNPCC tumors are unclear. We investigated the contribution of epigenetic
alterations to the development of MSS HNPCC tumors.
METHODS: Colorectal cancers were divided into 4 groups: (1) microsatellite
stable, Amsterdam-positive (MSS HNPCC) (N = 22); (2) Lynch syndrome cancers
(identified mismatch repair mutations) (N = 21); (3) sporadic MSS (N = 92); and
(4) sporadic MSI (N = 46). Methylation status was evaluated for CACNAG1, SOCS1,
RUNX3, NEUROG1, MLH1, and long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1). KRAS
and BRAF mutation status was analyzed.
RESULTS: MSS HNPCC tumors displayed a significantly lower degree of LINE-1
methylation, a marker for global methylation, than any other group. Although most
MSS HNPCC tumors had some degree of CpG island methylation, none presented a high
index of methylation. MSS HNPCC tumors had KRAS mutations exclusively in codon
12, but none harbored V600E BRAF mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Tumors from Amsterdam-positive patients without mismatch repair
deficiency (MSS HNPCC) have certain molecular features, including global
hypomethylation, that distinguish them from all other colorectal cancers. These
characteristics could have an important impact on tumor behavior or treatment
response. Studies are underway to further assess the cause and effects of these
features.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2859993
PMID: 20102720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Biochemistry. 2010 Mar 2;49(8):1577-89. doi: 10.1021/bi901616z.

The basic helix-loop-helix region of human neurogenin 1 is a monomeric natively
unfolded protein which forms a "fuzzy" complex upon DNA binding.

Aguado-Llera D(1), Goormaghtigh E, de Geest N, Quan XJ, Prieto A, Hassan BA,
Gómez J, Neira JL.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular y Celular, Universidad Miguel Hernández, 03202
Elche (Alicante), Spain.

Neuronal specification is regulated by the activity of transcription factors
containing the basic helix-loop-helix motif (bHLH); these regulating proteins
include, among others, the neurogenin (Ngn) family, related to the atonal family 
of genes. Neurogenin 1 (NGN1) is a 237-residue protein that contains a bHLH
domain and is involved in neuronal differentiation. In this work, we synthesized 
the bHLH region of NGN1 (bHLHN) comprising residues 90-150 of the full-length
NGN1. The domain is a monomeric natively unfolded protein with a pH-dependent
premolten globule conformation, as shown by several spectroscopic techniques
(namely, NMR, fluorescence, FTIR, and circular dichroism). The unfolded character
of the domain also explains, first, the impossibility of its overexpression in
several Escherichia coli strains and, second, its insolubility in aqueous
buffers. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first extensive study of the
conformational preferences of a bHLH domain under different solution conditions. 
Upon binding to two DNA E-boxes, the protein forms "fuzzy" complexes (that is,
the complexes were not fully folded). The affinities of bHLHN for both DNA boxes 
were smaller than those of other bHLH domains, which might explain why the
protein-DNA complexes were not fully folded.

PMID: 20102160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Genes Dev. 2010 Jan 15;24(2):206-18. doi: 10.1101/gad.554510.

A feedback loop mediated by degradation of an inhibitor is required to initiate
neuronal differentiation.

Sobieszczuk DF(1), Poliakov A, Xu Q, Wilkinson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

Neuronal differentiation is regulated by proneural genes that promote
neurogenesis and inhibitory mechanisms that maintain progenitors. This raises the
question of how the up-regulation of proneural genes required to initiate
neurogenesis occurs in the presence of such inhibition. We carried out loss and
gain of gene function, an interaction screen for binding partners, and
biochemical analyses to uncover the regulation, developmental role, and mechanism
of action of a ubiquitination adaptor protein, Btbd6a (BTB domain containing 6a).
We find that the proneural gene neurog1 up-regulates btbd6a, which in turn is
required for up-regulation of neurog1. Btbd6a is an adaptor for the Cul3
ubiquitin ligase complex, and we find that it binds to the transcriptional
repressor Plzf (promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger). Btbd6a promotes the
relocation of Plzf from nucleus to cytoplasm and targets Plzf for ubiquitination 
and degradation. plzfa is expressed widely in the neural epithelium; when
overexpressed, it inhibits neurogenesis, and this inhibition is reversed by
btbd6a. The antagonism of endogenous plzfa by btbd6a is required for
neurogenesis, since the block in neuronal differentiation caused by btbd6a
knockdown is alleviated by plzfa knockdown. These findings reveal a feedback loop
mediated by degradation of an inhibitor that is essential for progenitors to
undergo the transition to neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2807355
PMID: 20080956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2009 Dec;31(6):707-11. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2009.06.011.

[Role of Ezh2 in the all-trans retinoic acid induced P19 neural differentiation].

[Article in Chinese]

Ge CT(1), Zhang Y, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of Ezh2 in the all-trans retinoic acid RA induced
P19 neural differentiation.
METHODS: The expression of Ngn1 in the RA induced P19 cells was detected at the
mRNA and protein levels using real time RT-PCR and Western blot assays. The
binding of Ezh2 and H3K27me3 on the Ngn 1 promoter was analyzed using chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay.
RESULT: In the RA induced P19 cells, the recruitment of Ezh2 and its methylated
substrate H3K27me3 on the promoter of Ngn 1 gene elevated in the first 2 days,
and then declined rapidly, followed by the initiation of neuronal
differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Ezh2 produces a repressive histone mark H3K27me3 in the early stage 
of RA induced P12 cells. By avoiding the premature expression of Ngn1 gene, Ezh2 
can ensure the normal differentiation of P19 cells.

PMID: 20078939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2009 Dec;31(6):692-5. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2009.06.007.

[Histone lysine methyltransferase Setd7 enhances Ngn 1 gene expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Dai JP(1), Zhang Y, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To construct the eukaryotic expression plasmid of mouse histone lysine
methyltransferase Setd7 and detect its effect on neuron development.
METHODS: The clone of mouse Setd7 was obtained and inserted into the eukaryotic
expression vector pCMV-3tag-6-Flag. The plasmid was transfected into HEK 293T and
identified by Western blot. Real-time PCR was used to detect the effect of Setd7 
on the neuron differentiation marker gene Ngn 1 mRNA expression. Dual luciferase 
reporter system was used to detect the effect of Setd7 on Ngn 1 mRNA expression. 
Real-time PCR was used to detect the effect of Setd 7 siRNA plasmid on Ngn 1 mRNA
expression.
RESULTS: An eukaryotic expression plasmid of Setd 7 was successfully constructed.
Setd7 induced Ngn 1 mRNA expression and increased Ngn 1 promoter activity. Also, 
the knockdown of Setd 7 inhibited Ngn 1 mRNA expression.
CONCLUSION: Histone lysine methyltransferase Setd7 can enhance neuron
differentiation marker gene Ngn 1 transcription.

PMID: 20078936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Neurosci. 2010 Jan 13;30(2):714-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3852-09.2010.

Sox2 induces neuronal formation in the developing mammalian cochlea.

Puligilla C(1), Dabdoub A, Brenowitz SD, Kelley MW.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Developmental Neuroscience and Section on Synaptic Transmission,
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. puligillac@nidcd.nih.gov

In the cochlea, spiral ganglion neurons play a critical role in hearing as they
form the relay between mechanosensory hair cells in the inner ear and cochlear
nuclei in the brainstem. The proneural basic helix-loop-helix transcription
factors Neurogenin1 (Neurog1) and NeuroD1 have been shown to be essential for the
development of otocyst-derived inner ear sensory neurons. Here, we show neural
competence of nonsensory epithelial cells in the cochlea, as ectopic expression
of either Neurog1 or NeuroD1 results in the formation of neuronal cells. Since
the high-mobility-group type transcription factor Sox2, which is also known to
play a role in neurogenesis, is expressed in otocyst-derived neural precursor
cells and later in the spiral ganglion neurons along with Neurog1 and NeuroD1, we
used both gain- and loss-of-function experiments to examine the role of Sox2 in
spiral ganglion neuron formation. We demonstrate that overexpression of Sox2
results in the production of neurons, suggesting that Sox2 is sufficient for the 
induction of neuronal fate in nonsensory epithelial cells. Furthermore, spiral
ganglion neurons are absent in cochleae from Sox2(Lcc/Lcc) mice, indicating that 
Sox2 is also required for neuronal formation in the cochlea. Our results indicate
that Sox2, along with Neurog1 and NeuroD1, are sufficient to induce a neuronal
fate in nonsensory regions of the cochlea. Finally, we demonstrate that
nonsensory cells within the cochlea retain neural competence through at least the
early postnatal period.

PMCID: PMC2835399
PMID: 20071536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Feb 15;518(4):526-46. doi: 10.1002/cne.22236.

Neurogenin1 effectively reprograms cultured chick retinal pigment epithelial
cells to differentiate toward photoreceptors.

Yan RT(1), Liang L, Ma W, Li X, Xie W, Wang SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
Alabama 35294-0009, USA.

Photoreceptors are highly specialized sensory neurons in the retina, and their
degeneration results in blindness. Replacement with developing photoreceptor
cells promises to be an effective therapy, but it requires a supply of new
photoreceptors, because the neural retina in human eyes lacks regeneration
capability. We report efficient generation of differentiating, photoreceptor-like
neurons from chick retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells propagated in culture
through reprogramming with neurogenin1 (ngn1). In reprogrammed culture, a large
number of the cells (85.0% +/- 5.9%) began to differentiate toward
photoreceptors. Reprogrammed cells expressed transcription factors that set in
motion photoreceptor differentiation, including Crx, Nr2E3, NeuroD, and RXRgamma,
and phototransduction pathway components, including transducin, cGMP-gated
channel, and red opsin of cone photoreceptors (equivalent to rhodopsin of rod
photoreceptors). They developed inner segments rich in mitochondria. Furthermore,
they responded to light by decreasing their cellular free calcium (Ca(2+)) levels
and responded to 9-cis-retinal by increasing their Ca(2+) levels after
photobleaching, hallmarks of photoreceptor physiology. The high efficiency and
the advanced photoreceptor differentiation indicate ngn1 as a gene of choice to
reprogram RPE progeny cells to differentiate into photoreceptor neurons in future
cell replacement studies.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2927132
PMID: 20029995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Oncogene. 2010 Mar 18;29(11):1653-62. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.449. Epub 2009 Dec 7.

DNA methylation within the normal colorectal mucosa is associated with
pathway-specific predisposition to cancer.

Worthley DL(1), Whitehall VL, Buttenshaw RL, Irahara N, Greco SA, Ramsnes I,
Mallitt KA, Le Leu RK, Winter J, Hu Y, Ogino S, Young GP, Leggett BA.

Author information: 
(1)Royal Brisbane and Women's Hospital Research Foundation Clinical Research
Centre, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. daniel.worthley@uqconnect.edu.au

There are two major molecular pathways to sporadic colorectal cancer, the
chromosomal instability (CIN) and the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP)
pathways. This study recruited 166 patients undergoing colonoscopy. Biopsy
samples were collected from the cecum, transverse colon, sigmoid colon and
rectum. DNA methylation was quantified at 'type A' (ESR1, GATA5, HIC1, HPP1,
SFRP1) and 'type C' markers (MGMT, MLH1, CDKN2A, MINT2, MINT31, IGF2, CACNA1G,
NEUROG1, SOCS1, RUNX3), and LINE-1. 'Type A' genes are frequently methylated in
normal and neoplastic tissues, proportional to tissue age. 'Type C' methylation
is more specific for neoplasia. The last five 'type C' markers comprise a CIMP
panel. The mean 'type A' and CIMP-panel methylation Z-scores were calculated. In 
all, 88 patients had adenomatous lesions, 32 had proximal serrated polyps (PSPs) 
and 50 were normal. Most 'type A' genes showed direct correlations between
methylation and age (ESR1, rho=0.66, P<0.0001), with higher methylation distally 
(ESR1, P<0.0001). On multivariate analysis, 'type A' methylation was inversely
associated with colorectal adenomas (odds ratio=0.23, P<0.001), the precursor to 
CIN cancers. CIMP-panel methylation was significantly associated with advanced
PSPs (odds ratio=5.1, P=0.009), the precursor to CIMP cancers. DNA methylation in
normal mucosa varied with age and region and was associated with pathway-specific
pathology. In the future, the colorectal field could yield important information 
and potentially inform clinical practice.

PMID: 19966864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Dev Dyn. 2009 Dec;238(12):3310-25. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22165.

Neurogenin1 expression in cell lineages of the cerebellar cortex in embryonic and
postnatal mice.

Lundell TG(1), Zhou Q, Doughty ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, Uniformed Services University 
of the Health Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20814, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors Ptf1a and Math1 are
necessary for the specification of gamma-aminobutyric acid-ergic and
glutamatergic cell lineages in the cerebellum, respectively. Recent evidence
suggests cascades of bHLH factor activities drive cell type specificity in
Ptf1a(+ve) and Math1(+ve) lineages. In this manuscript, we reveal cell lineages
in the cerebellar cortex but not deep cerebellar nuclei express the pro-neural
bHLH factor Neurogenin1 (Ngn1). Ngn1 is expressed in ventricular zone progenitors
and in newly generated neurons in the caudal cerebellar primordium. In later
embryonic and postnatal developmental stages, Ngn1 is expressed in progenitors
and in migrating interneurons in the prospective white matter. Transgenic
fate-mapping reveals Ngn1 reporter-gene expression in Purkinje cells, multiple
inhibitory interneuron cell types, and in unipolar brush cells of the cortex. The
data suggest Ngn1 is a component of the bHLH factor code regulating cell type
specification in the cerebellar cortex.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19924827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Nov 24;106(47):19895-900. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0910894106. Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Her6 regulates the neurogenetic gradient and neuronal identity in the thalamus.

Scholpp S(1), Delogu A, Gilthorpe J, Peukert D, Schindler S, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus,
King's College London, London SE1 1UL, United Kingdom. steffen.scholpp@kit.edu

During vertebrate brain development, the onset of neuronal differentiation is
under strict temporal control. In the mammalian thalamus and other brain regions,
neurogenesis is regulated also in a spatially progressive manner referred to as a
neurogenetic gradient, the underlying mechanism of which is unknown. Here we
describe the existence of a neurogenetic gradient in the zebrafish thalamus and
show that the progression of neurogenesis is controlled by dynamic expression of 
the bHLH repressor her6. Members of the Hes/Her family are known to regulate
proneural genes, such as Neurogenin and Ascl. Here we find that Her6 determines
not only the onset of neurogenesis but also the identity of thalamic neurons,
marked by proneural and neurotransmitter gene expression: loss of Her6 leads to
premature Neurogenin1-mediated genesis of glutamatergic (excitatory) neurons,
whereas maintenance of Her6 leads to Ascl1-mediated production of GABAergic
(inhibitory) neurons. Thus, the presence or absence of a single upstream
regulator of proneural gene expression, Her6, leads to the establishment of
discrete neuronal domains in the thalamus.

PMCID: PMC2775703
PMID: 19903880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Oct 15;15(20):6412-20. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1438. 
Epub 2009 Oct 13.

Lymphocytic reaction to colorectal cancer is associated with longer survival,
independent of lymph node count, microsatellite instability, and CpG island
methylator phenotype.

Ogino S(1), Nosho K, Irahara N, Meyerhardt JA, Baba Y, Shima K, Glickman JN,
Ferrone CR, Mino-Kenudson M, Tanaka N, Dranoff G, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 44 Binney Street, Boston,
MA 02115, USA. shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

PURPOSE: Host immune response to tumor may be an important prognostic factor for 
colon cancer patients. However, little is known on prognostic significance of
histopathologic lymphoid reaction to tumor, independent of the number of lymph
nodes examined and tumoral molecular alterations, including microsatellite
instability (MSI) and the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), both of which
are associated with lymphocytic reaction and clinical outcome.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using 843 colorectal cancer patients in two independent
prospective cohorts, we examined patient prognosis in relation to four components
of lymphocytic reaction (i.e., Crohn's-like reaction, peritumoral reaction,
intratumoral periglandular reaction, and tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes) and
overall lymphocytic score (0-12). CIMP was determined using eight markers
including CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1.
Cox proportional hazard models computed hazard ratio for mortality, adjusted for 
covariates including tumor stage, body mass index, lymph node count, KRAS, BRAF, 
p53, cyclooxygenase-2 (PTGS2), MSI, CIMP, and LINE-1 methylation.
RESULTS: Increasing overall lymphocytic reaction score including
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes was associated with a significant improvement in
colorectal cancer-specific and overall survival (log-rank P < 0.003). These
findings remained significant (adjusted hazard ratio estimates, 0.49-0.71;
P(trend) < 0.009) in multivariate models that adjusted for covariates, including 
body mass index, MSI, CIMP, LINE-1 hypomethylation, and cyclooxygenase-2. The
beneficial effect of tumoral lymphocytic reaction was consistent across strata of
clinical, pathologic, and molecular characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: Lymphocytic reactions to tumor were associated with improved
prognosis among colorectal cancer patients, independent of lymph node count and
other clinical, pathologic, and molecular characteristics.

PMCID: PMC2771425
PMID: 19825961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2010 Apr;30(3):415-26. doi: 10.1007/s10571-009-9466-3. Epub
2009 Oct 8.

Stable expression of neurogenin 1 induces LGR5, a novel stem cell marker, in an
immortalized human neural stem cell line HB1.F3.

Satoh J(1), Obayashi S, Tabunoki H, Wakana T, Kim SU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Neuropathology, Meiji
Pharmaceutical University, 2-522-1 Noshio, Kiyose, Tokyo, 204-8588, Japan.
satoj@my-pharm.ac.jp

Neural stem cells (NSC) with self-renewal and multipotent properties serve as an 
ideal cell source for transplantation to treat spinal cord injury, stroke, and
neurodegenerative diseases. To efficiently induce neuronal lineage cells from NSC
for neuron replacement therapy, we should clarify the intrinsic genetic programs 
involved in a time- and place-specific regulation of human NSC differentiation.
Recently, we established an immortalized human NSC clone HB1.F3 to provide an
unlimited NSC source applicable to genetic manipulation for cell-based therapy.
To investigate a role of neurogenin 1 (Ngn1), a proneural basic helix-loop-helix 
(bHLH) transcription factor, in human NSC differentiation, we established a clone
derived from F3 stably overexpressing Ngn1. Genome-wide gene expression profiling
identified 250 upregulated genes and 338 downregulated genes in
Ngn1-overexpressing F3 cells (F3-Ngn1) versus wild-type F3 cells (F3-WT).
Notably, leucine-rich repeat-containing G protein-coupled receptor 5 (LGR5), a
novel stem cell marker, showed an 167-fold increase in F3-Ngn1, although
transient overexpression of Ngn1 did not induce upregulation of LGR5, suggesting 
that LGR5 is not a direct transcriptional target of Ngn1. KeyMolnet, a
bioinformatics tool for analyzing molecular relations on a comprehensive
knowledgebase, suggests that the molecular network of differentially expressed
genes involves the complex interaction of networks regulated by multiple
transcription factors. Gene ontology (GO) terms of development and morphogenesis 
are enriched in upregulated genes, while those of extracellular matrix and
adhesion are enriched in downregulated genes. These results suggest that stable
expression of a single gene Ngn1 in F3 cells induces not simply neurogenic but
multifunctional changes that potentially affect the differentiation of human NSC 
via a reorganization of complex gene regulatory networks.

PMID: 19813087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Oct;18(10):2765-72. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0490. Epub 2009 Sep 29.

Vitamin D receptor expression is associated with PIK3CA and KRAS mutations in
colorectal cancer.

Kure S(1), Nosho K, Baba Y, Irahara N, Shima K, Ng K, Meyerhardt JA, Giovannucci 
EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Vitamin D is associated with decreased risks of various cancers, including colon 
cancer. The vitamin D receptor (VDR) is a transcription factor, which plays an
important role in cellular differentiation and inhibition of proliferation. A
link between VDR and the RAS-mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) or
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-AKT pathway has been suggested. However, the
prognostic role of VDR expression or its relationship with PIK3CA or KRAS
mutation remains uncertain. Among 619 colorectal cancers in two prospective
cohort studies, 233 (38%) tumors showed VDR overexpression by
immunohistochemistry. We analyzed for PIK3CA and KRAS mutations and LINE-1
methylation by Pyrosequencing, microsatellite instability (MSI), and DNA
methylation (epigenetic changes) in eight CpG island methylator phenotype
(CIMP)-specific promoters [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1,
RUNX3, and SOCS1] by MethyLight (real-time PCR). VDR overexpression was
significantly associated with KRAS mutation (odds ratio, 1.55; 95% confidence
interval, 1.11-2.16) and PIK3CA mutation (odds ratio, 2.17; 95% confidence
interval, 1.36-3.47), both of which persisted in multivariate logistic regression
analysis. VDR was not independently associated with body mass index, family
history of colorectal cancer, tumor location (colon versus rectum), stage, tumor 
grade, signet ring cells, CIMP, MSI, LINE-1 hypomethylation, BRAF, p53, p21,
beta-catenin, or cyclooxygenase-2. VDR expression was not significantly related
with patient survival, prognosis, or clinical outcome. In conclusion, VDR
overexpression in colorectal cancer is independently associated with PIK3CA and
KRAS mutations. Our data support potential interactions between the VDR, RAS-MAPK
and PI3K-AKT pathways, and possible influence by KRAS or PIK3CA mutation on
therapy or chemoprevention targeting VDR.

PMCID: PMC2768137
PMID: 19789368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Virchows Arch. 2009 Oct;455(4):343-51. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0829-4. Epub 2009 
Sep 10.

CpG island hypermethylation and repetitive DNA hypomethylation in premalignant
lesion of extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.

Kim BH(1), Cho NY, Shin SH, Kwon HJ, Jang JJ, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Korea University Medical School, Seoul, South Korea.

Biliary intraepithelial neoplasia (BilIN) is the premalignant lesion of
extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (EHC), and there are no published data regarding 
epigenetic changes throughout disease progression from normal biliary epithelia
to BilIN to EHC. The objective of this study was to identify the occurrence of
CpG island hypermethylation and repetitive DNA hypomethylation in BilIN. A total 
of 50 EHCs, 31 BilINs, and 31 normal cystic duct samples were analyzed for their 
methylation status in seven genes and two repetitive DNA elements. The number of 
methylated genes increased with disease progression (normal bile duct, 0.6;
BilIN, 2.0; EHC, 3.6; P < 0.001). The methylation level of examined genes was
significantly higher in BilIN than in normal samples (TMEFF2, HOXA1, NEUROG1, and
RUNX3, P < 0.05) and in EHC than in BilIN samples (TMEFF2, HOXA1, NEUROG1, RUNX3,
RASSF1A, and APC, P < 0.05). Long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1) and 
juxtacentromeric satellite 2 (SAT2) methylation levels were markedly lower in EHC
than in normal duct and BilIN samples, and BilIN samples showed a decrease of
SAT2 methylation levels but no decrease of LINE-1 methylation levels compared to 
normal samples. These findings suggest that most of cancer-specific CpG island
hypermethylation occur in the stage of BilIN and that CpG island hypermethylation
seems to occur earlier than repetitive DNA element hypomethylation.

PMID: 19763613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Neuron. 2009 Sep 10;63(5):600-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.08.021.

Polycomb limits the neurogenic competence of neural precursor cells to promote
astrogenic fate transition.

Hirabayashi Y(1), Suzki N, Tsuboi M, Endo TA, Toyoda T, Shinga J, Koseki H, Vidal
M, Gotoh Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

During neocortical development, neural precursor cells (NPCs, or neural stem
cells) produce neurons first and astrocytes later. Although the timing of the
fate switch from neurogenic to astrogenic is critical for determining the number 
of neurons, the mechanisms are not fully understood. Here, we show that the
polycomb group complex (PcG) restricts neurogenic competence of NPCs and promotes
the transition of NPC fate from neurogenic to astrogenic. Inactivation of PcG by 
knockout of the Ring1B or Ezh2 gene or Eed knockdown prolonged the neurogenic
phase of NPCs and delayed the onset of the astrogenic phase. Moreover, PcG was
found to repress the promoter of the proneural gene neurogenin1 in a
developmental-stage-dependent manner. These results demonstrate a role of PcG:
the temporal regulation of NPC fate.

PMID: 19755104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Gastroenterology. 2009 Nov;137(5):1609-20.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2009.08.002. Epub 2009 Aug 14.

A prospective cohort study shows unique epigenetic, genetic, and prognostic
features of synchronous colorectal cancers.

Nosho K(1), Kure S, Irahara N, Shima K, Baba Y, Spiegelman D, Meyerhardt JA,
Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2009 Nov;137(5):1559-62.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Synchronous colorectal neoplasias (2 or more primary
carcinomas identified in the same patient) are caused by common genetic and
environmental factors and can be used to study the field effect. Synchronous
colon cancers have not been compared with control solitary cancers in a
prospective study.
METHODS: We analyzed data collected from 47 patients with synchronous colorectal 
cancers and 2021 solitary colorectal cancers (controls) in 2 prospective cohort
studies. Tumors samples were analyzed for methylation in LINE-1 and 16 CpG
islands (CACNA1G, CDKN2A [p16], CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3, SOCS1, CHFR, 
HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, MINT31, p14 [ARF], and WRN); microsatellite
instability (MSI); the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP); 18q loss of
heterozygosity; KRAS, BRAF, and PIK3CA mutations; and expression of beta-catenin,
p53, p21, p27, cyclin D1, fatty acid synthase, and cyclooxygenase-2.
RESULTS: Compared with patients with solitary colorectal cancer, synchronous
colorectal cancer patients had reduced overall survival time (log-rank, P =
.0048; hazard ratio [HR], 1.71; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.17-2.50; P =
.0053; multivariate HR, 1.47; 95% CI: 1.00-2.17; P = .049). Compared with
solitary tumors, synchronous tumors more frequently contained BRAF mutations (P =
.0041), CIMP-high (P = .013), and MSI-high (P = .037). Methylation levels of
LINE-1 (Spearman r = 0.82; P = .0072) and CpG island methylation (P < .0001)
correlated between synchronous cancer pairs from the same individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: Synchronous colorectal cancers had more frequent mutations in BRAF, 
were more frequently CIMP- and MSI-high, and had a worse prognosis than solitary 
colorectal cancers. Similar epigenomic and epigenetic events were frequently
observed within a synchronous cancer pair, suggesting the presence of a field
defect.

PMCID: PMC2859181
PMID: 19686742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Oct;12(10):1238-47. doi: 10.1038/nn.2387. Epub 2009 Aug 5.

SOX6 controls dorsal progenitor identity and interneuron diversity during
neocortical development.

Azim E(1), Jabaudon D, Fame RM, Macklis JD.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital-Harvard Medical School Center for Nervous
System Repair, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The neuronal diversity of the CNS emerges largely from controlled spatial and
temporal segregation of cell type-specific molecular regulators. We found that
the transcription factor SOX6 controls the molecular segregation of dorsal
(pallial) from ventral (subpallial) telencephalic progenitors and the
differentiation of cortical interneurons, regulating forebrain progenitor and
interneuron heterogeneity. During corticogenesis in mice, SOX6 and SOX5 were
largely mutually exclusively expressed in pallial and subpallial progenitors,
respectively, and remained mutually exclusive in a reverse pattern in postmitotic
neuronal progeny. Loss of SOX6 from pallial progenitors caused their
inappropriate expression of normally subpallium-restricted developmental
controls, conferring mixed dorsal-ventral identity. In postmitotic cortical
interneurons, loss of SOX6 disrupted the differentiation and diversity of
cortical interneuron subtypes, analogous to SOX5 control over cortical projection
neuron development. These data indicate that SOX6 is a central regulator of both 
progenitor and cortical interneuron diversity during neocortical development.

PMCID: PMC2903203
PMID: 19657336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Oct 1;315(16):2791-801. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.06.023. Epub
2009 Jun 27.

Independent and cooperative action of Psen2 with Psen1 in zebrafish embryos.

Nornes S(1), Newman M, Wells S, Verdile G, Martins RN, Lardelli M.

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Genetics, School of Molecular and Biomedical Science, The
University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia.

Presenilin1 (PSEN1) and presenilin2 (PSEN2) are involved in the processing of
type-1 transmembrane proteins including the amyloid precursor protein (APP),
Notch and several others. PSEN1 has been shown to be crucial for proteolytic
cleavage of Notch in developing animal embryos. Mouse embryos lacking Psen1
function show disturbed neurogenesis and somite formation, resembling Notch
pathway mutants. However, loss of Psen2 activity reveals only a minor phenotype. 
Zebrafish embryos are a valuable tool for analysis of the molecular genetic
control of cell differentiation since endogenous gene expression can be modulated
in subtle and complex ways to give a phenotypic readout. Using injection of
morpholino antisense oligonucleotides to inhibit protein translation in zebrafish
embryos, we show that reduced Psen2 activity decreases the number of melanocytes 
in the trunk but not in the cranial area at 2 days post fertilisation (dpf).
Reduced Psen2 activity apparently reduces Notch signalling resulting in perturbed
spinal neurogenin1 (neurog1) expression, neurogenesis and trunk and tail neural
crest development. Similar effects are seen for reduced Psen1 activity. These
results suggest that Psen2 plays a more prominent role in Notch signalling and
embryo development in zebrafish than in mammals. Intriguingly, decreased Psen2
activity increases the number of Dorsal Longitudinal Ascending (DoLA)
interneurons in the spinal cord while decreased Psen1 activity has no effect.
However, the effect on DoLAs of reduced Psen2 can be ameliorated by Psen1 loss.
The effects of changes in Psen2 activity on DoLA interneurons and other cells in 
zebrafish embryos provide bioassays for more detailed dissection of Psen2
function.

PMID: 19563801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jul;238(7):1827-35. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21987.

High resolution fate map of the zebrafish diencephalon.

Russek-Blum N(1), Nabel-Rosen H, Levkowitz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 
Israel.

The diencephalon acts as an interactive site between the sensory, central, and
endocrine systems and is one of the most elaborate structures in the vertebrate
brain. To better understand the embryonic development and morphogenesis of the
diencephalon, we developed an improved photoactivation (uncaging)-based lineage
tracing strategy. To determine the exact position of a given diencephalic
progenitor domain, we used a transgenic line driving green fluorescent protein
(GFP) in cells expressing the proneural protein, Neurogenin1 (Neurog1), which was
used as a visible neural plate landmark. This approach facilitated precise
labeling of defined groups of cells in the prospective diencephalon of the
zebrafish neural plate. In this manner, we labeled multiple overlapping areas of 
the diencephalon, thereby ensuring both accuracy and reproducibility of our
lineage tracing regardless of the dynamic changes of the developing neural plate.
We present a fate map of the zebrafish diencephalon at a higher spatial
resolution than previously described.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19504459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Jun 1;15(11):3663-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-2383.
Epub 2009 May 26.

DNMT3B expression might contribute to CpG island methylator phenotype in
colorectal cancer.

Nosho K(1), Shima K, Irahara N, Kure S, Baba Y, Kirkner GJ, Chen L, Gokhale S,
Hazra A, Spiegelman D, Giovannucci EL, Jaenisch R, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

PURPOSE: DNA methyltransferase-3B (DNMT3B) plays an important role in de novo CpG
island methylation. Dnmt3b can induce colon tumor in mice with methylation in
specific CpG islands. We hypothesized that cellular DNMT3B level might influence 
the occurrence of widespread CpG island methylation (i.e., the CpG island
methylator phenotype, CIMP) in colon cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Utilizing 765 colorectal cancers in two cohort studies, we
detected DNMT3B expression in 116 (15%) tumors by immunohistochemistry. We
assessed microsatellite instability, quantified DNA methylation in repetitive
long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1) by Pyrosequencing, eight
CIMP-specific promoters [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1,
RUNX3, and SOCS1], and eight other CpG islands (CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, 
MINT31, p14, and WRN) by real-time PCR (MethyLight).
RESULTS: Tumoral DNMT3B overexpression was significantly associated with
CIMP-high [> or =6/8 methylated CIMP-specific promoters; odds ratio (OR), 3.34;
95% confidence interval, 2.11-5.29; P < 0.0001]. The relations between DNMT3B and
methylation in 16 individual CpG islands varied substantially (OR, 0.80-2.96),
suggesting variable locus-to-locus specificities of DNMT3B activity. DNMT3B
expression was not significantly related with LINE-1 hypomethylation. In
multivariate logistic regression, the significant relation between DNMT3B and
CIMP-high persisted (OR, 2.39; 95% confidence interval, 1.11-5.14; P = 0.026)
after adjusting for clinical and other molecular features, including p53,
beta-catenin, LINE-1, microsatellite instability, KRAS, PIK3CA, and BRAF. DNMT3B 
expression was unrelated with patient outcome, survival, or prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Tumoral DNMT3B overexpression is associated with CIMP-high in
colorectal cancer. Our data support a possible role of DNMT3B in nonrandom de
novo CpG island methylation leading to colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2866637
PMID: 19470733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mod Pathol. 2009 Jul;22(7):922-32. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.49. Epub 2009 May 
8.

SIRT1 histone deacetylase expression is associated with microsatellite
instability and CpG island methylator phenotype in colorectal cancer.

Nosho K(1), Shima K, Irahara N, Kure S, Firestein R, Baba Y, Toyoda S, Chen L,
Hazra A, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

The class III histone deacetylase SIRT1 (sir2) is important in epigenetic gene
silencing. Inhibition of SIRT1 reactivates silenced genes, suggesting a possible 
therapeutic approach of targeted reversal of aberrantly silenced genes. In
addition, SIRT1 may be involved in the well-known link between obesity, cellular 
energy balance and cancer. However, a comprehensive study of SIRT1 using human
cancer tissue with clinical outcome data is currently lacking, and its prognostic
significance is uncertain. Using the database of 485 colorectal cancers in two
independent prospective cohort studies, we detected SIRT1 overexpression in 180
(37%) tumors by immunohistochemistry. We examined its relationship to the CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP), related molecular events, clinical features
including body mass index, and patient survival. We quantified DNA methylation in
eight CIMP-specific promoters (CACNA1G, CDKN2A, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1,
RUNX3, and SOCS1) and eight other CpG islands (CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1,
MINT31, p14, and WRN) by MethyLight. SIRT1 overexpression was associated with
CIMP-high (> or =6 of 8 methylated CIMP-specific promoters, P=0.002) and
microsatellite instability (MSI)-high phenotype (P<0.0001). In both univariate
and multivariate analyses, SIRT1 overexpression was significantly associated with
the CIMP-high MSI-high phenotype (multivariate odds ratio, 3.20; 95% confidence
interval, 1.35-7.59; P=0.008). In addition, mucinous component (P=0.01), high
tumor grade (P=0.02), and fatty acid synthase overexpression (P=0.04) were
significantly associated with SIRT positivity in multivariate analysis. SIRT1 was
not significantly related with age, sex, tumor location, stage, signet ring
cells, cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), LINE-1 hypomethylation, KRAS, BRAF, BMI, PIK3CA,
HDAC, p53, beta-catenin, COX-2, or patient prognosis. In conclusion, SIRT1
expression is associated with CIMP-high MSI-high colon cancer, suggesting
involvement of SIRT1 in gene silencing in this unique tumor subtype.

PMCID: PMC2704253
PMID: 19430421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Dev Biol. 2009 Apr 15;328(2):529-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.01.007. Epub 2009 
Jan 14.

Ascl1 and Neurog2 form novel complexes and regulate Delta-like3 (Dll3) expression
in the neural tube.

Henke RM(1), Meredith DM, Borromeo MD, Savage TK, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, 
USA.

Delta-like 3 (Dll3) is a Delta family member expressed broadly in the developing 
nervous system as neural progenitor cells initiate differentiation. A proximal
promoter sequence for Dll3 is conserved across multiple species and is sufficient
to direct GFP expression in a Dll3-like pattern in the neural tube of transgenic 
mice. This promoter contains multiple E-boxes, the consensus binding site for
bHLH factors. Dll3 expression and the activity of the Dll3-promoter in the dorsal
neural tube depends on the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors
Ascl1 (Mash1) and Neurog2 (Ngn2). Mutations in each E-box identified in the
Dll3-promoter allowed distinct enhancer or repressor properties to be assigned to
each site individually or in combination. In addition, each E-box has distinct
characteristics relative to binding of bHLH factors Ascl1, Neurog1, and Neurog2. 
Surprisingly, novel Ascl1 containing DNA binding complexes are identified that
interact with specific E-box sites within the Dll3-promoter in vitro. These
complexes include Ascl1/Ascl1 homodimers and Ascl1/Neurog2 heterodimers,
complexes that in some cases require additional undefined factors for efficient
DNA binding. Thus, a complex interplay of E-box binding proteins spatially and
temporally regulate Dll3 levels during neural tube development.

PMCID: PMC2698949
PMID: 19389376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2009;4(4):e5204. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005204. Epub 2009 Apr 13.

ERK5 MAP kinase regulates neurogenin1 during cortical neurogenesis.

Cundiff P(1), Liu L, Wang Y, Zou J, Pan YW, Abel G, Duan X, Ming GL, Englund C,
Hevner R, Xia Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America.

The commitment of multi-potent cortical progenitors to a neuronal fate depends on
the transient induction of the basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family of
transcription factors including Neurogenin 1 (Neurog1). Previous studies have
focused on mechanisms that control the expression of these proteins while little 
is known about whether their pro-neural activities can be regulated by kinase
signaling pathways. Using primary cultures and ex vivo slice cultures, here we
report that both the transcriptional and pro-neural activities of Neurog1 are
regulated by extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 5 signaling in cortical 
progenitors. Activation of ERK5 potentiated, while blocking ERK5 inhibited
Neurog1-induced neurogenesis. Furthermore, endogenous ERK5 activity was required 
for Neurog1-initiated transcription. Interestingly, ERK5 activation was
sufficient to induce Neurog1 phosphorylation and ERK5 directly phosphorylated
Neurog1 in vitro. We identified S179/S208 as putative ERK5 phosphorylation sites 
in Neurog1. Mutations of S179/S208 to alanines inhibited the transcriptional and 
pro-neural activities of Neurog1. Our data identify ERK5 phosphorylation of
Neurog1 as a novel mechanism regulating neuronal fate commitment of cortical
progenitors.

PMCID: PMC2664926
PMID: 19365559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Neuroscience. 2009 Aug 4;162(1):39-54. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.03.033.
Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Fibroblast growth factor-2 increases the expression of neurogenic genes and
promotes the migration and differentiation of neurons derived from transplanted
neural stem/progenitor cells.

Vergaño-Vera E(1), Méndez-Gómez HR, Hurtado-Chong A, Cigudosa JC, Vicario-Abejón 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Avda Dr.
Arce 37, E-28002 Madrid, Spain.

The capacity of neural stem cells (NSC) to generate different types of neurons
and glia depends on the action of intrinsic determinants and extracellular
signals. Here, we isolated adult olfactory bulb stem cells (aOBSC) that express
nestin, RC2 and Sox2, and that have the capacity to generate neurons possessing
mature features in culture and in vivo. The differentiation of aOBSC into neurons
and glia, as well as their genetic profile, was compared to that of embryonic
OBSC (eOBSC) and ganglionic eminence stem cells (GESC). While these eOBSC express
neurogenin (Ngn) 1 and 2, two telencephalic dorsal markers, GESC only express
Ngn2. Adult OBSC express either little or no detectable Ngn1 and 2, and they
produced significantly fewer neurons in culture than eOBSC. By contrast, Dlx2
transcripts (a telencephalic ventral marker) were only clearly detected in GESC. 
When transplanted into the early postnatal P5-P7 OB, each of the three
populations gave rise to cells with a distinct pattern of neuronal migration
and/or dendritic arborization. Overall, these findings suggest that cultured NSC 
partially maintain their regional and temporal specification. Notably,
significant neuronal migration and differentiation were only observed in vivo
when the NSC were briefly exposed to fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) before
grafting, a treatment that enhanced the neurogenin expression. Hence, the
migration and maturation of neurons derived from transplanted NSC can be promoted
by upregulating neurogenic gene expression with FGF-2.

PMID: 19318120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Cell Biochem. 2009 May 15;107(2):264-71. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22122.

Histone marks and chromatin remodelers on the regulation of neurogenin1 gene in
RA induced neuronal differentiation of P19 cells.

Wu M(1), Zhang Y, Wu NH, Shen YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

Neurogenin1 is an important bHLH protein that plays crucial role in neurogenesis.
We first show that the expression of ngn1 increases drastically in RA induced
neuronal differentiation. During which, a three successive stages of the
epigenetic changes surrounding the ngn1 gene are found correlated with a
repression to activation of the gene in P19 cells. Recruiting of a repressive
histone code H3K27me3 on the ngn1 gene is the dominant change in first repression
stage, which is followed by the binding of the active codes of H3K9ac, H3K14ac,
and the H3K4me3 in the second and third stages of RA treatment. Additionally, BRM
but not BRG1 is specifically recruited to ngn1 gene at the third stage and is
positively involved in the RA induced ngn1 expression. We propose that histone
modifiers and chromatin remodelers are pivotal in the activation of the ngn1 gene
in RA induced differentiation of P19 cells.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19308998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Dev Dyn. 2009 Apr;238(4):931-43. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21915.

Transcriptional control of Rohon-Beard sensory neuron development at the neural
plate border.

Rossi CC(1), Kaji T, Artinger KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado, Denver, Colorado
80010, USA.

Rohon-Beard (RB) mechanosensory neurons are among the first sensory neurons to
develop, and the process by which they adopt their fate is not completely
understood. RBs form at the neural plate border (NPB), the junction between
neural and epidermal ectoderm, and require the transcription factor prdm1a. Here,
we show that prior to RB differentiation, prdm1a overlaps extensively with the
epidermal marker dlx3b but shows little overlap with the neuroectodermal markers 
sox3 and sox19a. Birthdating analysis reveals that the majority of RBs are born
during gastrulation in zebrafish, suggesting that it is during this period that
RBs become specified. Expression analysis in prdm1a and neurogenin1 mutant and
dlx3b/dlx4b morpholino-injected embryos suggests that prdm1a is upstream of
dlx3b, dlx4b, and neurogenin1 at the NPB. mRNA for neurogenin1 or dlx3b/dlx4b can
rescue the lack of RBs in prdm1a mutants. Based on these data, we suggest a
preliminary gene regulatory network for RB development.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2755227
PMID: 19301392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Neoplasia. 2009 Jan;11(1):87-95.

JC virus T-antigen in colorectal cancer is associated with p53 expression and
chromosomal instability, independent of CpG island methylator phenotype.

Nosho K(1), Shima K, Kure S, Irahara N, Baba Y, Chen L, Kirkner GJ, Fuchs CS,
Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

JC virus has a transforming gene encoding JC virus T-antigen (JCVT). JCVT may
inactivate wild-type p53, cause chromosomal instability (CIN), and stabilize
beta-catenin. A link between JCVT and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) has 
been suggested. However, no large-scale study has examined the relations of JCVT 
with molecular alterations, clinical outcome, or prognosis in colon cancer. We
detected JCVT expression (by immunohistochemistry) in 271 (35%) of 766 colorectal
cancers. We quantified DNA methylation in eight CIMP-specific promoters (CACNA1G,
CDKN2A, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1) and eight other loci
(CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, MINT31, p14, WRN) by MethyLight. We examined
loss of heterozygosity in 2p, 5q, 17q, and 18q. JCVT was significantly associated
with p53 expression (P < .0001), p21 loss (P < .0001), CIN (>/=2 chromosomal
segments with LOH; P < .0001), nuclear beta-catenin (P = .006), LINE-1
hypomethylation (P = .002), and inversely with CIMP-high (P = .0005) and
microsatellite instability (MSI) (P < .0001), but not with PIK3CA mutation. In
multivariate logistic regression analysis, the associations of JCVT with p53
[adjusted odds ratio (OR), 8.45; P < .0001], CIN (adjusted OR, 2.53; P = .003),
cyclin D1 (adjusted OR, 1.57; P = .02), LINE-1 hypomethylation (adjusted OR, 1.97
for a 30% decline as a unit; P = .03), BRAF mutation (adjusted OR, 2.20; P =
.04), and family history of colorectal cancer (adjusted OR, 0.64; P = .04)
remained statistically significant. However, JCVT was no longer significantly
associated with CIMP, MSI, beta-catenin, or cyclooxygenase-2 expression in
multivariate analysis. JCVT was unrelated with patient survival. In conclusion,
JCVT expression in colorectal cancer is independently associated with p53
expression and CIN, which may lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2606122
PMID: 19107235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jan 30;379(1):22-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.11.149. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

Her4 is necessary for establishing peripheral projections of the trigeminal
ganglia in zebrafish.

So JH(1), Chun HS, Bae YK, Kim HS, Park YM, Huh TL, Chitnis AB, Kim CH, Yeo SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Republic of
Korea.

Transcripts of notch and its target genes have been detected in some
differentiating neurons. However, the role of Notch in neuronal differentiation
remains poorly defined. Here, we show that a subset of differentiating sensory
neurons in the trigeminal ganglia express her4. Expression of her4 requires Notch
signaling during neurogenesis but not during differentiation, when peripheral
projections of the trigeminal ganglia are established. These projections develop 
poorly in her4 morphants. While many components of the canonical Notch signaling 
pathway are not required for late her4 expression or peripheral axon outgrowth in
trigeminal neurons, simultaneous knock-down of Notch receptors prevents
establishment of these peripheral projections. These observations suggest that
Her4 and Notch play a role in peripheral outgrowth of sensory neurons.

PMID: 19084503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 26;28(48):12622-31. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0563-08.2008.

Glutamatergic neuronal differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells after
transient expression of neurogenin 1 and treatment with BDNF and GDNF: in vitro
and in vivo studies.

Reyes JH(1), O'Shea KS, Wys NL, Velkey JM, Prieskorn DM, Wesolowski K, Miller JM,
Altschuler RA.

Author information: 
(1)Kresge Hearing Research Institute, Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0506, USA.

Differentiation of the pluripotent neuroepithelium into neurons and glia is
accomplished by the interaction of growth factors and cell-type restricted
transcription factors. One approach to obtaining a particular neuronal phenotype 
is by recapitulating the expression of these factors in embryonic stem (ES)
cells. Toward the eventual goal of auditory nerve replacement, the aim of the
current investigation was to generate auditory nerve-like glutamatergic neurons
from ES cells. Transient expression of Neurog1 promoted widespread neuronal
differentiation in vitro; when supplemented with brain-derived neurotrophic
factor (BDNF) and glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF), 75% of ES
cell-derived neurons attained a glutamatergic phenotype after 5 d in vitro. Mouse
ES cells were also placed into deafened guinea pig cochleae and Neurog1
expression was induced for 48 h followed by 26 d of BDNF/GDNF infusion. In vivo
differentiation resulted in 50-75% of ES cells bearing markers of early neurons, 
and a majority of these cells had a glutamatergic phenotype. This is the first
study to report a high percentage of ES cell differentiation into a glutamatergic
phenotype and sets the stage for cell replacement of auditory nerve.

PMCID: PMC2729437
PMID: 19036956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. J Neurosci. 2008 Nov 19;28(47):12558-69. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2079-08.2008.

Zebrafish dorsal root ganglia neural precursor cells adopt a glial fate in the
absence of neurogenin1.

McGraw HF(1), Nechiporuk A, Raible DW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program and Department of Biological Structure,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

The proneural transcription factor neurogenin 1 (neurog1) has been shown to be a 
key regulator of dorsal root ganglion (DRG) neuron development. Here we use a
novel transgenic zebrafish line to demonstrate that the neural crest population
that gives rise to DRG neurons becomes fate restricted to a neuronal/glial
precursor before the onset of neurog1 function. We generated a stable transgenic 
zebrafish line that carries a modified bacterial artificial chromosome that
expresses green fluorescent protein (GFP) under the control of the neurog1
promoter [Tg(neurog1:EGFP)]. In contrast to previously described neurog1
transgenic lines, Tg(neurog1:EGFP) expresses GFP in DRG neuronal precursors cells
as they migrate ventrally and after their initial differentiation as neurons.
Using this line, we are able to track the fate of DRG neuronal precursor cells
during their specification. When Neurog1 function is blocked, either by neurog1
morpholino antisense oligonucleotide injection or in neurog1 mutants, GFP
expression initiates in neural crest cells, although they fail to form DRG
neurons. Rather, these cells take on a glial-like morphology, retain
proliferative capacity, and express glial markers and become associated with the 
ventral motor root. These results suggest that, within the zebrafish neural
crest, there is a fate-restricted lineage that is limited to form either sensory 
neurons or glia in the developing DRG. Neurog1 acts as the key factor in this
lineage to direct the formation of sensory neurons.

PMCID: PMC3176597
PMID: 19020048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS One. 2008;3(11):e3698. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003698. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Comprehensive biostatistical analysis of CpG island methylator phenotype in
colorectal cancer using a large population-based sample.

Nosho K(1), Irahara N, Shima K, Kure S, Kirkner GJ, Schernhammer ES, Hazra A,
Hunter DJ, Quackenbush J, Spiegelman D, Giovannucci EL, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) is a distinct phenotype
associated with microsatellite instability (MSI) and BRAF mutation in colon
cancer. Recent investigations have selected 5 promoters (CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, 
RUNX3 and SOCS1) as surrogate markers for CIMP-high. However, no study has
comprehensively evaluated an expanded set of methylation markers (including these
5 markers) using a large number of tumors, or deciphered the complex clinical and
molecular associations with CIMP-high determined by the validated marker panel.
METHOLODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: DNA methylation at 16 CpG islands [the above 5 
plus CDKN2A (p16), CHFR, CRABP1, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, MINT31, MLH1, p14
(CDKN2A/ARF) and WRN] was quantified in 904 colorectal cancers by real-time PCR
(MethyLight). In unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis, the 5 markers
(CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1), CDKN2A, CRABP1, MINT31, MLH1, p14 and 
WRN were generally clustered with each other and with MSI and BRAF mutation. KRAS
mutation was not clustered with any methylation marker, suggesting its
association with a random methylation pattern in CIMP-low tumors. Utilizing the
validated CIMP marker panel (including the 5 markers), multivariate logistic
regression demonstrated that CIMP-high was independently associated with older
age, proximal location, poor differentiation, MSI-high, BRAF mutation, and
inversely with LINE-1 hypomethylation and beta-catenin (CTNNB1) activation.
Mucinous feature, signet ring cells, and p53-negativity were associated with
CIMP-high in only univariate analysis. In stratified analyses, the relations of
CIMP-high with poor differentiation, KRAS mutation and LINE-1 hypomethylation
significantly differed according to MSI status.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides valuable data for standardization of the use of
CIMP-high-specific methylation markers. CIMP-high is independently associated
with clinical and key molecular features in colorectal cancer. Our data also
suggest that KRAS mutation is related with a random CpG island methylation
pattern which may lead to CIMP-low tumors.

PMCID: PMC2579485
PMID: 19002263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Histopathology. 2008 Nov;53(5):588-98. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2008.03161.x.

Cyclin D1 is frequently overexpressed in microsatellite unstable colorectal
cancer, independent of CpG island methylator phenotype.

Nosho K(1), Kawasaki T, Chan AT, Ohnishi M, Suemoto Y, Kirkner GJ, Fuchs CS,
Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, & Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

AIMS: Cyclin D1 and cyclin-dependent kinases are commonly activated in colorectal
cancer. Microsatellite instability (MSI) and CpG island methylator phenotype
(CIMP) are important molecular classifiers in colorectal cancer. The aim was to
clarify the relationship between cyclin D1, MSI and CIMP.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Among 865 colorectal cancers with MSI and CIMP data, 246
tumours (28.4%) showed cyclin D1 overexpression by immunohistochemistry. DNA
methylation in p14 and eight CIMP-specific promoters (CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16),
CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1) was quantified by real-time
polymerase chain reaction (MethyLight). Both MSI-high and CIMP-high were
associated with cyclin D1 overexpression (P < 0.0001). After tumours were
stratified by MSI and CIMP status, the relationship between MSI-high and cyclin
D1 persisted (P < or = 0.02), whereas the relationship between CIMP-high and
cyclin D1 did not. Cyclin D1 overexpression was correlated with BRAF mutation (P 
= 0.0001), p27 loss (P = 0.0007) and p16 loss (P = 0.02), and inversely with p53 
expression (P = 0.0002) and p21 loss (P < 0.0001). After stratification by MSI
status, the inverse relationship between cyclin D1 and p21 loss still persisted
(P < 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Cyclin D1 activation is associated with MSI and inversely with p21
loss in colorectal cancers. Cyclin D1 may play an important role in the
development of MSI-high tumours, independent of CIMP status.

PMCID: PMC2719983
PMID: 18983468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Toxicol Sci. 2009 Jan;107(1):206-19. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfn221. Epub 2008 Oct
29.

Cadmium-induced differential toxicogenomic response in resistant and sensitive
mouse strains undergoing neurulation.

Robinson JF(1), Yu X, Hong S, Griffith WC, Beyer R, Kim E, Faustman EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

Common inbred mouse strains, such as the C57BL/6 (C57) and the SWV, display
differences in sensitivity to environmental teratogens during gestation. For
example, the C57 is more sensitive than the SWV to cadmium (Cd) exposure during
neurulation, inducing a higher incidence of neural tube defects (NTDs). Here, we 
report, using Cd as a model teratogen, the first large scale toxicogenomic study 
to compare teratogen-induced gene expression alterations in C57 and SWV embryos
undergoing neurulation, identifying toxicogenomic responses that associate with
developmental toxicity and differential sensitivity. Using a systems-based
toxicogenomic approach, comparing Cd-exposed and control C57 and SWV embryos (12-
and 24-h postinjection [p.i.] [gestational day 8.0, ip]), we examined
differentially expressed genes at multiple levels (biological process, pathway,
gene) using Gene Ontology (GO) analysis, pathway mapping and cross-scatter plots.
In both C57 and SWV embryos, we observed several gene expression alterations
linked with cell cycle-related classifications, however, only in the C57 we
observed upregulation of p53-dependent mediators Ccng1 and Pmaip1, previously
associated with cell cycle arrest, apoptosis and NTD formation. In addition, we
also identified a greater reduction in expression of nervous system
development-related genes (e.g., Zic1, En2, Neurog1, Elavl4, Metrn, Nr2f1, Nr2f2)
in the C57 compared to the SWV (12-h p.i.). In summary, our results indicate that
differences in Cd-induced gene expression profiles between NTD resistant and
sensitive strains within enriched biological processes (including developmental
and cell cycle-related categories) associate with increased sensitivity to
developmental toxicity as determined by observations of increased NTD formation, 
mortality (resorptions) and reduced fetal growth. Such observations may provide
more detailed and useful mechanistic clues for identification of differences in
life-stage specific teratogenic response.

PMCID: PMC2768398
PMID: 18974090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008 Oct;132(10):1657-65. doi:
10.1043/1543-2165(2008)132[1657:CIMPIC]2.0.CO;2.

CpG island methylator phenotype in colorectal cancers: comparison of the new and 
classic CpG island methylator phenotype marker panels.

Lee S(1), Cho NY, Yoo EJ, Kim JH, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Kyung Hee University College of Medicine, Seoul,
Korea.

CONTEXT: CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) designates a subset of colorectal
cancers featuring concordant hypermethylation of multiple promoter CpG islands.
Little is known about the clinical outcome or histologic characteristics of
CIMP-positive colorectal cancers defined by recently identified CpG island
methylator phenotype panels.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate and compare the molecular and clinicopathologic
features of CIMP-positive colorectal cancers defined by classic (p16, hMLH1,
MINT1, MINT2, MINT31) and new (CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, RUNX3, SOCS1) CIMP panels.
DESIGN: We analyzed 130 colorectal cancers for hypermethylation of both panels
using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: With at least 2 markers methylated, both classic (39/130; 23.1%) and new
(23.1%) CIMP-positive colorectal cancers were significantly associated with
proximal tumor location, microsatellite instability, and BRAF mutation (all P
values were less than .05). The new panel outperformed the classic panel in
detecting these features. With at least 3 markers methylated, new CIMP-positive
colorectal cancers (16.9%) were closely associated with proximal tumor location, 
low frequency of KRAS mutation, and high frequency of BRAF mutation (all P values
were less than .05), whereas classic CIMP-positive colorectal cancers (18.5%)
were closely associated with proximal tumor location, frequent microsatellite
instability, and frequent BRAF mutation (all P values were less than .05).
Analyzing a combination of CIMP and microsatellite instability status,
CIMP-positive/microsatellite instability-negative colorectal cancers had the
worst clinical outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Whereas the classic panel outperformed in predicting clinical
outcome, the new panel was superior in detecting known clinicopathologic features
of CIMP but inferior in prognostication power.

PMID: 18834226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Gut. 2009 Jan;58(1):90-6. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.155473. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

CpG island methylator phenotype, microsatellite instability, BRAF mutation and
clinical outcome in colon cancer.

Ogino S(1), Nosho K, Kirkner GJ, Kawasaki T, Meyerhardt JA, Loda M, Giovannucci
EL, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Oncologic Pathology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115 USA.
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), characterised by
widespread promoter methylation, is associated with microsatellite instability
(MSI) and BRAF mutation in colorectal cancer. The independent effect of CIMP, MSI
and BRAF mutation on prognosis remains uncertain.
METHODS: Utilising 649 colon cancers (stage I-IV) in two independent cohort
studies, we quantified DNA methylation in eight CIMP-specific promoters (CACNA1G,
CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1) as well as CHFR,
HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT1, MINT31, p14, and WRN by using MethyLight technology.
We examined MSI, KRAS and BRAF status. Cox proportional hazard models computed
hazard ratios (HRs) for colon cancer-specific and overall mortalities, adjusting 
for patient characteristics and tumoral molecular features.
RESULTS: After adjustment for other predictors of patient survival, patients with
CIMP-high cancers (126 (19%) tumours with >or=6/8 methylated CIMP-specific
promoters) experienced a significantly low colon cancer-specific mortality
(multivariate HR 0.44, 95% confidence interval (CI) 0.22 to 0.88), whereas the
BRAF mutation was significantly associated with a high cancer-specific mortality 
(multivariate HR 1.97, 95% CI 1.13 to 3.42). A trend toward a low cancer-specific
mortality was observed for MSI-high tumours (multivariate HR 0.70, 95% CI 0.36 to
1.37). In stratified analyses, CIMP-high tumours were associated with a
significant reduction in colon cancer-specific mortality, regardless of both MSI 
and BRAF status. The relation between CIMP-high and lower mortality appeared to
be consistent across all stages. KRAS mutation was unrelated to prognostic
significance.
CONCLUSION: CIMP-high appears to be an independent predictor of a low colon
cancer-specific mortality, while BRAF mutation is associated with a high colon
cancer-specific mortality.

PMCID: PMC2679586
PMID: 18832519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Schizophr Res. 2008 Dec;106(2-3):192-9. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2008.08.009. Epub
2008 Sep 16.

Basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NEUROG1 and schizophrenia: effects on
illness susceptibility, MRI brain morphometry and cognitive abilities.

Ho BC(1), Epping E, Wang K, Andreasen NC, Librant A, Wassink TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, USA. 
beng-ho@uiowa.edu

Transcription factors, including the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) family,
regulate numerous genes and play vital roles in controlling gene expression.
Consequently, transcription factor mutations can lead to phenotypic pleiotropy,
and may be a candidate mechanism underlying the complex genetics and
heterogeneous phenotype of schizophrenia. Neurogenin1 (NEUROG1; a.k.a. Ngn1 or
Neurod3), a bHLH transcription factor encoded on a known schizophrenia linkage
region in 5q31.1, induces glutamatergic and suppresses GABAergic neuronal
differentiation during embryonic neurodevelopment. The goal of this study is to
investigate NEUROG1 effects on schizophrenia risk and on phenotypic features of
schizophrenia. We tested 392 patients with schizophrenia or schizoaffective
disorder and 226 healthy normal volunteers for association with NEUROG1. Major
alleles on two NEUROG1-associated SNPs (rs2344484-C-allele and
rs8192558-G-allele) were significantly more prevalent among patients
(p<or=.0018). Approximately 80% of the sample also underwent high-resolution,
multi-spectral magnetic resonance brain imaging and standardized
neuropsychological assessment. There were significant rs2344484 genotype main
effects on total cerebral gray matter (GM) and temporal GM volumes (p<or=.05).
C-allele-carrier patients and healthy volunteers had smaller total cerebral GM
and temporal GM volumes than their respective T-homozygous counterparts.
rs2344484-C-allele was further associated with generalized cognitive deficits
among schizophrenia patients but not in healthy volunteers. Our findings
replicate previous association between NEUROG1 and schizophrenia. More
importantly, this is the first study to examine brain morphological and
neurocognitive correlates of NEUROG1. rs2344484-C-allele may affect NEUROG1's
role in transcription regulation such that brain morphology and cognitive
abilities are altered resulting in increased susceptibility to develop
schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC2597152
PMID: 18799289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Neurosci. 2008 Aug 27;28(35):8698-708. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1479-08.2008.

Manipulating Robo expression in vivo perturbs commissural axon pathfinding in the
chick spinal cord.

Reeber SL(1), Sakai N, Nakada Y, Dumas J, Dobrenis K, Johnson JE, Kaprielian Z.

Author information: 
(1)Dominick P. Purpura Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

In vertebrate embryos, most spinal commissural axons cross the ventral midline
(VM) and project either alongside or significant distances away from the floor
plate (FP). The upregulation of repulsive Robo1/2 receptors on postcrossing
commissural axons, in mammals, presumably allows these axons to respond to the
midline-associated repellents, Slit1-3, facilitating their expulsion from, and
prohibiting their reentry into, the FP. Compelling data suggest that Robo3
represses Robo1/2 function on precrossing axons and that Robo1/2 inhibit
attractive guidance receptors on postcrossing axons, thereby ensuring that
decussated axons are selectively responsive to midline Slits. However, whether
Robo1/2 expel decussated commissural axons from the VM and/or prevent their
reentry into the FP has not been explicitly established in vivo. Furthermore,
some commissural axons do not require Robo1/2 to elaborate appropriate
contralateral projections in the mouse spinal cord. Here, we use unilateral in
ovo electroporation together with Atoh1 and Neurog1 enhancer elements to
visualize, and assess the consequences of manipulating Robo expression on, dl1
and dl2 chick commissural axons. In response to misexpressing a cytoplasmic
truncation of Robo1 and/or Robo2, which should block all Robo-ligand
interactions, postcrossing commissural axons extend alongside, but do not project
away from or reenter the FP. In contrast, misexpression of full-length Robo2
prevents many commissural axons from crossing the VM. Together, these findings
support key and selective in vivo roles for Robo receptors in presumably altering
the responsiveness of decussated commissural axons and facilitating their
expulsion from the VM within the chick spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC2886497
PMID: 18753371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Oct;39(2):202-10. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2008.06.010. Epub
2008 Jun 25.

Nr4a2 is essential for the differentiation of dopaminergic neurons during
zebrafish embryogenesis.

Luo GR(1), Chen Y, Li XP, Liu TX, Le WD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200025, China.

Nr4a2 is a member of the orphan nuclear receptor gene superfamily, which has been
found to be critical for the development and maintenance of mesencephalic
dopaminergic (DA) neurons. To uncover the molecular mechanisms by which Nr4a2
contributes to the development of DA neurons, we have applied zebrafish to study 
the topographic distribution of nr4a2b transcripts, as well as its correlation
with neuronal progenitor marker (neurogenin 1) and DA neuron markers (tyrosine
hydroxylase, TH and DA transporter, DAT) during neurogenesis. Our studies showed 
that although nr4a2b transcripts did not co-localize with TH and DAT transcripts 
in the posterior tuberculum (PT area), knockdown of Nr4a2 resulted in a
significant decrease of TH(+) and DAT(+) DA neurons in the PT area, accompanied
by a reduction of DA transmitter, which were partially rescued by the injection
of mouse Nr4a2 mRNA. Surprisingly, the number of nr4a2b(+) cells in
Nr4a2-deficient embryos was increased by 1.6 fold. These results suggest that
Nr4a2 may play an important role in the differentiation and maturation rather
than the survival of DA progenitors in the PT area during zebrafish early
embryogenesis.

PMID: 18638558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2008 Jul;17(7):1774-80. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0091.

Ethnicity and risk for colorectal cancers showing somatic BRAF V600E mutation or 
CpG island methylator phenotype.

English DR(1), Young JP, Simpson JA, Jenkins MA, Southey MC, Walsh MD, Buchanan
DD, Barker MA, Haydon AM, Royce SG, Roberts A, Parry S, Hopper JL, Jass JJ, Giles
GG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular, Environmental, Genetic and Analytic Epidemiology, School
of Population Health, The University of Melbourne, Level 1, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia. d.english@unimelb.edu.au

Colorectal cancers arising from serrated polyps are characterized by the CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP) and somatic mutation (V600E) in the BRAF
proto-oncogene. Few epidemiologic studies have investigated risk factors for
these tumors. We conducted a cohort study of 41,328 residents of Melbourne,
Australia that included 9,939 participants of southern European origin and 31,389
of Anglo-Celtic origin. Colorectal adenocarcinomas were identified from
population-based cancer registries. BRAF V600E mutation in tumors was determined 
using a PCR-based allelic discrimination method. Tumors were classified as CIMP
positive when at least three of five markers (RUNX3, CACNA1G, SOCS1, NEUROG1, and
IGF2) were methylated according to MethyLight analysis. Hazard ratios (HR) and
95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were estimated by Cox regression with
adjustment for risk factors for colorectal cancer. During follow-up, 718
participants were diagnosed with colorectal cancer. CIMP assays were done for 579
and BRAF V600E mutation testing for 582. After adjustment for other risk factors,
when compared with people of Anglo-Celtic origin, those of southern European
origin had lower incidence of colorectal cancer that had CIMP (HR, 0.32; 95% CI, 
0.16-0.67) or BRAF mutations (HR, 0.30; 95% CI, 0.16-0.58) but similar incidence 
of colorectal cancer without CIMP (HR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.70-1.05) or BRAF (HR,
0.90; 95% CI, 0.74-1.11). People of southern European origin had lower risk of
colorectal cancers with CIMP and BRAF mutation than people of Anglo-Celtic
origin, which may in part be due to genetic factors that are less common in
people of southern European origin.

PMID: 18628431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Stem Cells. 2008 Sep;26(9):2217-28. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0108. Epub 2008
Jul 10.

Neural induction with neurogenin1 increases the therapeutic effects of
mesenchymal stem cells in the ischemic brain.

Kim SS(1), Yoo SW, Park TS, Ahn SC, Jeong HS, Kim JW, Chang DY, Cho KG, Kim SU,
Huh Y, Lee JE, Lee SY, Lee YD, Suh-Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Ajou University School of Medicine, San 5,
Woncheon-dong, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon 443-721, South Korea.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been shown to ameliorate a variety of
neurological dysfunctions. This effect is believed to be mediated by their
paracrine functions, since these cells rarely differentiate into neuronal cells. 
It is of clinical interest whether neural induction of MSCs is beneficial for the
replacement therapy of neurological diseases. Here we report that expression of
Neurogenin1 (Ngn1), a proneural gene that directs neuronal differentiation of
progenitor cells during development, is sufficient to convert the mesodermal cell
fate of MSCs into a neuronal one. Ngn1-expressing MSCs expressed neuron-specific 
proteins, including NeuroD and voltage-gated Ca2+ and Na+ channels that were
absent in parental MSCs. Most importantly, transplantation of Ngn1-expressing
MSCs in the animal stroke model dramatically improved motor functions compared
with the parental MSCs. MSCs with Ngn1 populated the ischemic brain, where they
expressed mature neuronal markers, including microtubule associated protein 2,
neurofilament 200, and vesicular glutamate transporter 2, and functionally
connected to host neurons. MSCs with and without Ngn1 were indistinguishable in
reducing the numbers of Iba1+, ED1+ inflammatory cells, and terminal
deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end labeling(+) apoptotic cells and in
increasing the numbers of proliferating Ki67+ cells. The data indicate that in
addition to the intrinsic paracrine functions of MSCs, motor dysfunctions were
remarkably improved by MSCs able to transdifferentiate into neuronal cells. Thus,
neural induction of MSCs is advantageous for the treatment of neurological
dysfunctions.

PMID: 18617687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Genomics. 2008 Nov;92(5):301-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2008.06.003. Epub 2008 Aug
28.

Identification of phylogenetically conserved enhancer elements implicated in
pancreas development in the WISP1 and CTGF orthologs.

Kapasa M(1), Serafimidis I, Gavalas A, Kossida S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Biomedical Research Foundation of the
Academy of Athens, 11527, Athens, Greece.

WISP1 and CTGF are members of the CCN family of growth factors encoding
extracellular matrix proteins participating in several developmental and
tumorigenic processes. Both are induced by the WNT signaling pathway, and
microarray data suggest that expression of WISP1 and CTGF is repressed by
Neurogenin3 (Ngn3 (NEUROG3)), a transcription factor directing specification of
the endocrine pancreas. Single-cell reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction analysis suggested that this was a cell autonomous effect. To identify
possible common regulatory networks involved in WISP1 and CTGF gene expression,
their genomic regions were searched for common transcription factor motifs using 
a combination of in silico approaches and documented knowledge concerning
pancreas development. This analysis revealed the presence of a conserved enhancer
in both CTGF and WISP1 regulatory regions in 10 species covering a wide
evolutionary distance. This enhancer contains binding sites for Ngn1/3
(NEUROG1/3) and transcription factors that are critically involved in pancreas
development. Furthermore, it contained binding sites for three additional
transcription factor families, which may indicate novel players are involved in
this process.

PMID: 18616996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Jul 25;440(1):27-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.05.053. Epub 
2008 May 18.

Folic acid supplementation affects apoptosis and differentiation of embryonic
neural stem cells exposed to high glucose.

Jia DY(1), Liu HJ, Wang FW, Liu SM, Ling EA, Liu K, Hao AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education for Experimental Teratology,
Department of Histology and Embryology, Shandong University School of Medicine,
No. 44, Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong 250012, PR China.

Folic acid (FA) supplementation has been shown to be extremely effective in
reducing the occurrence of neural tube defects (NTDs), one of the most common
birth defects associated with diabetic pregnancy. However, the antiteratogenic
mechanism of FA in diabetes-induced NTDs is unclear. This study investigated the 
neuroprotective mechanism of FA in neural stem cells (NSCs) exposed to high
glucose in vitro. The undifferentiated or differentiated NSCs were cultured in
normal D-glucose concentration (NG) or high D-glucose concentration (HG) with or 
without FA. FA supplementation significantly decreased apoptosis induced by HG
and lowered the expression of p53 in the nucleus of undifferentiated NSCs exposed
to HG. Administration of FA in differentiated NSCs did not alter their precocious
differentiation induced by HG. The increased mRNA expression levels of the basic 
helix-loop-helix factors including Neurog1, Neurog2, NeuroD2, Mash1, Id1, Id2,
and Hes5 in the presence of HG were not significantly affected by FA. The present
results provided a cellular mechanism by which FA supplementation may have a
potential role in prevention of NTDs in diabetic pregnancies. On the other hand, 
FA increased the mRNA expression levels of the above transcription factors and
accelerated the differentiation of NSCs in the NG medium, suggesting that it may 
adversely affect the normal differentiation of NSCs. Therefore, the timing and
dose of FA would be critical factors in considering FA supplementation in normal 
maternal pregnancy.

PMID: 18541378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mutat Res. 2008 Jul 3;642(1-2):57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2008.04.007. Epub
2008 May 2.

Expression profiles are different in carbon ion-irradiated normal human
fibroblasts and their bystander cells.

Iwakawa M(1), Hamada N, Imadome K, Funayama T, Sakashita T, Kobayashi Y, Imai T.

Author information: 
(1)RadGenomics Research Group, Research Center for Charged Particle Therapy,
National Institute of Radiological Sciences, 4-9-1 Anagawa, Chiba, Japan.
mayumii@nirs.go.jp

Evidence has accumulated that ionizing radiation induces biological effects in
non-irradiated bystander cells having received signals from directly irradiated
cells; however, energetic heavy ion-induced bystander response is incompletely
characterized. Here we performed microarray analysis of irradiated and bystander 
fibroblasts in confluent cultures. To see the effects in bystander cells, each of
1, 5 and 25 sites was targeted with 10 particles of carbon ions (18.3 MeV/u, 103 
keV/microm) using microbeams, where particles traversed 0.00026, 0.0013 and
0.0066% of cells, respectively. diated cells, cultures were exposed to 10%
survival dose (D), 0.1D and 0.01D of corresponding broadbeams (108 keV/microm).
Irrespective of the target numbers (1, 5 or 25 sites) and the time (2 or 6h
postirradiation), similar expression changes were observed in bystander cells.
Among 874 probes that showed more than 1.5-fold changes in bystander cells, 25%
were upregulated and the remainder downregulated. These included genes related to
cell communication (PIK3C2A, GNA13, FN1, ANXA1 and IL1RAP), stress response
(RAD23B, ATF4 and EIF2AK4) and cell cycle (MYCN, RBBP4 and NEUROG1). Pathway
analysis revealed serial bystander activation of G protein/PI-3 kinase pathways. 
Instead, genes related to cell cycle or death (CDKN1A, GADD45A, NOTCH1 and
BCL2L1), and cell communication (IL1B, TCF7 and ID1) were upregulated in
irradiated cells, but not in bystander cells. Our results indicate different
expression profiles in irradiated and bystander cells, and imply that
intercellular signaling between irradiated and bystander cells activate
intracellular signaling, leading to the transcriptional stress response in
bystander cells.

PMID: 18538798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Neoplasia. 2008 Jun;10(6):534-41.

PIK3CA mutation in colorectal cancer: relationship with genetic and epigenetic
alterations.

Nosho K(1), Kawasaki T, Ohnishi M, Suemoto Y, Kirkner GJ, Zepf D, Yan L, Longtine
JA, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Somatic PIK3CA mutations are often present in colorectal cancer. Mutant PIK3CA
activates AKT signaling, which up-regulates fatty acid synthase (FASN).
Microsatellite instability (MSI) and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) are
important molecular classifiers in colorectal cancer. However, the relationship
between PIK3CA mutation, MSI and CIMP remains uncertain. Using Pyrosequencing
technology, we detected PIK3CA mutations in 91 (15%) of 590 population-based
colorectal cancers. To determine CIMP status, we quantified DNA methylation in
eight CIMP-specific promoters [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1,
NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1] by real-time polymerase chain reaction (MethyLight).
PIK3CA mutation was significantly associated with mucinous tumors [P = .0002;
odds ratio (OR) = 2.44], KRAS mutation (P < .0001; OR = 2.68), CIMP-high (P =
.03; OR = 2.08), phospho-ribosomal protein S6 expression (P = .002; OR = 2.19),
and FASN expression (P = .02; OR = 1.85) and inversely with p53 expression (P =
.01; OR = 0.54) and beta-catenin (CTNNB1) alteration (P = .004; OR = 0.43). In
addition, PIK3CA G-to-A mutations were associated with MGMT loss (P = .001; OR = 
3.24) but not with MGMT promoter methylation. In conclusion, PIK3CA mutation is
significantly associated with other key molecular events in colorectal cancer,
and MGMT loss likely contributes to the development of PIK3CA G>A mutation. In
addition, Pyrosequencing is useful in detecting PIK3CA mutation in archival
paraffin tumor tissue. PIK3CA mutational data further emphasize heterogeneity of 
colorectal cancer at the molecular level.

PMCID: PMC2386538
PMID: 18516290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1726-35. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21571.

Comparative analysis of proneural gene expression in the embryonic cerebellum.

Zordan P(1), Croci L, Hawkes R, Consalez GG.

Author information: 
(1)San Raffaele Scientific Institute and San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy.

The embryonic cerebellum contains two germinative epithelia: the rhombic lip and 
the ventricular zone. While the lineage of glutamatergic neurons arising from the
rhombic lip has been characterized, plenty remains to be learned about the
factors giving rise to the array of ventricular zone-derived gamma-aminobutyric
acid (GABA)ergic neurons. In the present study, we describe the expression of
proneural genes Mash1/Ascl1, Ngn1/Neurog1, and Ngn2/Neurog2 in the cerebellar
primordium at key stages of Purkinje cell and interneuron development, and
compare them with the expression of other genes active in the same context. Our
results indicate that Ngn1, Ngn2 and Mash1 are expressed at relevant stages of
cerebellar neurogenesis in the prospective cerebellar nuclei and in the
ventricular zone, excluding the Math1/Atoh1-positive rhombic lip. Their
expression domains are only partially overlapping, suggesting that they may
contribute selectively to ventricular zone regionalization, giving rise to the
diversity of cerebellar GABA neurons and, possibly, Purkinje cell subtypes.

PMID: 18498101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Apr 15;105(15):5780-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0708704105. Epub 2008 Apr 7.

Tlx3 exerts context-dependent transcriptional regulation and promotes neuronal
differentiation from embryonic stem cells.

Kondo T(1), Sheets PL, Zopf DA, Aloor HL, Cummins TR, Chan RJ, Hashino E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Stark Neurosciences
Research Institute, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

The T cell leukemia 3 (Tlx3) gene has been implicated in specification of
glutamatergic sensory neurons in the spinal cord. In cranial sensory ganglia,
Tlx3 is highly expressed in differentiating neurons during early embryogenesis.
To study a role of Tlx3 during neural differentiation, mouse embryonic stem (ES) 
cells were transfected with a Tlx3 expression vector. ES cells stably expressing 
Tlx3 were grown in the presence or absence of a neural induction medium. In
undifferentiated ES cells, there was no significant difference in gene expression
in the presence or absence of Tlx3, even after ES cells were cultured for an
extensive time period. In contrast, expression levels of Mash1, Ngn1, and NeuroD 
were significantly higher in Tlx3-expressing cells after neural induction for 4
days compared with those in cells expressing the control vector. At 7 days after 
neural induction, whereas expression of the proneural genes was down-regulated,
VGLUT2, GluR2, and GluR4 were significantly increased in ES cell-derived neurons 
expressing Tlx3. The sequential and coordinated expression of the proneural and
neuronal subtype-specific genes identifies Tlx3 as a selector gene in ES cells
undergoing neural differentiation. In addition, the differential effects of Tlx3 
overexpression in undifferentiated ES cells compared with ES cell-derived neurons
suggest that Tlx3 exerts context-dependent transcriptional signals on its
downstream target genes. The context-dependent function of Tlx3 as a selector
gene may be used to establish a novel strategy to conditionally generate
excitatory glutamatergic neurons from ES cells to cure various types of
neurodegenerative disorders.

PMCID: PMC2311353
PMID: 18391221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Int J Cancer. 2008 Jun 15;122(12):2767-73. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23470.

LINE-1 hypomethylation is inversely associated with microsatellite instability
and CpG island methylator phenotype in colorectal cancer.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Nosho K, Ohnishi M, Suemoto Y, Kirkner GJ, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA. shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) with widespread promoter CpG island
methylation is a phenotype in colorectal cancer, associated with microsatellite
instability (MSI) and BRAF mutation. Genome-wide hypomethylation may also play an
important role in genomic instability. However, the relation between global DNA
methylation level and methylation in individual CpG islands remains uncertain.
Utilizing 869 population-based colorectal cancers, we measured long interspersed 
nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1) methylation level by Pyrosequencing, which
correlates with global DNA methylation level. We quantified DNA methylation in 8 
CIMP-specific promoters (CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1,
RUNX3 and SOCS1) by real-time PCR (MethyLight technology). LINE-1 methylation
levels in tumors were approximately normally distributed (mean, 61.4%; median,
62.3%; standard deviation, 9.6%). Among the 869 tumors, 128 (15%) were classified
as CIMP-high (>or=6/8 methylated promoters). The mean LINE-1 methylation level
was higher in CIMP-high tumors (65.1%, p < 0.0001) than non-CIMP-high tumors
(60.7%), and higher in MSI-high tumors (64.7%, p < 0.0001) than non-MSI-high
tumors (60.7%). When tumors were stratified by MSI/CIMP status, compared to
non-MSI-high non-CIMP-high tumors (mean LINE-1 methylation level, 60.4%), the
mean LINE-1 methylation level was higher in MSI-high CIMP-high (64.8%, p <
0.0001), MSI-high non-CIMP-high (64.6%, p = 0.03) and non-MSI-high CIMP-high
tumors (66.1%, p = 0.0003). In addition, 18q loss of heterozygosity in
non-MSI-high tumors was correlated with LINE-1 hypomethylation (p = 0.004). In
conclusion, both CIMP-high and MSI-high are inversely associated with LINE-1
hypomethylation, suggesting that CIMP/MSI and genomic hypomethylation may
represent different pathways to colorectal cancer. Our data also support a
possible link between global hypomethylation and chromosomal instability.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2630175
PMID: 18366060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Laryngol Otol. 2008 Oct;122(10):1029-36. doi: 10.1017/S0022215107001582. Epub
2008 Feb 29.

Bioinformatics analysis of candidate genes and mutations in a congenital
sensorineural hearing loss pedigree: detection of 52 genes for the DFNA52 locus.

Qiong P(1), Hu Z, Feng Y, Pan Q, Xia J, Xia K.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Genetics of China, Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha, Hunan, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: Previously, we have mapped the DFNA52 (Online Mendelian Inheritance in
Man (OMIM) 607683) locus, using an 8.8-cM interval on the human chromosome
5q31.1-q32, in a large, consanguineous Chinese family with congenital
sensorineural hearing loss. In order to identify the responsible pathogenic
mutation within the DFNA52 locus, we set out to identify candidate disease genes 
within that region and to sequentially analyse these candidate genes.
METHODS: Using bioinformatics analysis, 52 candidate disease genes were
identified based on gene expression data, deafness phenotype, and findings from a
mouse model and from the literature (including two mouse deafness genes NEUROG1
and SMAD5). Mutation detection was performed for the 52 candidate genes, in
patients from the pedigree.
RESULTS: In these patients, we found no disease-causing mutations in the coding
and splice site regions of these genes, which segregated with the disease.
However, 108 single nucleotide polymorphisms were identified, of which 15 were
novel. Eleven of these 108 single nucleotide polymorphisms altered the encoded
amino acid.
CONCLUSIONS: Although we identified a number of nucleotide changes in the
affected patients, by analysis of coding and splice site regions of the genes,
none of these changes are likely to be pathogenic mutations segregating with the 
disease. The result implies that the genes studied are unlikely to be a cause of 
DFNA52-linked sensorineural hearing loss.

PMID: 18312703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Comp Neurol. 2008 May 1;508(1):62-71. doi: 10.1002/cne.21657.

Solitary chemoreceptor cell survival is independent of intact trigeminal
innervation.

Gulbransen B(1), Silver W, Finger TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Neuroscience Program and Rocky
Mountain Taste and Smell Center, School of Medicine University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA.

Nasal solitary chemoreceptor cells (SCCs) are a population of specialized
chemosensory epithelial cells presumed to broaden trigeminal chemoreceptivity in 
mammals (Finger et al. [2003] Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100:8981-8986). SCCs are
innervated by peptidergic trigeminal nerve fibers (Finger et al. [2003]) but it
is currently unknown if intact innervation is necessary for SCC development or
survival. We tested the dependence of SCCs on innervation by eliminating
trigeminal nerve fibers during development with neurogenin-1 knockout mice,
during early postnatal development with capsaicin desensitization, and during
adulthood with trigeminal lesioning. Our results demonstrate that elimination of 
innervation at any of these times does not result in decreased SCC numbers. In
conclusion, neither SCC development nor mature cell maintenance is dependent on
intact trigeminal innervation.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2586644
PMID: 18300260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Hum Pathol. 2008 May;39(5):767-75. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2007.10.005. Epub 2008 
Mar 4.

Correlation of laterally spreading type and JC virus with methylator phenotype
status in colorectal adenoma.

Nosho K(1), Yamamoto H, Takahashi T, Mikami M, Hizaki K, Maehata T, Taniguchi H, 
Yamaoka S, Adachi Y, Itoh F, Imai K, Shinomura Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Sapporo Medical University School of
Medicine, Sapporo 060-8543, Japan. nosho@sapmed.ac.jp

Accurate frequencies of CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) have not been
determined for laterally spreading tumors (LSTs) and other flat-type colorectal
adenomas, and the role of JC virus T-antigen (T-Ag) in these tumors is unclear.
We used MethyLight assay to analyze the relationship between CIMP status and
clinicopathologic characteristics in tissue from 72 LST of granular-type (LST-G),
35 LST of nongranular-type (LST-NG), 54 protruded-type adenomas, and 89
colorectal cancers. We also investigated the relationship between CIMP status and
T-Ag by immunohistochemistry. With the use of 5 markers for CIMP status, tumors
were classified as CIMP-high (> or = 4/5 methylated promoters), CIMP-low (1/5 to 
3/5 methylated promoters), or CIMP-0 (no methylated promoters). The proportion
classified as CIMP-0 status was 5.6% for protruded-type adenoma, 17.1% for
LST-NG, and 29.2% for LST-G (LST-G versus protruded-type adenoma, P = .001).
CIMP-low status was established for 62.5% of LST-G, 74.3% of LST-NG, and 81.5% of
protruded-type adenomas. CIMP-high status was established for 8.3% of LST-G, 8.6%
of LST-NG, and 12.9% of protruded-type adenomas. The proportions of CIMP-low and 
CIMP-high status were not significantly different between the 3 groups. Multiple 
logistic analysis showed that LST-G appearance was the only significant factor
for identifying CIMP-0 status. BRAF mutation was the only significant factor for 
identifying CIMP-high status. T-Ag expression increased with CIMP status and was 
not associated with macroscopic appearance. In conclusion, among colorectal
adenomas, CIMP-high status was determined by BRAF mutation and not by macroscopic
type, unlike CIMP-0. JC virus T-Ag may be important in determining methylator
phenotype.

PMID: 18284934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mod Pathol. 2008 Mar;21(3):245-55. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.3800982. Epub 2008 Jan 
18.

CpG island methylator phenotype-low (CIMP-low) colorectal cancer shows not only
few methylated CIMP-high-specific CpG islands, but also low-level methylation at 
individual loci.

Kawasaki T(1), Ohnishi M, Nosho K, Suemoto Y, Kirkner GJ, Meyerhardt JA, Fuchs
CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA.

The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP or CIMP-high) with widespread promoter 
methylation is a distinct phenotype in colorectal cancer. However, the concept of
CIMP-low with less extensive CpG island methylation is still evolving. Our aim is
to examine whether density of methylation in individual CpG islands was different
between CIMP-low and CIMP-high tumors. Utilizing MethyLight technology and 889
population-based colorectal cancers, we quantified DNA methylation (methylation
index, percentage of methylated reference) at 14 CpG islands, including 8
CIMP-high-specific loci (CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1,
RUNX3 and SOCS1). Methylation positivity in each locus was defined as methylation
index>4. Low-level methylation (methylation index>0, <20) in each
CIMP-high-specific locus was significantly more common in 340 CIMP-low tumors
(1/8-5/8 methylation-positive loci) than 133 CIMP-high tumors (> or =6/8
methylation-positive loci) and 416 CIMP-0 tumors (0/8 methylation-positive loci) 
(P< or =0.002). In the other six loci (CHFR, HIC1, IGFBP3, MGMT, MINT31 and WRN),
which were not highly specific for CIMP-high, low-level methylation, was not
persistently more prevalent in CIMP-low tumors. In conclusion, compared to
CIMP-high and CIMP-0 tumors, CIMP-low colorectal cancers show not only few
methylated CIMP-high-specific CpG islands, but also more frequent low-level
methylation at individual loci. Our data may provide supporting evidence for a
difference in pathogenesis of DNA methylation between CIMP-low and CIMP-high
tumors.

PMID: 18204436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Neurosci. 2007 Dec 19;27(51):14078-88.

Auditory neurons make stereotyped wiring decisions before maturation of their
targets.

Koundakjian EJ(1), Appler JL, Goodrich LV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Cochlear ganglion neurons communicate sound information from cochlear hair cells 
to auditory brainstem neurons through precisely wired circuits. Understanding
auditory circuit assembly is a significant challenge because of the small size of
the otic vesicle and difficulties labeling and imaging embryonic neurons. We used
genetic fate mapping in the mouse to visualize the morphologies of individual
cochlear ganglion neurons throughout development, from their origin in the
Neurogenin1-positive neurogenic domain in the otic vesicle to the formation of
connections with targets in the cochlea and in the cochlear nucleus. We found
that auditory neurons with different patterns of connectivity arise from discrete
populations of Neurogenin1-positive precursors that make stereotyped wiring
decisions depending on when and where they are born. Auditory precursors are
segregated from vestibular precursors early in neurogenesis. Within this
population, cochlear ganglion neurons with type I and type II morphologies are
apparent before birth and develop within common pools of precursors. The
peripheral projections are initially complex and branched and then become simple 
and straight after reaching the edge of the sensory epithelium. Subsequently, a
small number of projections attain obvious type II morphologies, beginning at
embryonic day 16.5 (E16.5), when hair cells begin to differentiate. Centrally,
cochlear ganglion axons are topographically organized in the auditory brainstem
as early as E15.5, when the cochlear nucleus is still immature. These findings
suggest that Neurogenin1 precursors possess intrinsic programs of differentiation
that direct early auditory circuit assembly events before the maturation of
presynaptic and postsynaptic target cells.

PMID: 18094247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Neoplasia. 2007 Dec;9(12):1091-8.

IGFBP3 promoter methylation in colorectal cancer: relationship with
microsatellite instability, CpG island methylator phenotype, and p53.

Kawasaki T(1), Nosho K, Ohnishi M, Suemoto Y, Kirkner GJ, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (IGFBP3), which is induced by
wild-type p53, regulates IGF and interacts with the TGF-beta pathway. IGFBP3
promoter methylation may occur in colorectal cancer with or without the CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP), which is associated with microsatellite
instability (MSI) and TGFBR2 mutation. We examined the relationship between
IGFBP3 methylation, p53 expression, CIMP and MSI in 902 population-based
colorectal cancers. Utilizing real-time PCR (MethyLight), we quantified promoter 
methylation in IGFBP3 and eight other CIMP-high-specific promoters (CACNA1G,
CDKN2A, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1). IGFBP3 methylation was
far more frequent in non-MSI-high CIMP-high tumors (85% = 35/41) than in MSI-high
CIMP-high (49% = 44/90, P < .0001), MSI-high non-CIMP-high (17% = 6/36, P <
.0001), and non-MSI-high non-CIMP-high tumors (22% = 152/680, P < .0001). Among
CIMP-high tumors, the inverse relationship between MSI and IGFBP3 methylation
persisted in p53-negative tumors (P < .0001), but not in p53-positive tumors.
IGFBP3 methylation was associated inversely with TGFBR2 mutation in MSI-high
non-CIMP-high tumors (P = .02). In conclusion, IGFBP3 methylation is inversely
associated with MSI in CIMP-high colorectal cancers, and this relationship is
limited to p53-negative tumors. Our data suggest complex relationship between
global genomic/epigenomic phenomena (such as MSI/CIMP), single molecular events
(e.g., IGFBP3 methylation, TP53 mutation, and TGFBR2 mutation), and the related
pathways.

PMCID: PMC2134905
PMID: 18084616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Mod Pathol. 2008 Feb;21(2):150-8. Epub 2007 Dec 14.

WRN promoter methylation possibly connects mucinous differentiation,
microsatellite instability and CpG island methylator phenotype in colorectal
cancer.

Kawasaki T(1), Ohnishi M, Suemoto Y, Kirkner GJ, Liu Z, Yamamoto H, Loda M, Fuchs
CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Werner syndrome is a premature aging syndrome characterized by early onset of
cancer and abnormal cellular metabolism of glycosaminoglycan. The WRN helicase
plays an important role in the maintenance of telomere function. WRN promoter
methylation and gene silencing are common in colorectal cancer with the CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP), which is associated with microsatellite
instability (MSI) and mucinous tumors. However, no study has examined the
relationship between mucinous differentiation, WRN methylation, CIMP and MSI in
colorectal cancer. Utilizing 903 population-based colorectal cancers and
real-time PCR (MethyLight), we quantified DNA methylation in WRN and eight other 
promoters (CACNA1G, CDKN2A, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1) known
to be specific for CIMP. Supporting WRN as a good CIMP marker, WRN methylation
was correlated well with CIMP-high diagnosis (> or =6/8 methylated promoters),
demonstrating 89% sensitivity and 81% specificity. WRN methylation was associated
with the presence of any mucinous component and > or =50% mucinous component
(P<0.0001). Because both MSI and CIMP were associated with mucinous tumors and
WRN methylation, we stratified tumors into 9 MSI/CIMP subtypes, to examine
whether the relationship between WRN methylation and mucin still persisted. In
each MSI/CIMP subtype, tumors with mucinous component were persistently more
common in WRN-methylated tumors than WRN-unmethylated tumors (P=0.004). No
relations of WRN methylation with other variables (age, sex, tumor location, poor
differentiation, signet ring cells, lymphocytic reactions, KRAS, BRAF, p53, p21
or 18q loss of heterozygosity) persisted after tumors were stratified by CIMP
status. In conclusion, WRN methylation is associated with mucinous
differentiation independent of CIMP and MSI status. Our data suggest a possible
role of WRN methylation in mucinous differentiation, and may provide explanation 
to the enigmatic association between mucin and MSI/CIMP.

PMID: 18084250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Exp Eye Res. 2008 Feb;86(2):201-6. Epub 2007 Nov 4.

Hypermethylation of CpG island loci of multiple tumor suppressor genes in
retinoblastoma.

Cohen Y(1), Merhavi-Shoham E, Avraham RB, Frenkel S, Pe'er J, Goldenberg-Cohen N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Sheba Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, 
Tel Hashomer, Israel.

Epigenetic silencing of tumor suppressor genes by methylation of discrete regions
of the CpG islands is a major mechanism underlying tumorigenesis. Methylation of 
at least three of five specific genes may represent a distinct trait, termed the 
CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). Positive CIMP is associated with BRAF
mutations. The present study sought to investigate the presence of BRAF mutations
in human retinoblastoma and the role of epigenetic silencing of multiple tumor
suppression genes in a search for methylation phenotype. Twenty-five archival
retinoblastoma samples were analyzed for BRAF mutations with polymerase chain
reaction, Mutector assay, and direct sequencing. Nineteen samples were also
analyzed for the promoter methylation status of eight candidate cancer-related
genes using real-time quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction
after sodium bisulfite modification. The CIMP status was determined. No BRAF
mutations were found. The frequencies of cancer-related gene methylation were as 
follows: 89% for RASSF1A, 52% for NEUROG1, 5% for DAP-kinase, RUNX3 and CACNA1G, 
and 0 for RAR-beta2, SOCS-1 and IGF-2. The lack of BRAF mutations in
retinoblastoma is in accord with the negative CIMP status and the high
hypermethylation rate for RASSF1A. The high methylation status for NEUROG1 may
point to an alternative pathway in the development and progression of
retinoblastoma, but further studies are needed.

PMID: 18068703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Feb;37(2):388-401. Epub 2007 Nov 1.

Combined activity of the two Gli2 genes of zebrafish play a major role in
Hedgehog signaling during zebrafish neurodevelopment.

Ke Z(1), Kondrichin I, Gong Z, Korzh V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

It has been proposed that the downstream mediator of the evolutionarily conserved
Hedgehog pathway Gli2 plays a relatively minor role in neural development of
zebrafish. The second gli2 of zebrafish, gli2b, is expressed in the neural plate 
and the central nervous system. Our comparative analysis of the developmental
role of gli2/gli2b demonstrate a major role of the two Gli2s in mediating Hh
signaling. The Gli2s play an early Hh-independent repressor role in the
maintenance of neural progenitors and an Hh-dependent activating role during cell
differentiation in the floor plate, branchial motor neurons, and sensory neurons.
Our analysis of Gli2b loss-of-function using antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides indicates that the functions of the two Gli2s diverged in
evolution. Gli2b acts in cell proliferation and plays an early role in the
hindbrain within a regulatory cascade involving Notch and Ngn1, as well as a role
as specific activator in rhombomere 4.

PMID: 18060804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. BMC Med Genet. 2007 Dec 6;8:74.

Association of autism with polymorphisms in the paired-like homeodomain
transcription factor 1 (PITX1) on chromosome 5q31: a candidate gene analysis.

Philippi A(1), Tores F, Carayol J, Rousseau F, Letexier M, Roschmann E,
Lindenbaum P, Benajjou A, Fontaine K, Vazart C, Gesnouin P, Brooks P, Hager J.

Author information: 
(1)IntegraGen SA, 5 rue Henri Desbruères, Genopole Campus 1, Genavenir 8, 91000
Evry, France. anne.philippi@integragen.com

BACKGROUND: Autism is a complex, heterogeneous, behaviorally-defined disorder
characterized by disruptions of the nervous system and of other systems such as
the pituitary-hypothalamic axis. In a previous genome wide screen, we reported
linkage of autism with a 1.2 Megabase interval on chromosome 5q31. For the
current study, we hypothesized that 3 of the genes in this region could be
involved in the development of autism: 1) paired-like homeodomain transcription
factor 1 (PITX1), which is a key regulator of hormones within the
pituitary-hypothalamic axis, 2) neurogenin 1, a transcription factor involved in 
neurogenesis, and 3) histone family member Y (H2AFY), which is involved in
X-chromosome inactivation in females and could explain the 4:1 male:female gender
distortion present in autism.
METHODS: A total of 276 families from the Autism Genetic Resource Exchange (AGRE)
repository composed of 1086 individuals including 530 affected children were
included in the study. Single nucleotide polymorphisms tagging the three
candidate genes were genotyped on the initial linkage sample of 116 families. A
second step of analysis was performed using tightly linked SNPs covering the
PITX1 gene. Association was evaluated using the FBAT software version 1.7.3 for
single SNP analysis and the HBAT command from the same package for haplotype
analysis respectively.
RESULTS: Association between SNPs and autism was only detected for PITX1.
Haplotype analysis within PITX1 showed evidence for overtransmission of the A-C
haplotype of markers rs11959298 - rs6596189 (p = 0.0004). Individuals homozygous 
or heterozygous for the A-C haplotype risk allele were 2.54 and 1.59 fold more
likely to be autistic than individuals who were not carrying the allele,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Strong and consistent association was observed between a 2 SNPs
within PITX1 and autism. Our data suggest that PITX1, a key regulator of hormones
within the pituitary-hypothalamic axis, may be implicated in the etiology of
autism.

PMCID: PMC2222245
PMID: 18053270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Development. 2007 Dec;134(24):4405-15.

Cross-regulation of Ngn1 and Math1 coordinates the production of neurons and
sensory hair cells during inner ear development.

Raft S(1), Koundakjian EJ, Quinones H, Jayasena CS, Goodrich LV, Johnson JE,
Segil N, Groves AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, 2100 West
3rd Street, Los Angeles CA 90057, USA.

Temporal and spatial coordination of multiple cell fate decisions is essential
for proper organogenesis. Here, we define gene interactions that transform the
neurogenic epithelium of the developing inner ear into specialized mechanosensory
receptors. By Cre-loxP fate mapping, we show that vestibular sensory hair cells
derive from a previously neurogenic region of the inner ear. The related bHLH
genes Ngn1 (Neurog1) and Math1 (Atoh1) are required, respectively, for neural and
sensory epithelial development in this system. Our analysis of mouse mutants
indicates that a mutual antagonism between Ngn1 and Math1 regulates the
transition from neurogenesis to sensory cell production during ear development.
Furthermore, we provide evidence that the transition to sensory cell production
involves distinct autoregulatory behaviors of Ngn1 (negative) and Math1
(positive). We propose that Ngn1, as well as promoting neurogenesis, maintains an
uncommitted progenitor cell population through Notch-mediated lateral inhibition,
and Math1 irreversibly commits these progenitors to a hair-cell fate.

PMID: 18039969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Oct;48(10):4403-6.

Promoter methylation status of multiple genes in uveal melanoma.

Merhavi E(1), Cohen Y, Avraham BC, Frenkel S, Chowers I, Pe'er J,
Goldenberg-Cohen N.

Author information: 
(1)The Krieger Eye Research Laboratory, Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Tel 
Aviv University, Petach Tikva, Israel.

PURPOSE: Aberrant promoter hypermethylation of CpG islands is thought to play an 
important role in the inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes (TSGs) in cancer.
Studies of cutaneous melanoma have reported a high methylation rate for MGMT,
DAPK, RAR-b2, and RASSF1A. In colon cancer, SOCS-1, IGF-2, RUNX3, NEUROG1, and
CACNA1G are commonly inactivated. The concomitant methylation of at least three
of these genes may represent a distinct trait, the CpG island methylator
phenotype (CIMP). The purpose of the present study was to investigate the role of
epigenetic inactivation of multiple genes in uveal melanoma.
METHODS: Twenty samples of uveal melanoma were analyzed for the methylation
status of nine candidate cancer-related genes: MGMT, DAPK, RAR-b2, RASSF1A,
SOCS-1, IGF-2, RUNX3, NEUROG1, and CACNA1G, using real-time quantitative
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction after sodium bisulfite
modification.
RESULTS: Methylation rates of the genes commonly inactivated in cutaneous
melanoma were 70% for RASSFIA, 5% for MGMT and DAPK, and 0 for RAR-b2. The rates 
for the CIMP-related genes were 25% for RUNX3, 5% for NEUROG1 and CACNA1G, and 0 
for SOCS-1 and IGF-2. None of the samples was CIMP-positive.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study uveal melanoma was negative for CIMP, with
hypermethylation of RASSF1A. The negative CIMP phenotype and frequent RASSF1A
methylation in uveal melanoma is in accord with its known lack of BRAF mutations.
Given that mutations in genes of the RAS pathway are rarely observed in uveal
melanoma, epigenetic inactivation of RASSF1A may be an alternative mechanism of
tumorigenesis. The low frequency of promoter methylation of TSGs commonly
inactivated in cutaneous melanoma further stratifies the different tumorigenesis 
pathway in cutaneous and uveal melanoma.

PMID: 17898258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Endocrinol. 2007 Sep;194(3):475-84.

Differential expression of neurogenins and NeuroD1 in human pituitary tumours.

Fratticci A(1), Grieco FA, Spilioti C, Giangaspero F, Ventura L, Esposito V,
Piccirilli M, Santoro A, Gulino A, Cantore G, Alesse E, Jaffrain-Rea ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of L'Aquila, Via Vetoio,
Coppito 2 - 67100 L'Aquila (AQ), Italy.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are involved in
neuroendocrine cell growth and differentiation. Though NeuroD1 is viewed as
corticotroph specific, its overexpression in non-corticotroph pituitary adenomas 
(PAs) may reflect the activation of molecular pathways involving other bHLH
factors, like neurogenins. To search for neurogenin-NeuroD1 molecular pathways in
the human normal and tumoural pituitary. Fifty-one PAs--22 clinically
non-secreting (CNS) and 29 secreting respectively--and normal human pituitaries
(NP) were studied for NeuroD1 and neurogenins (Ngn1, Ngn2 and Ngn3) gene
expression by RT-PCR and quantitative real-time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR).
Immunohistochemistry for Ngn2/3 was performed in some cases. NeuroD1, Ngn2, Ngn3 
and Ngn1 were observed in up to 84.3, 76.5, 30.4 and 9.1% of PA respectively,
only NeuroD1 and Ngn2 being frequently overexpressed when compared with NP.
Whereas NeuroD1 expression was higher in corticotroph and CNS adenomas (P=0.0001 
versus Pit-1-dependent PA), Ngn2 expression was higher in secreting PA,
especially in Pit-1-dependent PA (P=0.007 and P=0.0006 versus CNS respectively). 
Pit-1-dependent PA which received pre-operative pharmacological treatment
expressed higher Ngn2 levels than untreated cases (P=0.025). Nuclear Ngn2 was
observed in NP and in most PA, especially ACTH- and GH-secreting adenomas.
Nuclear Ngn3 was observed in a minority of secreting PA. Ngn2 is normally
expressed in the anterior pituitary and frequently expressed in PA, but does not 
account for NeuroD1 overexpression where present. Owing to their low and
inconstant expression, the biological significance of Ngn1/3 in the adult
pituitary is uncertain.

PMID: 17761887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Neoplasia. 2007 Jul;9(7):569-77.

Correlation of beta-catenin localization with cyclooxygenase-2 expression and CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in colorectal cancer.

Kawasaki T(1), Nosho K, Ohnishi M, Suemoto Y, Kirkner GJ, Dehari R, Meyerhardt
JA, Fuchs CS, Ogino S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The WNT/beta-catenin (CTNNB1) pathway is commonly activated in the carcinogenic
process. Cross-talks between the WNT and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2 or
PTGS2)/prostaglandin pathways have been suggested. The relationship between
beta-catenin activation and microsatellite instability (MSI) in colorectal cancer
has been controversial. The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP or CIMP-high)
with widespread promoter methylation is a distinct epigenetic phenotype in
colorectal cancer, which is associated with MSI-high. However, no study has
examined the relationship between beta-catenin activation and CIMP status. Using 
832 population-based colorectal cancer specimens, we assessed beta-catenin
localization by immunohistochemistry. We quantified DNA methylation in eight
CIMP-specific promoters [CACNA1G, CDKN2A(p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1,
RUNX3, and SOCS1] by real-time polymerase chain reaction (MethyLight). MSI-high, 
CIMP-high, and BRAF mutation were associated inversely with cytoplasmic and
nuclear beta-catenin expressions (i.e., beta-catenin activation) and associated
positively with membrane expression. The inverse relation between beta-catenin
activation and CIMP was independent of MSI. COX-2 overexpression correlated with 
cytoplasmic beta-catenin expression (even after tumors were stratified by CIMP
status), but did not correlate significantly with nuclear or membrane expression.
In conclusion, beta-catenin activation is inversely associated with CIMP-high
independent of MSI status. Cytoplasmic beta-catenin is associated with COX-2
overexpression, supporting the role of cytoplasmic beta-catenin in stabilizing
PTGS2 (COX-2) mRNA.

PMCID: PMC1939932
PMID: 17710160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2007 Apr;38(2):174-6.

[Molecular regulation of neurogenesis in the cerebral cortex].

[Article in Chinese]

Ren P, Guan YQ, Xu YL.

PMID: 17633240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Sep;28(9):1985-90. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

MGMT germline polymorphism is associated with somatic MGMT promoter methylation
and gene silencing in colorectal cancer.

Ogino S(1), Hazra A, Tranah GJ, Kirkner GJ, Kawasaki T, Nosho K, Ohnishi M,
Suemoto Y, Meyerhardt JA, Hunter DJ, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA. shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

O-6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT) repairs inappropriately methylated
guanine residues in DNA. MGMT promoter methylation and gene silencing are common 
events in colorectal cancer, and may or may not co-exist with the CpG island
methylator phenotype (CIMP). To date, no study has examined the relationship
between MGMT promoter methylation and common MGMT single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs), which have been associated with colorectal cancer risk. Utilizing
real-time polymerase chain reaction (MethyLight technology), we quantified DNA
methylation in MGMT and eight other markers (a CIMP diagnostic panel including
CACNA1G, CDKN2A, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1 in 182 colorectal
cancers collected from two prospective cohorts, the Nurses' Health Study and the 
Health Professionals Follow-up Study. We genotyped four MGMT germline SNPs in
normal DNA and assessed microsatellite instability (MSI), 18q loss of
heterozygosity and KRAS and BRAF status in tumors. The presence of a common MGMT 
promoter SNP (NM_002412.2:c.-56C>T) (rs16906252) was strongly associated with
MGMT methylation (multivariate odds ratio 18.0; 95% confidence interval,
6.2-52.1, P < 0.0001). The presence of the c.-56C>T SNP was also associated with 
loss of MGMT expression in tumors (assessed by immunohistochemistry) (P = 0.009).
This promoter SNP was not correlated with KRAS, BRAF, CIMP or MSI status. None of
the other three non-promoter SNPs was significantly associated with any molecular
changes tested. In conclusion, we have found a strong association between the
germline polymorphism (c.-56C>T) of the MGMT promoter and promoter
methylation/silencing of MGMT in colorectal cancer. Our data provide compelling
evidence for common susceptibility for MGMT promoter CpG island methylation.

PMID: 17621591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2783-93. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Helt determines GABAergic over glutamatergic neuronal fate by repressing Ngn
genes in the developing mesencephalon.

Nakatani T(1), Minaki Y, Kumai M, Ono Y.

Author information: 
(1)KAN Research Institute Inc., KobeMI R&D Center, 6-7-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, 
Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

The mechanism underlying the determination of neurotransmitter phenotype in the
developing mesencephalon, particularly GABAergic versus glutamatergic fate,
remains largely unknown. Here, we show in mice that the basic helix-loop-helix
transcriptional repressor gene Helt (also known as Megane and Heslike) functions 
as a selector gene that determines GABAergic over glutamatergic fate in the
mesencephalon. Helt was coincidently expressed in all the progenitor domains for 
mesencephalic GABAergic neurons. In the mesencephalon of Helt-deficient embryos, 
GABAergic neurons were mostly absent and glutamatergic neurons emerged instead.
Conversely, ectopically expressed Helt suppressed glutamatergic formation and
induced GABAergic neurogenesis. However, the Helt mutants showed normal
progenitor domain formation. In consequence, postmitotic expression of the
homeodomain factor Nkx2.2, which was specifically expressed by GABAergic
populations in wild-type embryos, was maintained despite the transmitter
phenotype conversion from GABAergic to glutamatergic in the Helt mutants,
suggesting that Helt is not involved in neuronal identity specification.
Furthermore, we identified proneural genes Ngn1 and Ngn2, which were selectively 
expressed in glutamatergic progenitors in the developing mesencephalon and had
the ability to confer the glutamatergic fate, as downstream target genes of Helt.
These results suggest that Helt determines GABAergic over glutamatergic fate, at 
least in part, by repressing Ngn (Neurog) genes and that basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor networks involving Helt and Ngns are commonly used in the
mesencephalon for determination of the GABAergic versus glutamatergic transmitter
phenotype.

PMID: 17611227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Mol Diagn. 2007 Jul;9(3):305-14.

Evaluation of markers for CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in colorectal
cancer by a large population-based sample.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Kirkner GJ, Kraft P, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

Comment in
    J Mol Diagn. 2007 Jul;9(3):281-3.

The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP or CIMP-high) with extensive promoter
methylation is a distinct phenotype in colorectal cancer. However, a choice of
markers for CIMP has been controversial. A recent extensive investigation has
selected five methylation markers (CACNA1G, IGF2, NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1) as
surrogate markers for epigenomic aberrations in tumor. The use of these markers
as a CIMP-specific panel needs to be validated by an independent, large dataset. 
Using MethyLight assays on 920 colorectal cancers from two large prospective
cohort studies, we quantified DNA methylation in eight CIMP-specific markers [the
above five plus CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, and MLH1]. A CIMP-high cutoff was set at > 
or = 6/8 or > or = 5/8 methylated promoters, based on tumor distribution and
BRAF/KRAS mutation frequencies. All but two very specific markers [MLH1 (98%
specific) and SOCS1 (93% specific)] demonstrated > or = 85% sensitivity and > or 
= 80% specificity, indicating overall good concordance in methylation patterns
and good performance of these markers. Based on sensitivity, specificity, and
false positives and negatives, the eight markers were ranked in order as: RUNX3, 
CACNA1G, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, CRABP1, SOCS1, and CDKN2A. In conclusion, a panel
of markers including at least RUNX3, CACNA1G, IGF2, and MLH1 can serve as a
sensitive and specific marker panel for CIMP-high.

PMCID: PMC1899428
PMID: 17591929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Jun;131(6):923-30.

Methylation profiles of multiple CpG island loci in extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma versus those of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas.

Kim BH(1), Cho NY, Choi M, Lee S, Jang JJ, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-744 South Korea.

CONTEXT: CpG island hypermethylation is attracting attention because of its
importance as a tumor marker and its potential mechanism for the development of
human cancers. Extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma has been poorly investigated with 
respect to CpG island hypermethylation, and the number of genes known to be
methylated in extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas is fewer than 20.
OBJECTIVE: To generate methylation profiles of 24 CpG island loci in extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas, to correlate methylation findings with clinicopathologic
findings, and to compare these findings with those of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas.
DESIGN: Sixty-three extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas and 48 intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas were investigated for hypermethylation in 24 CpG island loci 
by using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: A total of 61 (96.8%) of 63 extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas showed
hypermethylation in at least one of the examined loci, and a high methylation
frequency was seen in HOXA1 (95.2%), HPP1 (69.8%), and NEUROG1 (61.9%). The
number of methylated CpG island loci was greater in extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas with nodal metastasis than in those without nodal metastasis 
(P = .047), and hypermethylation of TIG1 was closely associated with nodal
metastasis of extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (P = .007). CDH1 and NEUROG1 were 
more frequently methylated in extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma than in
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, whereas CHFR, GSTP1, IGF2, MGMT, MINT31, p14,
and RBP1 were more frequently methylated in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: the 
differences was statistically significant (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: A close relationship exists between CpG island hypermethylation and 
nodal metastasis of extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. Methylation profiles of
extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas are somewhat similar to but distinct from those 
of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas.

PMID: 17550320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Neuro Oncol. 2007 Jul;9(3):298-307. Epub 2007 May 23.

Expression of the neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NEUROG1 
identifies a subgroup of medulloblastomas not expressing ATOH1.

Salsano E(1), Croci L, Maderna E, Lupo L, Pollo B, Giordana MT, Consalez GG,
Finocchiaro G.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Experimental Neuro-Oncology, Carlo Besta Neurological Institute
Foundation, via Celoria 11, 20133 Milan, Italy. ettore.salsano@istituto-besta.it

To gain insight into the lineage of origin of medulloblastomas, the mRNA
expression of NEUROG1, a gene encoding a proneural transcription factor
transiently detected during nervous system development, was investigated in 27
human medulloblastomas characterized for mRNA expression of ATOH1, a marker of
cerebellar granule precursors and corresponding medulloblastomas. Expression of
Ngn1, the mouse homolog of NEUROG1, was also analyzed in the mouse cerebellar
primordium. In addition, we studied mRNA expression of GLI1 as a marker of the
SHH pathway activation, and nuclear beta-catenin staining, beta-catenin
mutations, and mRNA expression of MYC as indicators of the WNT pathway status. In
15 cases, we also examined expression of OTX2, a transcription factor recently
indicated as a positive marker of medulloblastomas originating from cerebellar
granule precursors. The mRNA expression of NEUROG1 and Ngn1 was selectively found
in medulloblastomas not expressing ATOH1 and in progenitors of the cerebellar
ventricular zone, respectively. GLI1 transcript was expressed in medulloblastomas
with ATOH1 transcript, whereas high levels of MYC transcript were unrelated to
NEUROG1 or ATOH1 expression. No clear association between MYC overexpression and 
nuclear beta-catenin staining was found. Finally, OTX2 mRNA was expressed in all 
medulloblastomas with NEUROG1 transcript, but also in a subset of these
malignancies with ATOH1 transcript. These observations may help to define the
lineage of origin of medulloblastomas, and support a role for ATOH1 and NEUROG1
in the classification of these malignancies.

PMCID: PMC1907423
PMID: 17522332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. BMC Cancer. 2007 May 2;7:72.

18q loss of heterozygosity in microsatellite stable colorectal cancer is
correlated with CpG island methylator phenotype-negative (CIMP-0) and inversely
with CIMP-low and CIMP-high.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Kirkner GJ, Ohnishi M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA. shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) with widespread promoter
methylation is a distinct epigenetic phenotype in colorectal cancer, associated
with microsatellite instability-high (MSI-high) and BRAF mutations. 18q loss of
heterozygosity (LOH) commonly present in colorectal cancer with chromosomal
instability (CIN) is associated with global hypomethylation in tumor cell. A
recent study has shown an inverse correlation between CIN and CIMP (determined by
MINTs, p16, p14 and MLH1 methylation) in colorectal cancer. However, no study has
examined 18q LOH in relation to CIMP-high, CIMP-low (less extensive promoter
methylation) and CIMP-0 (CIMP-negative), determined by quantitative DNA
methylation analysis.
METHODS: Utilizing MethyLight technology (real-time PCR), we quantified DNA
methylation in 8 CIMP-specific promoters {CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2,
MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1} in 758 non-MSI-high colorectal cancers obtained
from two large prospective cohorts. Using four 18q microsatellite markers
(D18S55, D18S56, D18S67 and D18S487) and stringent criteria for 18q LOH, we
selected 374 tumors (236 LOH-positive tumors with > or = 2 markers showing LOH;
and 138 LOH-negative tumors with > or = 3 informative markers and no LOH).
RESULTS: CIMP-0 (0/8 methylated promoters) was significantly more common in 18q
LOH-positive tumors (59% = 139/236, p = 0.002) than 18q LOH-negative tumors (44% 
= 61/138), while CIMP-low/high (1/8-8/8 methylated promoters) was significantly
more common (56%) in 18q LOH-negative tumors than 18q LOH-positive tumors (41%). 
These relations persisted after stratification by sex, location, or the status of
MSI, p53 expression (by immunohistochemistry), or KRAS/BRAF mutation.
CONCLUSION: 18q LOH is correlated positively with CIMP-0 and inversely with
CIMP-low and CIMP-high. Our findings provide supporting evidence for relationship
between CIMP-0 and 18q LOH as well as a molecular difference between CIMP-0 and
CIMP-low in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC1876238
PMID: 17474983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Nat Neurosci. 2007 Jun;10(6):720-6. Epub 2007 Apr 29.

Contribution of olfactory neural stem cells to tissue maintenance and
regeneration.

Leung CT(1), Coulombe PA, Reed RR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Sensory Biology and the Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 725 N. Wolfe Street, PCTB 
801, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2007 Jun;10(6):673-4.

The olfactory neuroepithelium undergoes continual neurogenesis and, after
extensive lesions, fully regenerates to maintain sensory function. The stem cell 
population underlying this regenerative capacity remains elusive. Here we show
that mouse horizontal basal cells (HBCs) function as adult olfactory
neuroepithelium neural stem cells and examine their distinct dynamics in
olfactory neuroepithelium maintenance and regeneration. Fate-mapping analysis
after olfactory neuroepithelium lesioning shows that HBCs are competent to
regenerate both neuronal and non-neuronal olfactory neuroepithelium lineages.
HBCs serve as a reservoir of long-lived progenitors that remain largely quiescent
during normal neuronal turnover or even after acute, selective loss of mature
neurons. Under these conditions, previously identified progenitors are largely
responsible for tissue maintenance. Yet after extensive injuries that deplete
resident neuronal precursors, HBCs transiently proliferate and their progeny
fully reconstitute the neuroepithelium. Our data support a new model of adult
neurogenesis in which distinct cell populations mediate normal neuronal turnover 
and neuronal replacement upon traumatic injury.

PMID: 17468753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Virchows Arch. 2007 May;450(5):529-37. Epub 2007 Mar 20.

CpG island methylation, response to combination chemotherapy, and patient
survival in advanced microsatellite stable colorectal carcinoma.

Ogino S(1), Meyerhardt JA, Kawasaki T, Clark JW, Ryan DP, Kulke MH, Enzinger PC, 
Wolpin BM, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
75 Francis Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA. shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) is a distinct epigenetic phenotype in 
colorectal carcinoma with concordant methylation in multiple promoter CpG
islands. The relationship between CpG island methylation and clinical outcomes
among colorectal cancer patients treated with chemotherapy has been a
controversial subject. Utilizing real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR;
MethyLight technology), we quantified DNA methylation in 13 CpG island loci
(CACNA1G, CDKN2A, CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3, SOCS1, MINT1, MINT31,
IGFBP3, MGMT, and WRN) in 30 metastatic microsatellite stable colorectal
carcinomas in phase I/II clinical trials of combination chemotherapy
(5-fluorouracil, irinotecan, leucovorin, and gefitinib). Tumor response was
assessed by CT scans performed at baseline and every 6 weeks thereafter. Overall 
CIMP-high status (either >or=9/13 or >or=7/13 methylated markers; identifying 3
or 5 CIMP-high tumors, respectively) and methylation in CACNA1G, IGF2, MLH1,
NEUROG1, RUNX3, MINT31, and WRN were associated with worse survival (all p <
0.01). Although not statistically significant, there was a trend toward
resistance to chemotherapy among tumors with CpG island methylation. In
conclusion, CpG island methylation may predict poor survival in metastatic
microsatellite stable colorectal carcinoma treated with chemotherapy. Additional 
studies are necessary to examine the role of DNA methylation in treatment
efficacy.

PMID: 17372756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Hum Pathol. 2007 Jun;38(6):842-9. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Fatty acid synthase overexpression in colorectal cancer is associated with
microsatellite instability, independent of CpG island methylator phenotype.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Ogawa A, Kirkner GJ, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

Overexpression of fatty acid synthase (FASN), a key enzyme for de novo
lipogenesis, is observed in many cancers including colorectal cancer and is
associated with poor clinical outcomes. Cellular FASN expression is
physiologically upregulated in a state of energy excess. Obesity and excess
energy balance have been known to be risk factors for colorectal cancer. High
degree of microsatellite instability (MSI-H) is a distinct phenotype in
colorectal cancer, associated with CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP).
Previous data suggest that obesity or altered energy balance may potentially
modify risks for MSI-H cancers and microsatellite stable (MSS) cancers
differently. However, the relationship between MSI and FASN overexpression has
not been investigated. Using 976 cases of population-based colorectal cancer
samples from 2 large prospective cohort studies, we correlated FASN expression
(by immunohistochemistry) with MSI, KRAS and BRAF mutations, p53 expression (by
immunohistochemistry), and CIMP status [determined by MethyLight for 8
CIMP-specific gene promoters including CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1,
NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1]. Marked (2+) FASN overexpression was observed in 110
(11%) of the 976 tumors and was significantly more common in MSI-H tumors (21%
[28/135]) than MSI-low (5.6% [4/72], P = .004) and MSS tumors (11% [72/678], P = 
.001). The association between FASN overexpression and MSI-H persisted even after
stratification by CIMP status. In contrast, FASN overexpression was not
correlated with CIMP after stratification by MSI status. Fatty acid synthase
overexpression was not significantly correlated with sex, tumor location, p53, or
KRAS/BRAF status. In conclusion, FASN overexpression in colorectal cancer is
associated with MSI-H, independent of CIMP status.

PMID: 17350669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Development. 2007 Apr;134(8):1617-29. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Combinatorial actions of patterning and HLH transcription factors in the
spatiotemporal control of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing spinal
cord.

Sugimori M(1), Nagao M, Bertrand N, Parras CM, Guillemot F, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

During development, the three major neural cell lineages, neurons,
oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, differentiate in specific temporal orders at
topologically defined positions. How the timing and position of their generation 
are coordinately regulated remains poorly understood. Here, we provide evidence
that the transcription factors Pax6, Olig2 and Nkx2.2 (Nkx2-2), which define the 
positional identity of multipotent progenitors early in development, also play
crucial roles in controlling the timing of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the
developing ventral spinal cord. We show that each of these factors has a unique
ability to either enhance or inhibit the activities of the proneural
helix-loop-helix (HLH) factors Ngn1 (Neurog1), Ngn2 (Neurog2), Ngn3 (Neurog3) and
Mash1 (Ascl1), and the inhibitory HLH factors Id1 and Hes1, thereby regulating
both the timing of differentiation of multipotent progenitors and their fate.
Consistent with this, dynamic changes in their co-expression pattern in vivo are 
closely correlated to stage- and domain-specific generation of three neural cell 
lineages. We also show that genetic manipulations of their temporal expression
patterns in mice alter the timing of differentiation of neurons and glia. We
propose a molecular code model whereby the combinatorial actions of two classes
of transcription factors coordinately regulate the domain-specific temporal
sequence of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing spinal cord.

PMID: 17344230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Gut. 2007 Nov;56(11):1564-71. Epub 2007 Mar 5.

Molecular correlates with MGMT promoter methylation and silencing support CpG
island methylator phenotype-low (CIMP-low) in colorectal cancer.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Kirkner GJ, Suemoto Y, Meyerhardt JA, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical 
School, 75 Francis St, BWH Pathology, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Gut. 2007 Nov;56(11):1498-500.

BACKGROUND: The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP or CIMP-high) with
widespread promoter methylation is a distinct epigenetic phenotype in colorectal 
cancer. In contrast, a phenotype with less widespread promoter methylation
(CIMP-low) has not been well characterised. O-6-methylguanine-DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) promoter methylation and silencing have been associated 
with G>A mutations and microsatellite instability-low (MSI-low).
AIM: To examine molecular correlates with MGMT methylation/silencing in
colorectal cancer.
METHODS: Utilising MethyLight technology, we quantified DNA methylation in MGMT
and eight other markers (a CIMP-diagnostic panel; CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, 
IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3 and SOCS1) in 920 population-based colorectal cancers.
RESULTS: Tumours with both MGMT methylation and loss were correlated positively
with MSI-low (p = 0.02), CIMP-high (>or=6/8 methylated CIMP markers, p = 0.005), 
CIMP-low (1/8-5/8 methylated CIMP markers, p = 0.002, compared to CIMP-0 with 0/8
methylated markers), KRAS G>A mutation (p = 0.02), and inversely with 18q loss of
heterozygosity (p = 0.0002). Tumours were classified into nine MSI/CIMP subtypes.
Among the CIMP-low group, tumours with both MGMT methylation and loss were far
more frequent in MSI-low tumours (67%, 12/18) than MSI-high tumours (5.6%, 1/18; 
p = 0.0003) and microsatellite stable (MSS) tumours (33%, 52/160; p = 0.008).
However, no such relationship was observed among the CIMP-high or CIMP-0 groups.
CONCLUSION: The relationship between MGMT methylation/silencing and MSI-low is
limited to only CIMP-low tumours, supporting the suggestion that CIMP-low in
colorectal cancer may be a different molecular phenotype from CIMP-high and
CIMP-0. Our data support a molecular difference between MSI-low and MSS in
colorectal cancer, and a possible link between CIMP-low, MSI-low, MGMT
methylation/loss and KRAS mutation.

PMCID: PMC2095664
PMID: 17339237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Hear Res. 2007 Mar;225(1-2):71-9. Epub 2006 Dec 28.

The role of bone morphogenetic protein 4 in inner ear development and function.

Blauwkamp MN(1), Beyer LA, Kabara L, Takemura K, Buck T, King WM, Dolan DF,
Barald KF, Raphael Y, Koenig RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Program, 2966 Taubman Medical Library,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0619, USA. mousman@med.umich.edu

Bone Morphogenetic Protein 4 (BMP4) is a member of the TGF-beta superfamily and
is known to be important for the normal development of many tissues and organs,
including the inner ear. Bmp4 homozygous null mice die as embryos, but Bmp4
heterozygous null (Bmp4(+/-)) mice are viable and some adults exhibit a circling 
phenotype, suggestive of an inner ear defect. To understand the role of BMP4 in
inner ear development and function, we have begun to study C57BL/6 Bmp4(+/-)
mice. Quantitative testing of the vestibulo-collic reflex, which helps maintain
head stability, demonstrated that Bmp4(+/-) mice that exhibit circling behavior
have a poor response in the yaw axis, consistent with semicircular canal
dysfunction. Although the hair cells of the ampullae were grossly normal, the
stereocilia were greatly reduced in number. Auditory brainstem responses showed
that Bmp4(+/-) mice have elevated hearing thresholds and immunohistochemical
staining demonstrated decreased numbers of neuronal processes in the organ of
Corti. Thus Bmp4(+/-) mice have structural and functional deficits in the inner
ear.

PMCID: PMC1868473
PMID: 17275231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Hum Pathol. 2007 Apr;38(4):614-20. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

TGFBR2 mutation is correlated with CpG island methylator phenotype in
microsatellite instability-high colorectal cancer.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Ogawa A, Kirkner GJ, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

The transforming growth factor-beta receptor type 2 gene (TGFBR2) is mutated in
most microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) colorectal cancers. Promoter
methylation of RUNX3 (runt-related transcription factor 3; encoding a
transcription factor downstream of the TGF-beta pathway) is observed in
colorectal cancer with CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP), which is
characterized by extensive promoter methylation and is associated with MSI-H and 
BRAF mutations. However, no study to date has examined interrelationship between 
TGFBR2 mutation, RUNX3 methylation, and CIMP in colorectal cancer. Using 144
MSI-H colorectal cancers derived from 2 large prospective cohort studies, we
analyzed a mononucleotide repeat of TGFBR2 and quantified DNA methylation (by
MethyLight technology) in 8 CIMP-specific promoters (RUNX3, CACNA1G [calcium
channel, voltage-dependent, T type alpha-1G subunit], CDKN2A [p16], CRABP1
[cellular retinoic acid binding protein 1], IGF2 [insulin-like growth factor 2], 
MLH1, NEUROG1 [neurogenin 1], and SOCS1 [suppressor of cytokine signaling 1]).
Among the 144 MSI-H tumors, the presence of TGFBR2 mutation (overall 72%
frequency) was correlated positively with CIMP-high (with >/=6/8 methylated
promoters; P < .0001), RUNX3 methylation (P = .0004), BRAF mutation (P = .0006), 
and right colon (P = .05); inversely with KRAS mutation (P = .006); but not
significantly with sex, tumor differentiation, and p53 status (assessed by
immunohistochemistry). After stratification by sex, location, tumor
differentiation, RUNX3 status, KRAS/BRAF status, or p53 status, CIMP-high was
persistently correlated with TGFBR2 mutation. In contrast, RUNX3, KRAS, or BRAF
status was no longer correlated with TGFBR2 mutation after stratification by CIMP
status. In conclusion, TGFBR2 mutation is associated with CIMP-high and
indirectly with RUNX3 methylation. Our findings emphasize the importance of
analyzing global epigenomic status (for which CIMP status is a surrogate marker) 
when correlating a single epigenetic event (eg, RUNX3 methylation) with any other
molecular or clinicopathologic variables.

PMID: 17270239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 9;282(10):6917-21. Epub 2007 Jan 26.

Prokineticin 2 is a target gene of proneural basic helix-loop-helix factors for
olfactory bulb neurogenesis.

Zhang C(1), Ng KL, Li JD, He F, Anderson DJ, Sun YE, Zhou QY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine, California
92697, USA.

Prokineticin 2, a cysteine-rich secreted protein, regulates diverse biological
functions including the neurogenesis of olfactory bulb. Here we show that the PK2
gene is a functional target gene of proneural basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
factors. Neurogenin 1 and MASH1 activate PK2 transcription by binding to E-box
motifs on the PK2 promoter with the same set of E-boxes critical for another pair
of bHLH factors, CLOCK and BMAL1, in the regulation of circadian clock. Our
results establish PK2 as a common functional target gene for different bHLH
transcriptional factors in mediating their respective functions.

PMID: 17259180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Hum Pathol. 2007 Apr;38(4):585-92. Epub 2007 Jan 19.

Cytoplasmic localization of p27 (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B/KIP1) in
colorectal cancer: inverse correlations with nuclear p27 loss, microsatellite
instability, and CpG island methylator phenotype.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Ogawa A, Kirkner GJ, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

Cytoplasmic mislocalization of p27 (CDKN1B/KIP1) is caused by activated AKT1 and 
has been associated with poor prognosis in various cancers. CIMP in colorectal
cancer is characterized by extensive promoter methylation and is associated with 
MSI-MSI-H and BRAF mutations. We have recently shown a positive correlation
between MSI/CIMP and loss of nuclear p27. However, no study has examined
cytoplasmic p27 mislocalization in relation to CIMP and MSI in colorectal cancer.
Using MethyLight assays, we quantified DNA methylation in 8 CIMP-specific gene
promoters (CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, IGF2, MLH1, NEUROG1, RUNX3, and SOCS1) 
in 853 colorectal cancer samples obtained from 2 large prospective cohorts. We
assessed expressions of nuclear and cytoplasmic p27 and nuclear p53 by
immunohistochemistry. Cytoplasmic p27 expression was inversely associated with
loss of nuclear p27 (P < .0001), CIMP-high (P < .0001), MSI-H (P < .0001), and
BRAF mutations (P < .0001). The inverse association of cytoplasmic p27 with
CIMP-high (or MSI-H) was independent of MSI (or CIMP) status. In addition, the
inverse association of cytoplasmic p27 with CIMP-high was independent of
KRAS/BRAF status. BRAF and CDKN2A (p16) methylation were not correlated with
cytoplasmic p27 after stratification by CIMP status. The inverse associations of 
cytoplasmic p27 with MSI-H and CIMP-high were much more pronounced in
p53-negative than p53-positive tumors. In conclusion, cytoplasmic p27 expression 
is inversely associated with MSI-H and CIMP-high, particularly in p53-negative
tumors, suggesting interplay of functional losses of p27 and p53 in the
development of various molecular subtypes of colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2000822
PMID: 17239930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Pathol. 2007 Feb;211(3):269-77.

Hypermethylation of CpG island loci and hypomethylation of LINE-1 and Alu repeats
in prostate adenocarcinoma and their relationship to clinicopathological
features.

Cho NY(1), Kim BH, Choi M, Yoo EJ, Moon KC, Cho YM, Kim D, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Promoter CpG island hypermethylation is an important carcinogenic event in
prostate adenocarcinoma. Regardless of tissue type, human cancers have in common 
both focal CpG island hypermethylation and global genomic hypomethylation. The
present study evaluated CpG island loci hypermethylation and LINE-1 and Alu
repeat hypomethylation in prostate adenocarcinoma, analysed the relationship
between them, and correlated these findings with clinicopathological features. We
examined 179 cases of prostate adenocarcinoma and 30 cases of benign prostate
hypertrophy for the methylation status of 22 CpG island loci and the methylation 
levels of LINE-1 and Alu repeats using methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction and combined bisulphite restriction analysis, respectively. The
following 16 CpG island loci were found to display cancer-related
hypermethylation: RASSF1A, GSTP1, RARB, TNFRSF10C, APC, BCL2, MDR1, ASC, TIG1,
RBP1, COX2, THBS1, TNFRSF10D, CD44, p16, and RUNX3. Except for the last four CpG 
island loci, hypermethylation of each of the remaining 12 CpG island loci
displayed a close association with one or more of the prognostic parameters (ie
preoperative serum prostate specific antigen level, Gleason score sum, and
clinical stage). Prostate adenocarcinoma with hypermethylation of each of ASC,
COX2, RARB, TNFRSF10C, MDR1, TIG1, RBP1, NEUROG1, RASSF1A, and GSTP1 showed a
significantly lower methylation level of Alu or LINE-1 than prostate
adenocarcinoma without hypermethylation. In addition, hypomethylation of Alu or
LINE-1 was closely associated with one or more of the above prognostic
parameters. These data suggest that in tumour progression a close relationship
exists between CpG island hypermethylation and the hypomethylation of repetitive 
elements, and that CpG island hypermethylation and DNA hypomethylation contribute
to cancer progression.

Copyright 2006 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 17139617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Dev Biol. 2007 Jan 15;301(2):555-67. Epub 2006 Oct 21.

Fluorescent protein expression driven by her4 regulatory elements reveals the
spatiotemporal pattern of Notch signaling in the nervous system of zebrafish
embryos.

Yeo SY(1), Kim M, Kim HS, Huh TL, Chitnis AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Engineering, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
702-701, Korea. sangyeobyeo@knu.ac.kr

Notch activation inhibits neuronal differentiation during development of the
nervous system; however, the dynamic role of Notch signaling in individual cell
lineages remains poorly understood. We have characterized 3.4 kb 5'-regulatory
sequence of a Notch target gene, her4, and used it to drive fluorescent gene
expression in transgenic lines where the spatiotemporal pattern of Notch
activation can be examined in vivo. The 3.4 kb her4 promoter contains five
predicted Su(H) binding sites of which two proximal sites were confirmed to be
required for Notch-mediated transcriptional activation. Without Notch, Su(H)
effectively represses transcription regulated by the promoter. Analyses of
transgenic zebrafish showed that while the expression of proneural genes and
Notch activation were both critical for endogenous her4 expression, reporter gene
expression was primarily regulated by Notch activity. This study also showed that
her4 may be differently regulated in sensory cranial ganglia, where Notch
activity is not essential for her4 expression and where Su(H) may repress her4
expression. The establishment of a reporter line with Notch-Su(H)-dependent
fluorescent gene expression provides a tool to explore the complex role of Notch 
signaling in the development of vertebrate nervous system.

PMID: 17134690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Mod Pathol. 2007 Jan;20(1):15-22. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

Loss of nuclear p27 (CDKN1B/KIP1) in colorectal cancer is correlated with
microsatellite instability and CIMP.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Kirkner GJ, Yamaji T, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

Downregulation of p27 (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor-1B, CDKN1B or KIP1) is
caused by increased ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation in colorectal
cancer, and has been associated with poor prognosis. CpG island methylator
phenotype (CIMP) is a phenotype of colorectal cancer with extensive promoter
methylation, and associated with high degree of microsatellite instability
(MSI-H) and BRAF mutations. We have recently shown that both CIMP and MSI-H are
inversely associated with downregulation of p21 (CDKN1A or CIP1), another
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor. However, no study to date has examined
relationship between p27 and CIMP status in colorectal cancer. Using MethyLight
assays, we measured DNA methylation in five CIMP-specific gene promoters
{CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, MLH1 and NEUROG1} in 706 colorectal cancer
samples obtained from two large prospective cohorts. Among the 706 tumors, 112
(16%) were CIMP-high tumors with >or=4/5 methylated promoters. We assessed p27
and p53 expressions by immunohistochemistry. Loss of nuclear p27 expression
{observed in 231 tumors (33%)} was significantly associated with CIMP-high, MSI-H
and BRAF mutations, and these associations were much more pronounced among
p53-negative tumors than p53-positive tumors. When CIMP-high and non-CIMP-high
tumors were stratified by MSI status (or KRAS and BRAF status), CIMP-high and
MSI-H (but not BRAF mutations) were still significantly associated with nuclear
p27 loss. Nuclear p27 loss did not appear to be directly related to CDKN2A (p16) 
methylation. We conclude that downregulation of nuclear p27 is associated with
CIMP-high and MSI-H in colorectal cancer. These associations are stronger among
p53 wild-type tumors, implying important interplay of p27 and p53 functions (or
dysfunctions) in the development of various molecular subtypes of colorectal
cancer.

PMID: 17086168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Mol Diagn. 2006 Nov;8(5):582-8.

CpG island methylator phenotype-low (CIMP-low) in colorectal cancer: possible
associations with male sex and KRAS mutations.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Kirkner GJ, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
75 Francis St., Boston, MA 02115, USA. shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

The CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP or CIMP-high) with extensive promoter
methylation seems to be a distinct epigenotype of colorectal cancer. However, no 
study has comprehensively examined features of colorectal cancer with less
extensive promoter methylation (designated as "CIMP-low"). Using real-time
polymerase chain reaction (MethyLight), we quantified DNA methylation in five
CIMP-specific gene promoters [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, MLH1, and NEUROG1]
in 840 relatively unbiased, population-based colorectal cancer samples, obtained 
from two large prospective cohort studies. CIMP-low (defined as 1/5 to 3/5
methylated promoters) colorectal cancers were significantly more common among men
(38 versus 30% in women, P = 0.01) and among KRAS-mutated tumors (44 versus 30%
in KRAS/BRAF wild-type tumors, P = 0.0003; 19% in BRAF-mutated tumors, P <
0.0001). In addition, KRAS mutations were significantly more common in CIMP-low
tumors (47%) than in CIMP-high tumors (with > or =4/5 methylated promoters, 12%, 
P < 0.0001) and CIMP-0 tumors (with 0/5 methylated promoters, 37%, P = 0.007).
The associations of CIMP-low tumors with male sex and KRAS mutations still
existed after tumors were stratified by microsatellite instability status. In
conclusion, CIMP-low colorectal cancer is associated with male sex and KRAS
mutations. The hypothesis that CIMP-low tumors are different from CIMP-high and
CIMP-0 tumors needs to be tested further.

PMCID: PMC1876166
PMID: 17065427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Development. 2006 Dec;133(23):4619-30. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

A direct role for Sox10 in specification of neural crest-derived sensory neurons.

Carney TJ(1), Dutton KA, Greenhill E, Delfino-Machín M, Dufourcq P, Blader P,
Kelsh RN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Developmental Biology Programme, Department 
of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Bath, Bath BA2 7AY, UK.

sox10 is necessary for development of neural and pigment cell derivatives of the 
neural crest (NC). However, whereas a direct role for Sox10 activity has been
established in pigment and glial lineages, this is more controversial in
NC-derived sensory neurons of the dorsal root ganglia (DRGs). We proposed that
sox10 functioned in specification of sensory neurons, whereas others suggested
that sensory neuronal defects were merely secondary to absence of glia. Here we
provide evidence that in zebrafish, early DRG sensory neuron survival is
independent of differentiated glia. Critically, we demonstrate that Sox10 is
expressed transiently in the sensory neuron lineage, and specifies sensory neuron
precursors by regulating the proneural gene neurogenin1. Consistent with this, we
have isolated a novel sox10 mutant that lacks glia and yet displays a neurogenic 
DRG phenotype. In conjunction with previous findings, these data establish the
generality of our model of Sox10 function in NC fate specification.

PMID: 17065232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2006 Jul;44(7):505-8.

[Inhibitory effect of murine cytomegalovirus infection on neural stem cells'
differentiation and its mechanisms].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou YF(1), Fang F, Dong YS, Zhou H, Zhen H, Liu J, Li G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: Cytomegalovirus (CMV) is the leading infectious cause of congenital
anomalies of the central nervous system caused by intrauterine infection.
However, the exact pathogenesis of these brain abnormalities has not been fully
elucidated. It has been reported that periependymitis, periventricular necrosis
and calcification are the most frequent findings in the brains of congenital CMV 
infection. Because a number of multipotential neural stem cells (NSCs) have been 
identified from ventricular zone, it is possible that NSCs in this area are
primary targets for viral infection, which seems to be primarily responsible for 
the generation of the brain abnormalities. Therefore, the objective of the
present study was to investigate the effect and mechanism of murine
cytomegalovirus (MCMV) infection on neural stem cells' differentiation in vitro
and its role in the mechanisms of brain abnormalities caused by congenital
cytomegalovirus infection.
METHODS: NSCs were prepared from fetal BALB/c mouse and were infected with
recombinant MCMV RM461 inserted with a report gene LacZ at 1 multiplicity of
infection (MOI = 1). The effect of MCMV infection on neural stem cells'
differentiation was observed by detecting the ratio of nestin, GFAP and NSE
positive cells with immunohistochemistry and flow cytometry on day 2
postinfection. The effects of MCMV infection on gene expression of Wnt-1 and
neurogenin 1 (Ngn1) related to neural differentiation were detected by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: NSCs isolated from embryonic mouse brains strongly expressed nestin, a
specific marker of NSCs and had the capacity to differentiate into NF-200 and NSE
positive neurons or GFAP positive astrocytes. At MOI = 1, the results of flow
cytometry assay showed that nestin positive cells' proportion in the infection
group [(62.2 +/- 1.8)%] was higher than that in the normal group [(37.2 +/-
2.4)%] (t = 4.62, P < 0.01). At the same time, the rates of GFAP and NSE positive
cells' in the infection group were significantly lower than those in the normal
group (P < 0.01). The scanning densities of Wnt-1 was 0.14 +/- 0.03 in the
infection group while 0.32 +/- 0.04 in the control group (t = 7.21, P < 0.01).
The scanning densities of Ngn1 were 0.09 +/- 0.01 and 0.21 +/- 0.02 in the two
groups (t = 10.7, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that MCMV infection could inhibit neuronal
differentiation, which may be primary causes of disorders of brain development in
congenital CMV infection. The decreased expression of Wnt-1 and Ngn1 may be
involved in the inhibitory effect of murine cytomegalovirus infection on neural
stem cells' differentiation, which may lead to a new strategy for preventing and 
treating brain abnormalities caused by CMV infection through regulating these two
signal pathways.

PMID: 17044975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2007 Mar 5;144B(2):207-14.

Association between the 5q31.1 gene neurogenin1 and schizophrenia.

Fanous AH(1), Chen X, Wang X, Amdur RL, O'Neill FA, Walsh D, Kendler KS.

Author information: 
(1)Washington VA Medical Center, Washington, District of Columbia, USA.
ayman.fanous@med.va.gov

Multiple lines of evidence suggest that schizophrenia results from aberrant
neurodevelopment. The neurogenin1 gene (neurog1) consists of a single 1,666 bp
exon that encodes a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor that
causes neuronal differentiation and induces cortical and glutamatergic
differentiation programs. Because of its function and its location in 5q31.1,
which has been linked to schizophrenia in multiple samples, we tested it for
association with the disorder. We sequenced neurog1 in 25 affected subjects from 
the Irish Study of High-Density Schizophrenia Families. We observed a 5'-UTR SNP 
at position -60, already present in databases as rs8192558, and tested it along
with rs2344485, rs8192559, and rs2344484. Narrow, intermediate, and broad
diagnostic definitions were used. The major alleles of rs8192558 and rs2344484
were over-transmitted to affected subjects using both Pedigree Disequilibrium
Test (PDT) (0.01 < or = P < or = 0.06) and FBAT (0.02 < or = P < or = 0.07). A
haplotype consisting of the major alleles of all four SNPs was significantly
over-transmitted in FBAT to the broad definition (P = 0.049), with trend
significance to the narrow and intermediate definitions, and with trend
significance in PDT. In confirmatory tests using 657 cases and 411 controls, this
haplotype was slightly but not significantly over-represented in cases (81% vs.
77%, P = 0.21). These results, along with a priori evidence for the involvement
of neurog1 in neurodevelopment, suggest that variants in neurog1 might have a
small effect on susceptibility to schizophrenia. This gene should be tested in
additional and larger samples.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17044100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Neurosci. 2006 Oct 11;26(41):10438-51.

The transcription factor six1 inhibits neuronal and promotes hair cell fate in
the developing zebrafish (Danio rerio) inner ear.

Bricaud O(1), Collazo A.

Author information: 
(1)Leslie and Susan Gonda (Goldschmied) Cell and Molecular Biology Department,
House Ear Institute, Los Angeles, California 90057, USA. obricaud@hei.org

The developmental processes leading to the differentiation of mechanosensory hair
cells and statoacoustic ganglion neurons from the early otic epithelium remain
unclear. Possible candidates include members of the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach (paired
box-sine oculis homeobox-eyes absent-dachshund) gene regulatory network. We
cloned zebrafish six1 and studied its function in inner ear development. Gain-
and loss-of-function experiments show that six1 has opposing roles in hair cell
and neuronal lineages. It promotes hair cell fate and, conversely, inhibits
neuronal fate by differentially affecting cell proliferation and cell death in
these lineages. By independently targeting hair cells with atoh1a (atonal homolog
1a) knockdown or neurons with neurog1 (neurogenin 1) knockdown, we showed that
the remaining cell population, neurons or hair cells, respectively, is still
affected by gain or loss of six1 function. six1 interacts with other members of
the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach regulatory network, in particular dacha and dachb in the
hair cell but not neuronal lineage. Unlike in mouse, six1 does not appear to be
dependent on eya1, although it seems to be important for the regulation of eya1
and pax2b expression in the ventral otic epithelium. Furthermore, six1 expression
appears to be regulated by pax2b and also by foxi1 (forkhead box I1) as expected 
for an early inducer of the otic placode. Our results are the first to
demonstrate a dual role for a member of the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach regulatory network
in inner ear development.

PMID: 17035528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Am J Surg Pathol. 2006 Sep;30(9):1175-83.

Correlation of pathologic features with CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) by
quantitative DNA methylation analysis in colorectal carcinoma.

Ogino S(1), Odze RD, Kawasaki T, Brahmandam M, Kirkner GJ, Laird PW, Loda M,
Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

Extensive gene promoter methylation in colorectal carcinoma has been termed the
CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP). Previous studies on CIMP used primarily
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR), which, unfortunately, may
detect low levels of methylation that has little or no biological significance.
Utilizing quantitative real-time PCR (MethyLight), we measured DNA methylation in
a panel of 5 CIMP-specific gene promoters (CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, MLH1,
and NEUROG1) in 459 colorectal carcinomas obtained from 2 large prospective
cohort studies. CIMP was defined as tumors that showed methylation in >or=4/5
promoters. CIMP was significantly associated with the presence of mucinous or
signet ring cell morphology, marked Crohn's-like lymphoid reaction, tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes, marked peritumoral lymphocytic reaction, tumor
necrosis, tumor cell sheeting, and poor differentiation. All these features have 
previously been associated with microsatellite instability (MSI). Therefore, we
divided the 459 colorectal carcinomas into 6 subtypes, namely, MSI-high
(MSI-H)/CIMP, MSI-H/non-CIMP, MSI-low (MSI-L)/CIMP, MSI-L/non-CIMP,
microsatellite stable/CIMP, and micro satellite sstable/non-CIMP. Compared with
MSI-H/non-CIMP, MSI-H/CIMP was associated with marked tumor infiltrating
lymphocytes, tumor necrosis, sheeting, and poor differentiation (all P<or=0.05). 
Compared with MSI-L/non-CIMP, MSI-L/CIMP was associated with tumors that had <50%
signet ring cell component, marked tumor infiltrating lymphocytes, and poor
differentiation (all P<0.05). In conclusion, several pathologic features that
have previously been shown to be associated with MSI are also significantly
associated with CIMP. Both MSI and CIMP appear to play a role in the pathogenesis
of specific morphologic patterns of colorectal carcinoma.

PMID: 16931963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Cell Biol. 2006 Aug 14;174(4):581-92. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

The novel gene asb11: a regulator of the size of the neural progenitor
compartment.

Diks SH(1), Bink RJ, van de Water S, Joore J, van Rooijen C, Verbeek FJ, den
Hertog J, Peppelenbosch MP, Zivkovic D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, NL-9713 AV Groningen, Netherlands.

From a differential display designed to isolate genes that are down-regulated
upon differentiation of the central nervous system in Danio rerio embryos, we
isolated d-asb11 (ankyrin repeat and suppressor of cytokine signaling
box-containing protein 11). Knockdown of the d-Asb11 protein altered the
expression of neural precursor genes sox2 and sox3 and resulted in an initial
relative increase in proneural cell numbers. This was reflected by neurogenin1
expansion followed by premature neuronal differentiation, as demonstrated by HuC 
labeling and resulting in reduced size of the definitive neuronal compartment.
Forced misexpression of d-asb11 was capable of ectopically inducing sox2 while it
diminished or entirely abolished neurogenesis. Overexpression of d-Asb11 in both 
a pluripotent and a neural-committed progenitor cell line resulted in the
stimulus-induced inhibition of terminal neuronal differentiation and enhanced
proliferation. We conclude that d-Asb11 is a novel regulator of the neuronal
progenitor compartment size by maintaining the neural precursors in the
proliferating undifferentiated state possibly through the control of SoxB1
transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2064263
PMID: 16893969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Pathol. 2006 Oct;210(2):147-54.

Down-regulation of p21 (CDKN1A/CIP1) is inversely associated with microsatellite 
instability and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) in colorectal cancer.

Ogino S(1), Kawasaki T, Kirkner GJ, Ogawa A, Dorfman I, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

p21 (CDKN1A/CIP1/WAF1), one of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors, plays a
key role in regulating the cell cycle and is transcriptionally regulated by p53. 
Down-regulation of p21 is caused by TP53 mutations in colorectal cancer. CpG
island methylator phenotype (CIMP) appears to be a distinct subtype of colorectal
cancer with concordant methylation of multiple gene promoters and is associated
with a high degree of microsatellite instability (MSI-H) and BRAF mutations.
However, no study to date has evaluated the relationship between p21 expression
and CIMP in colorectal cancer. The purpose of this study was to examine the
inter-relationships between p21, p53, CIMP, MSI and KRAS/BRAF status in
colorectal cancer. We utilized 737 relatively unbiased samples of colorectal
cancers from two large prospective cohort studies. Using quantitative real-time
PCR (MethyLight), we measured DNA methylation in five CIMP-specific gene
promoters [CACNA1G, CDKN2A (p16/INK4A), CRABP1, MLH1 and NEUROG1]. CIMP-high
(>or=4/5 methylated promoters) was diagnosed in 118 (16%) of the 737 tumours. We 
also assessed expression of p21 and p53 by immunohistochemistry. Among the 737
tumours, 371 (50%) showed p21 loss. Both p21 loss and p53 positivity were
inversely associated with CIMP-high, MSI-H and BRAF mutations. The associations
of p21 with these molecular features were still present after tumours were
stratified by p53 status. In contrast, the associations of p53 positivity with
the molecular features were no longer present after tumours were stratified by
p21 status. When CIMP-high and non-CIMP-high tumours were stratified by MSI or
KRAS/BRAF status, CIMP-high and MSI-H (but not BRAF mutations) were still
inversely associated with p21 loss. In conclusion, down-regulation of p21 is
inversely correlated with CIMP-high and MSI-H in colorectal cancer, independent
of TP53 and BRAF status.

PMID: 16850502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Neoplasia. 2006 Jun;8(6):458-64.

Combined analysis of COX-2 and p53 expressions reveals synergistic inverse
correlations with microsatellite instability and CpG island methylator phenotype 
in colorectal cancer.

Ogino S(1), Brahmandam M, Kawasaki T, Kirkner GJ, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA. shuji-ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) overexpression and mutations of p53 (a known COX-2
regulator) are inversely associated with microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H) 
and CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) characterized by extensive promoter
methylation, is associated with MSI-H. However, no studies have comprehensively
examined interrelations between COX-2, p53, MSI, and CIMP. Using MethyLight, we
measured DNA methylation in five CIMP-specific gene promoters [CACNA1G, CDKN2A
(p16/INK4A), CRABP1, MLH1, and NEUROG1] in relatively unbiased samples of 751
colorectal cancer cases obtained from two large prospective cohorts; 115 (15%)
tumors were CIMP-high (> or = 4 of 5 methylated promoters), 251 (33%) were
CIMP-low (1 to 3 methylated promoters), and the remaining 385 (51%) were CIMP-0
(no methylated promoters). CIMP-high tumors were much less frequent in
COX-2+/p53+ tumors (4.6%) than in COX-2+/p53- tumors (19%; P < .0001),
COX-2-/p53+ tumors (17%; P = .04), and COX-2-/p53- tumors (28%; P < .0001). In
addition, COX-2+/p53+ tumors were significantly less common in MSI-H CIMP-high
tumors (9.7%) than in non-MSI-H CIMP-low/CIMP-0 tumors (44-47%; P < .0001). In
conclusion, COX-2 and p53 alterations were synergistically inversely correlated
with both MSI-H and CIMP-high. Our data suggest that a combined analysis of COX-2
and p53 may be more useful for the molecular classification of colorectal cancer 
than either COX-2 or p53 analysis alone.

PMCID: PMC1601473
PMID: 16820091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cereb Cortex. 2006 Jul;16 Suppl 1:i138-51.

A role for proneural genes in the maturation of cortical progenitor cells.

Britz O(1), Mattar P, Nguyen L, Langevin LM, Zimmer C, Alam S, Guillemot F,
Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, UK.

We showed previously that the proneural genes Neurogenin1 (Ngn1) and Ngn2 are
required to specify the phenotypes of early- and not late-born neurons in the
neocortex, acting in part through repression of Mash1, a third cortically
expressed proneural gene. The precise timing of Ngn1/2 specification activity was
unexpected given these genes are expressed throughout cortical development,
prompting us to search for a later function. Here we reveal that Ngn2 and Mash1
are expressed in a dynamic fashion, acquiring a cell cycle-biased, nonoverlapping
distribution, with preferential expression in prospective basal progenitors,
during mid corticogenesis. We also identified a new function for Ngn2 during this
latter period, demonstrating that it is required to regulate the transit of
cortical progenitors from the ventricular zone (VZ) to the subventricular zone.
Notably, Ngn2 regulates progenitor maturation at least in part through repression
of Mash1 as misexpression of Mash1 strongly enhanced progenitor cell exit from
the VZ. Significantly, the ability of Mash1 to promote progenitor cell maturation
occurred independently of its ability to respecify cortical cells and is thus a
novel function for Mash1. Taken together, these data support a model whereby Ngn2
and Mash1 function together to regulate the zonal distribution of progenitors in 
the developing neocortex.

PMID: 16766700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Mod Pathol. 2006 Aug;19(8):1083-90. Epub 2006 May 12.

Epigenetic profiling of synchronous colorectal neoplasias by quantitative DNA
methylation analysis.

Ogino S(1), Brahmandam M, Kawasaki T, Kirkner GJ, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

Transcriptional inactivation of tumor-suppressor genes by promoter CpG island
methylation is thought to be an important mechanism in human carcinogenesis. The 
CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) with extensive promoter methylation
appears to be a distinct epigenetic subtype of colorectal carcinoma. Most
previous studies on CpG island methylation in colorectal carcinoma used
methylation-specific PCR, which may detect low levels of DNA methylation with
little or no biological significance. In contrast, quantitative DNA methylation
assays have been shown to provide useful information beyond that which can be
achieved with methylation-specific PCR. Synchronous neoplasias provide a unique
model for investigators to examine molecular alterations in multistep
tumorigenesis within one individual. However, no study to date has quantified DNA
methylation of CIMP-specific promoters in synchronous colorectal neoplasias.
Utilizing real-time PCR (MethyLight), we quantified DNA methylation in five
CIMP-specific gene promoters [CACNA1G (calcium channel, voltage-dependent, T type
alpha-1G subunit), CDKN2A (p16/INK4A), CRABP1 (cellular retinoic acid binding
protein-1), MLH1 and NEUROG1 (neurogenin 1)] and MGMT in six synchronous
carcinoma pairs (12 carcinomas) and eight synchronous carcinoma and adenoma pairs
(16 tumors). We found that while some synchronous tumor pairs showed discordant
promoter methylation patterns, other tumor pairs showed similar, but not exactly 
identical, patterns of promoter methylation. All but two pairs showed concordant 
patterns of CIMP status (CIMP positive vs CIMP negative) (P = 0.05 in cancer
pairs). BRAF mutations were present in only CIMP-positive tumors. A high degree
of microsatellite instability (MSI-H) was observed in both CIMP-positive and
CIMP-negative tumors. KRAS mutations were not concordant in any synchronous
neoplasia pair. In conclusion, epigenetic alterations at CIMP-specific promoter
CpG islands in synchronous colorectal neoplasias likely have both random and
nonrandom components.

PMID: 16699497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 15;295(2):534-45. Epub 2006 Apr 4.

Proneural gene requirement for hair cell differentiation in the zebrafish lateral
line.

Sarrazin AF(1), Villablanca EJ, Nuñez VA, Sandoval PC, Ghysen A, Allende ML.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Nucleus in Developmental Biology, Departamento de Biología,
Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Chile, Casilla 653, Santiago, Chile.

The lateral line system comprises an array of mechanosensory organs, the
neuromasts, distributed over the body surface. Each neuromast consists of a patch
of mechanosensory hair cells surrounded by support cells. We show that, in the
zebrafish, two proneural genes are essential for differentiation of the hair
cells, neuroD (nrd) and atonal homolog 1 (ath1). Gene knockdown experiments
demonstrate that loss of function of either gene, but not of the related
proneural gene neurogenin1 (ngn1), abrogate the appearance of hair cell markers. 
This is in contrast to other sensory systems, such as the neurons of the lateral 
line ganglion, where nrd is regulated by ngn1 and not by ath1. Overexpression of 
ath1 can induce nrd, and the phenotype produced by loss of ath1 function can be
partially rescued by injection of nrd mRNA. This supports the conclusion that the
activation of nrd probably requires ath1 in the hair cell lineage, whereas in
sensory neurons nrd activation requires ngn1. We propose that the emergence of
two atonal homologs, ath1 and ngn1, allowed the cellular segregation of
mechanoreception and signal transmission that were originally performed by a
single cell type as found in insects.

PMID: 16678150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Neuroscience. 2006 Jun 30;140(2):377-88. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

N-cadherin mediates nitric oxide-induced neurogenesis in young and retired
breeder neurospheres.

Chen J(1), Zacharek A, Li Y, Li A, Wang L, Katakowski M, Roberts C, Lu M, Chopp
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Henry Ford Health Sciences Center, Detroit, MI 48202,
USA.

Neurogenesis may contribute to functional recovery after neural injury. Nitric
oxide donors such as DETA-NONOate promote functional recovery after stroke.
However, the mechanisms underlying functional improvement have not been
ascertained. We therefore investigated the effects of DETA-NONOate on neural
progenitor/stem cell neurospheres derived from the subventricular zone from young
and retired breeder rat brain. Subventricular zone cells were dissociated from
normal young adult male Wistar rats (2-3 months old) and retired breeder rats (14
months old), treated with or without DETA-NONOate. Subventricular zone
neurosphere formation, proliferation, telomerase activity, and Neurogenin 1 mRNA 
expression were significantly decreased and glial fibrillary acidic protein
expression was significantly increased in subventricular zone neurospheres from
retired breeder rats compared with young rats. Treatment of neurospheres with
DETA-NONOate significantly decreased neurosphere formation and telomerase
activity, and promoted neuronal differentiation and neurite outgrowth
concomitantly with increased N-cadherin and beta-catenin mRNA expression in both 
young and old neurospheres. DETA-NONOate selectively increased Neurogenin 1 and
decreased glial fibrillary acidic protein mRNA expression in retired breeder
neurospheres. N-cadherin significantly increased Neurogenin 1 mRNA expression in 
young and old neurospheres. Anti-N-cadherin reversed DETA-NONOate-induced
neurosphere adhesion, neuronal differentiation, neurite outgrowth, and
beta-catenin mRNA expression. Our data indicate that age has a potent effect on
the characteristics of subventricular zone neurospheres; neurospheres from young 
rats show significantly higher formation, proliferation and telomerase activity
than older neurospheres. In contrast, older neurospheres exhibit significantly
increased glial differentiation than young neurospheres. DETA-NONOate promotes
neuronal differentiation and neurite outgrowth in both young and older
neurospheres. The molecular mechanisms associated with the DETA-NONOate
modulation of neurospheres from young and older animals as well age dependent
effects of neurospheres appear to be controlled by N-cadherin and beta-catenin
gene expression, which subsequently regulates the neuronal differentiating factor
Neurogenin expression in both young and old neural progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2791333
PMID: 16580782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Neuroscience. 2006;139(4):1355-67. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Transcription factor protein expression patterns by neural or neuronal progenitor
cells of adult monkey subventricular zone.

Tonchev AB(1), Yamashima T, Sawamoto K, Okano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Neurosurgery, Division of Neuroscience, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Medical Science, Japan.

The anterior subventricular zone of the adult mammalian brain contains progenitor
cells which are upregulated after cerebral ischemia. We have previously reported 
that while a part of the progenitors residing in adult monkey anterior
subventricular zone travels to the olfactory bulb, many of these cells sustain
location in the anterior subventricular zone for months after injury, exhibiting 
a phenotype of either neural or neuronal precursors. Here we show that ischemia
increased the numbers of anterior subventricular zone progenitor cells expressing
developmentally regulated transcription factors including Pax6 (paired-box 6),
Emx2 (empty spiracles-homeobox 2), Sox 1-3 (sex determining region Y-box 1-3),
Ngn1 (neurogenin 1), Dlx1,5 (distalless-homeobox 1,5), Olig1,3 (oligodendrocyte
lineage gene 1,3) and Nkx2.2 (Nk-box 2.2), as compared with control brains.
Analysis of transcription factor protein expression by sustained neural or
neuronal precursors in anterior subventricular zone revealed that these two cell 
types were positive for characteristic sets of transcription factors. The
proteins Pax6, Emx2, Sox2,3 and Olig1 were predominantly localized to dividing
neural precursors while the factors Sox1, Ngn1, Dlx1,5, Olig2 and Nkx2.2 were
mainly expressed by neuronal precursors. Further, differences between monkeys and
non-primate mammals emerged, related to expression patterns of Pax6, Olig2 and
Dlx2. Our results suggest that a complex network of developmental signals might
be involved in the specification of primate progenitor cells.

PMID: 16580139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 28;103(13):5143-8. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

Neurogenin1 is a determinant of zebrafish basal forebrain dopaminergic neurons
and is regulated by the conserved zinc finger protein Tof/Fezl.

Jeong JY(1), Einhorn Z, Mercurio S, Lee S, Lau B, Mione M, Wilson SW, Guo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Program in Human Genetics,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The development of vertebrate basal forebrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons requires 
the conserved zinc finger protein Too Few (Tof/Fezl) in zebrafish. However, how
Tof/Fezl regulates the commitment and differentiation of these DA neurons is not 
known. Proneural genes encoding basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
regulate the development of multiple neuronal lineages, but their involvement in 
vertebrate DA neuron determination is unclear. Here we show that neurogenin 1
(ngn1), a vertebrate proneural gene related to the Drosophila atonal, is
expressed in and required for specification of DA progenitor cells, and when
overexpressed leads to supernumerary DA neurons in the forebrain of zebrafish.
Overexpression of ngn1 is also sufficient to induce tyrosine hydroxylase
expression in addition to the pan-neuronal marker Hu in nonneural ectoderm. We
further show that Tof/Fezl is required to establish basal forebrain
ngn1-expressing DA progenitor domains. These findings identify Ngn1 as a
determinant of brain DA neurons and provide insights into how Tof/Fezl regulates 
the development of these clinically important neuronal types.

PMCID: PMC1458808
PMID: 16549779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Seikagaku. 2006 Feb;78(2):130-2.

[Molecular mechanisms underlying glutamatergic vs. GABAergic neuronal subtype
specification in the cerebellum].

[Article in Japanese]

Hoshino M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan.

PMID: 16541804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Diabetologia. 2006 May;49(5):1027-38. Epub 2006 Mar 1.

High glucose alters the expression of genes involved in proliferation and
cell-fate specification of embryonic neural stem cells.

Fu J(1), Tay SS, Ling EA, Dheen ST.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School 
of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maternal diabetes induces neural tube defects during
embryogenesis. Since the neural tube is derived from neural stem cells (NSCs), it
is hypothesised that in diabetic pregnancy neural tube defects result from
altered expression of developmental control genes, leading to abnormal
proliferation and cell-fate choice of NSCs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Cell viability, proliferation index and apoptosis of NSCs 
and differentiated cells from mice exposed to physiological or high glucose
concentration medium were examined by a tetrazolium salt assay,
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine incorporation, terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labelling and immunocytochemistry. Expression 
of developmental genes, including sonic hedgehog (Shh), bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (Bmp4), neurogenin 1/2 (Neurog1/2), achaete-scute complex-like 1
(Ascl1), oligodendrocyte transcription factor 1 (Olig1), oligodendrocyte lineage 
transcription factor 2 (Olig2), hairy and enhancer of split 1/5 (Hes1/5) and
delta-like 1 (Dll1), was analysed by real-time RT-PCR. Proliferation index and
neuronal specification in the forebrain of embryos at embryonic day 11.5 were
examined histologically.
RESULTS: High glucose decreased the proliferation of NSCs and differentiated
cells. The incidence of apoptosis was increased in NSCs treated with high
glucose, but not in the differentiated cells. High glucose also accelerated
neuronal and glial differentiation from NSCs. The decreased proliferation index
and early differentiation of neurons were evident in the telencephalon of embryos
derived from diabetic mice. Exposure to high glucose altered the mRNA expression 
levels of Shh, Bmp4, Neurog1/2, Ascl1, Hes1, Dll1 and Olig1 in NSCs and Shh,
Dll1, Neurog1/2 and Hes5 in differentiated cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The changes in proliferation and differentiation of
NSCs exposed to high glucose are associated with altered expression of genes that
are involved in cell-cycle progression and cell-fate specification during
neurulation. These changes may form the basis for the defective neural tube
patterning observed in embryos of diabetic pregnancies.

PMID: 16508779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Neuron. 2006 Feb 2;49(3):379-93.

A role for Runx transcription factor signaling in dorsal root ganglion sensory
neuron diversification.

Kramer I(1), Sigrist M, de Nooij JC, Taniuchi I, Jessell TM, Arber S.

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, Department of Cell Biology, University of Basel,
Klingelbergstrasse 70, 4056 Basel, Switzerland.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2006 Feb 2;49(3):325-7.

Subpopulations of sensory neurons in the dorsal root ganglion (DRG) can be
characterized on the basis of sensory modalities that convey distinct peripheral 
stimuli, but the molecular mechanisms that underlie sensory neuronal
diversification remain unclear. Here, we have used genetic manipulations in the
mouse embryo to examine how Runx transcription factor signaling controls the
acquisition of distinct DRG neuronal subtype identities. Runx3 acts to diversify 
an Ngn1-independent neuronal cohort by promoting the differentiation of
proprioceptive sensory neurons through erosion of TrkB expression in prospective 
TrkC+ sensory neurons. In contrast, Runx1 controls neuronal diversification
within Ngn1-dependent TrkA+ neurons by repression of neuropeptide CGRP expression
and controlling the fine pattern of laminar termination in the dorsal spinal
cord. Together, our findings suggest that Runx transcription factor signaling
plays a key role in sensory neuron diversification.

PMID: 16446142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Toxicol Sci. 2006 Apr;90(2):529-38. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Four-dimensional imaging and quantification of gene expression in early
developing zebrafish (Danio rerio) embryos.

Yu RM(1), Lin CC, Chan PK, Chow ES, Murphy MB, Chan BP, Müller F, Strähle U,
Cheng SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. 
bhcheng@cityu.edu.hk

Four-dimensional (4D) imaging is a powerful tool for studying three-dimensional
(3D) changes in an organism through time. Different imaging systems for obtaining
3D data from in vivo specimens have been developed but usually involved large and
expensive machines. We successfully used a simple inverted compound microscope
and a commercially available program to study and quantify in vivo changes in
sonic hedgehog (shh) expression during early development in a green fluorescence 
protein (GFP) transgenic zebrafish (Danio rerio) line. We applied the 4D system
to study the effect of 100 microM cadmium exposure on shh expression. In control 
zebrafish embryos, shh:GFP expression was detected at about 9 h
post-fertilization (hpf) and increased steadily in the next 7 h, peaking at about
17 hpf and decreasing in the following 4 h. In the same time period, different
shh expression volumes were observed in cadmium-treated and control embryos.
Embryos affected by cadmium-exposure demonstrated a down-regulation in shh
expression. The number of GFP-expressing cells measured by flow cytometry
decreased, and expression of neurogenin-1, a downstream target of the shh
signaling pathway, was down-regulated, providing additional supporting data on
the effects of cadmium on shh. In summary, we demonstrated the setup of a 4D
imaging system and its application to the quantification of gene expression.

PMID: 16434501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Development. 2006 Feb;133(3):495-505.

Neurogenin 2 is required for the development of ventral midbrain dopaminergic
neurons.

Kele J(1), Simplicio N, Ferri AL, Mira H, Guillemot F, Arenas E, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, MBB, Karolinska Institutet, Retzius
building A1, Stockholm, Sweden.

Proneural genes are crucial regulators of neurogenesis and subtype specification 
in many areas of the nervous system; however, their function in dopaminergic
neuron development is unknown. We report that proneural genes have an intricate
pattern of expression in the ventricular zone of the ventral midbrain, where
mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons are generated. Neurogenin 2 (Ngn2) and Mash1
are expressed in the ventral midline, while Ngn1, Ngn2 and Mash1 are co-localized
more laterally in the ventricular zone. Ngn2 is also expressed in an intermediate
zone immediately adjacent to the ventricular zone at the ventral midline. To
examine the function of these genes, we analyzed mutant mice in which one or two 
of these genes were deleted (Ngn1, Ngn2 and Mash1) or substituted (Mash1 in the
Ngn2 locus). Our results demonstrate that Ngn2 is required for the
differentiation of Sox2(+) ventricular zone progenitors into Nurr1(+) postmitotic
dopaminergic neuron precursors in the intermediate zone, and that it is also
likely to be required for their subsequent differentiation into tyrosine
hydroxylase-positive dopaminergic neurons in the marginal zone. Although Mash1
normally has no detectable function in dopaminergic neuron development, it could 
partially rescue the generation of dopaminergic neuron precursors in the absence 
of Ngn2. These results demonstrate that Ngn2 is uniquely required for the
development of midbrain dopaminergic neurons.

PMID: 16410412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Gut. 2006 Jul;55(7):1000-6. Epub 2006 Jan 11.

CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) of colorectal cancer is best characterised
by quantitative DNA methylation analysis and prospective cohort studies.

Ogino S(1), Cantor M, Kawasaki T, Brahmandam M, Kirkner GJ, Weisenberger DJ,
Campan M, Laird PW, Loda M, Fuchs CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
75 Francis St, Boston, MA 02115, USA. shuji_ogino@dfci.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The concept of CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) is not
universally accepted. Even if specific clinicopathological features have been
associated with CIMP, investigators often failed to demonstrate a bimodal
distribution of the number of methylated markers, which would suggest CIMP as a
distinct subtype of colorectal cancer. Previous studies primarily used
methylation specific polymerase chain reaction which might detect biologically
insignificant low levels of methylation.
AIM: To demonstrate a distinct genetic profile of CIMP colorectal cancer using
quantitative DNA methylation analysis that can distinguish high from low levels
of DNA methylation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We developed quantitative real time polymerase chain
reaction (MethyLight) assays and measured DNA methylation (percentage of
methylated reference) of five carefully selected loci (promoters of CACNA1G,
CDKN2A (p16), CRABP1, MLH1, and NEUROG1) in 460 colorectal cancers from large
prospective cohorts.
RESULTS: There was a clear bimodal distribution of 80 microsatellite
instability-high (MSI-H) tumours according to the number of methylated promoters,
with no tumours showing 3/5 methylated loci. Thus we defined CIMP as having
>or=4/5 methylated loci, and 17% (78) of the 460 tumours were classified as CIMP.
CIMP was significantly associated with female sex, MSI, BRAF mutations, and
wild-type KRAS. Both CIMP MSI-H tumours and CIMP microsatellite stable (MSS)
tumours showed much higher frequencies of BRAF mutations (63% and 54%) than
non-CIMP counterparts (non-CIMP MSI-H (0%, p<10(-5)) and non-CIMP MSS tumours
(6.6%, p<10(-4)), respectively).
CONCLUSION: CIMP is best characterised by quantitative DNA methylation analysis. 
CIMP is a distinct epigenotype of colorectal cancer and may be less frequent than
previously reported.

PMCID: PMC1856352
PMID: 16407376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Neuron. 2005 Dec 22;48(6):933-47.

Hindbrain rhombic lip is comprised of discrete progenitor cell populations
allocated by Pax6.

Landsberg RL(1), Awatramani RB, Hunter NL, Farago AF, DiPietrantonio HJ,
Rodriguez CI, Dymecki SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115,
USA.

The lower rhombic lip (LRL) is a germinal zone in the dorsal hindbrain productive
of tangentially migrating neurons, streaming extramurally (mossy fiber neurons)
or intramurally (climbing fiber neurons). Here we show that LRL territory,
operationally defined by Wnt1 expression, is parceled into molecular subdomains
predictive of cell fate. Progressing dorsoventrally, Lmx1a and Gdf7 expression
identifies the primordium for hindbrain choroid plexus epithelial cells; Math1,
for mossy fiber neurons; and immediately ventral to Math1 yet within Wnt1(+)
territory, a climbing fiber primordium dominated by Ngn1-expressing cells.
Elimination of Pax6 results in expansion of this Ngn1(+) progenitor pool and
reduction in the Math1(+) pool, with accompanying later enlargement of the
climbing fiber nucleus and reductions in mossy fiber nuclei. Pax6 loss also
disrupts Msx expression cell-nonautonomously, suggesting Pax6 may influence LRL
progenitor identity indirectly through potentiating BMP signaling. These studies 
suggest that underlying the diversity and proportions of fates produced by the
LRL is a precise suborganization regulated by Pax6.

PMID: 16364898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Dev Genes Evol. 2005 Dec;215(12):639-44. Epub 2005 Oct 12.

Vertebrate neurogenin evolution: long-term maintenance of redundant duplicates.

Furlong RF(1), Graham A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1
3PS, UK. rebecca.furlong@zoo.ox.ac.uk

The majority of the cranial sensory neurons of vertebrates, including all of
those concerned with the special senses of hearing, balance and taste, are
derived from the neurogenic placodes. A number of studies have shown that the
production of neuronal cells by the placodes is dependent upon the function of
the neurogenin (ngn) gene family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors.
One member of the gene family is expressed in each placode, suggesting that this 
specificity of expression could help to determine different neuronal classes. An 
interesting feature of this expression, however, is that the expression patterns 
vary amongst the vertebrates; for example, mammals and fish express ngn-1 in the 
ophthalmic trigeminal placode where birds use ngn-2. This prompted us to use
phylogenetic and genomic analysis to unravel the evolutionary history of this
gene family. We determined that the duplication that created the neurogenin-1 and
-2 subfamilies occurred deep in the vertebrate lineage before the divergence of
bony fish 450 million years ago and suggest that concurrent expression of both
genes was probably maintained in all neurogenic placodes until after the
divergence of birds and mammals 270 million years ago.

PMID: 16220265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Dev Dyn. 2005 Nov;234(3):633-50.

Smaller inner ear sensory epithelia in Neurog 1 null mice are related to earlier 
hair cell cycle exit.

Matei V(1), Pauley S, Kaing S, Rowitch D, Beisel KW, Morris K, Feng F, Jones K,
Lee J, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Creighton University, Omaha, Nebraska 68178,
USA.

We investigated whether co-expression of Neurog 1 and Atoh 1 in common
neurosensory precursors could explain the loss of hair cells in Neurog 1 null
mice. Analysis of terminal mitosis, using BrdU, supports previous findings
regarding timing of exit from cell cycle. Specifically, we show that cell cycle
exit occurs in spiral sensory neurons in a base-to-apex progression followed by
cell cycle exit of hair cells in the organ of Corti in an apex-to-base
progression, with some overlap of cell cycle exit in the apex for both hair cells
and spiral sensory neurons. Hair cells in Neurog 1 null mice show cell cycle exit
in an apex-to-base progression about 1-2 days earlier. Atoh 1 is expressed in an 
apex-to-base progression rather then a base-to-apex progression as in wildtype
littermates. We tested the possible expression of Atoh1 in neurosensory
precursors using two Atoh 1-Cre lines. We show Atoh 1-Cre mediated
beta-galactosidase expression in delaminating sensory neuron precursors as well
as undifferentiated epithelial cells at E11 and E12.5. PCR analysis shows
expression of Atoh 1 in the otocyst as early as E10.5, prior to any
histology-based detection techniques. Combined, these data suggest that low
levels of Atoh 1 exist much earlier in precursors of hair cells and sensory
neurons, possibly including neurosensory precursors. Analysis of Atoh 1-Cre
expression in E18.5 embryos and P31 mice reveal beta-galactosidase stain in all
hair cells but also in vestibular and cochlear sensory neurons and some
supporting cells. A similar expression of Atoh 1-LacZ exists in postnatal and
adult vestibular and cochlear sensory neurons, and Atoh 1 expression in
vestibular sensory neurons is confirmed with RT-PCR. We propose that the absence 
of NEUROG 1 protein leads to loss of sensory neuron formation through a
phenotypic switch of cycling neurosensory precursors from sensory neuron to hair 
cell fate. Neurog 1 null mice show a truncation of clonal expansion of hair cell 
precursors through temporally altered terminal mitosis, thereby resulting in
smaller sensory epithelia.

Developmental Dynamics 234:633-650, 2005. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC1343505
PMID: 16145671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Development. 2005 Jul;132(13):2991-3002. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Gsh2 is required for the repression of Ngn1 and specification of dorsal
interneuron fate in the spinal cord.

Kriks S(1), Lanuza GM, Mizuguchi R, Nakafuku M, Goulding M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. goulding@salk.edu

The molecular programs that specify progenitors in the dorsal spinal cord remain 
poorly defined. The homeodomain transcription factor Gsh2 is expressed in the
progenitors of three dorsal interneuron subtypes, dI3, dI4 and dI5 neurons,
whereas Gsh1 is only expressed in dI4 and dI5 progenitors. Mice lacking Gsh2
exhibit a selective loss of dI3 interneurons that is accompanied by an expansion 
of the dI2 progenitor domain. In Gsh2 mutant embryos, expression of the proneural
bHLH protein Mash1 is downregulated in dI3 neural progenitors, with Mash1 mutants
exhibiting a concordant reduction in dI3 neurons. Conversely, overexpression of
Gsh2 and Mash1 leads to the ectopic production of dI3 neurons and a concomitant
repression of Ngn1 expression. Our results provide evidence that genetic
interactions involving repression of Ngn1 by Gsh2 promote the differentiation of 
dI3 neurons from class A progenitors.

PMID: 15930101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Exp Neurol. 2005 Jul;194(1):1-11.

Transplantation of GABAergic neurons into adult mouse neocortex.

Muramatsu D(1), Sato Y, Hishiyama S, Miyamoto Y, Hisatsune T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrated Biosciences, University of Tokyo, Bioscience Building
402, 5-1-5 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, Chiba 277-8562, Japan.

GABAergic neurons in the neocortex contribute to various brain functions by
regulating cortical pyramidal neurons. A deficiency of GABAergic neurons in the
neocortex leads to the dysregulation of cortical neuronal circuits, but this can 
be overcome by cell transplantation, which provides a practical approach to
repair damaged neuronal circuits. Here, we focused on the transplantation of
committed neuronal progenitor cells. Because neuronal differentiation is
considerably suppressed in the adult neocortex, we transfected proneural bHLH
transcription factors into neural precursor cells to commit them to a neuronal
lineage prior to the cell transplantation. We show that ventral neural stem cells
transfected with Ngn1 are integrated as GABAergic neurons within a few days of
transplantation into the adult mouse neocortex. These results demonstrate that
the transplantation of committed neuronal progenitor cells is an effective method
for brain repair.

PMID: 15899239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mech Dev. 2005 May;122(5):625-34. Epub 2005 Jan 8.

Eya1 acts upstream of Tbx1, Neurogenin 1, NeuroD and the neurotrophins BDNF and
NT-3 during inner ear development.

Friedman RA(1), Makmura L, Biesiada E, Wang X, Keithley EM.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, 2100 W.
Third Street, Los Angeles, CA 90057, USA. rfriedman@hei.org

Cell fate specification during inner ear development is dependent upon regional
gene expression within the otic vesicle. One of the earliest cell fate
determination steps in this system is the specification of neural precursors, and
regulators of this process include the Atonal-related basic helix-loop-helix
genes, Ngn1 and NeuroD and the T-box gene, Tbx1. In this study we demonstrate
that Eya1 signaling is critical to the normal expression patterns of Tbx1, Ngn1, 
and NeuroD in the developing mouse otocyst. We discuss a potential mechanism for 
the absence of neural precursors in the Eya1-/- inner ears and the primary and
secondary mechanisms for the loss of cochleovestibular ganglion cells in the
Eya1bor/bor hypomorphic mutant.

PMID: 15817220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Chem Senses. 2005 Jan;30 Suppl 1:i125-6.

Expression of bHLH transcription factors and IGFs in the non-sensory patches,
olfactory epithelium and vomeronasal organ.

Suzuki Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy, School of Dentistry, Health Sciences University of
Hokkaido, Ishikari-Tobetsu 061-0293, Japan. suzuki@hoku-iryo-u.ac.jp

PMID: 15738072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Development. 2005 Mar;132(6):1327-36. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

A splice variant of the Wilms' tumour suppressor Wt1 is required for normal
development of the olfactory system.

Wagner N(1), Wagner KD, Hammes A, Kirschner KM, Vidal VP, Schedl A, Scholz H.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U636, Centre de Biochimie, Faculté des Sciences, Nice, France.

Neuronal lineage formation in the developing olfactory epithelium has been
extensively studied at the cellular level, but little is known about the genes
that control proliferation and differentiation of neuronal progenitor cells.
Here, we report that the Wilms' tumour zinc-finger protein, Wt1, is required for 
normal formation of the olfactory epithelium. Wt1 was detected by
immunohistochemistry in the developing olfactory epithelium of wild-type embryos 
between gestational days E9.5 and E18.5. Embryos with complete lack of Wt1 and
embryos with selective ablation of the alternatively spliced Wt1(+KTS) isoform
both had thinner olfactory epithelia and fewer neuronal progenitor cells than do 
normal animals. Mash1 and neurogenin 1, two basic helix-loop-helix transcription 
factors with critical functions during olfactory neuron development, were reduced
in the Wt1(+KTS)-/- mutants compared with the wild-type mice. Stable expression
of the Wt1(+KTS) isoform, but not of the Wt1(-KTS) variant, upregulated Mash1
mRNA and protein in vitro. The olfactory epithelia of mouse embryos, which lacked
the Wt1(-KTS) protein, appeared normal. However, formation of the neural retina
was severely impaired in the Wt1(-KTS)-/- mutants. These findings demonstrate
that the Wt1(+KTS) protein, which has been proposed to play a role in mRNA
processing, acts upstream of Mash1 to promote the development of the olfactory
epithelium. Furthermore, neuron formation depends on distinct functions of
alternatively spliced Wt1 products in the embryonic retina and the olfactory
epithelium.

PMID: 15716344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Development. 2005 Jan;132(1):75-88.

Inhibition of neurogenesis at the zebrafish midbrain-hindbrain boundary by the
combined and dose-dependent activity of a new hairy/E(spl) gene pair.

Ninkovic J(1), Tallafuss A, Leucht C, Topczewski J, Tannhäuser B, Solnica-Krezel 
L, Bally-Cuif L.

Author information: 
(1)Zebrafish Neurogenetics Junior Research Group, Institute of Virology,
Technical University-Munich, Trogerstrasse 4b, D-81675 Munich, Germany.
ninkovic@gsf.de

The intervening zone (IZ) is a pool of progenitor cells located at the
midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) and important for MHB maintenance,
midbrain-hindbrain growth and the generation of midbrain-hindbrain neurons.
Recently, we implicated the Hairy/E(spl) transcription factor Her5 in the
formation of the medial (most basal) part of the IZ (MIZ) in zebrafish; the
molecular bases for lateral IZ (LIZ) formation, however, remain unknown. We now
demonstrate that her5 is physically linked to a new family member, him,
displaying an identical MHB expression pattern. Using single and double
knockdowns of him and her5, as well as a him+her5 deletion mutant background
(b404), we demonstrate that Him and Her5 are equally necessary for MIZ formation,
and that they act redundantly in LIZ formation in vivo. We show that these
processes do not involve cross-regulation between Him and Her5 expression or
activities, although Him and Her5 can heterodimerize with high affinity.
Increasing the function of one factor when the other is depleted further shows
that Him and Her5 are functionally interchangeable. Together, our results
demonstrate that patterning and neurogenesis are integrated by the her5-him gene 
pair to maintain a progenitor pool at the embryonic MHB. We propose a molecular
mechanism for this process where the global 'Him+Her5' activity inhibits ngn1
expression in a dose-dependent manner and through different sensitivity
thresholds along the medio-lateral axis of the neural plate.

PMID: 15590746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):523-40.

dlx3b and dlx4b function in the development of Rohon-Beard sensory neurons and
trigeminal placode in the zebrafish neurula.

Kaji T(1), Artinger KB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Biology, University of Colorado Health Sciences
Center, 4200 East Ninth Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

Rohon-Beard sensory neurons, neural crest cells, and sensory placodes can be
distinguished at the boundary of the embryonic epidermis (skin) and the neural
plate. The inductive signals at the neural plate border region are likely to
involve a gradient of bone morphogenic protein (BMP) in conjunction with FGF and 
Wnts and other signals. However, how these signals are transduced to produce the 
final cell fate remains to be determined. Recent evidence from Xenopus and chick 
suggest that Dlx genes are required for the generation of cell fates at the
neural plate border (McLarren, K.W., Litsiou, A., Streit, A., 2003. DLX5
positions the neural crest and preplacode region at the border of the neural
plate. Dev. Biol. 259, 34-47; Woda, J.M., Pastagia, J., Mercola, M., Artinger,
K.B., 2003. Dlx proteins position the neural plate border and determine adjacent 
cell fates. Development 130, 331-342). In the present study, we extend these
findings to zebrafish, where we unequivocally demonstrate that dlx3b and dlx4b
function in a dose-dependent manner to specify cell fates such as Rohon-Beard
sensory neurons and trigeminal sensory placodes. dlx function was examined by
inhibiting: (1) protein levels with antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs), 
and (2) activity by repressing the ability of dlx-homeodomain to bind to
downstream targets (EnR-dlx3bhd mRNA; dlx3b homeodomain fused to Engrailed
transcriptional repressor domain). Inhibition of dlx3b and dlx4b protein and
activity resulted in the reduction or complete loss of Rohon-Beard (RB) sensory
neurons and trigeminal (TG) sensory placodes. These data suggest that dlx3b and
dlx4b function in the specification of RB neurons and trigeminal sensory placodes
in zebrafish. Further, we have shown that dlx3b and dlx4b function in a
non-cell-autonomous manner for RB neuron development; dlx3b and dlx4b act to
regulate bmp2b expression at the non-neural ectodermal border. These data suggest
that the contribution of dlx3b and dlx4b to neural plate border formation is
partially non-cell-autonomous acting via BMP activity.

PMCID: PMC4027963
PMID: 15581883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Development. 2005 Jan;132(1):105-15. Epub 2004 Dec 2.

The SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling protein Brg1 is required for vertebrate
neurogenesis and mediates transactivation of Ngn and NeuroD.

Seo S(1), Richardson GA, Kroll KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Pharmacology, Washington University School
of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Chromatin remodeling complexes play crucial roles in transcription and are
implicated in processes including cell proliferation, differentiation and
embryonic patterning. Brg1 is the catalytic subunit of the SWI/SNF chromatin
remodeling complex and shows neural-enriched expression. Although early lethality
of Brg1-null mice reflects its importance in embryogenesis, this phenotype
precluded further study of specific Brg1-dependent developmental processes. Here,
we have identified a requirement of Brg1 for both Xenopus primary neurogenesis
and neuronal differentiation of mammalian P19 embryonic carcinoma cells. In
Xenopus, loss of Brg1 function did not affect neural induction or neural cell
fate determination. However, the Sox2-positive, proliferating neural progenitor
cell population was expanded, and expression of a terminally differentiated
neuronal marker, N-tubulin, was diminished upon loss of Brg1 activity, suggesting
that Brg1 is required for neuronal differentiation. The ability of the bHLH
transcription factors Ngnr1 and NeuroD to drive neuronal differentiation was also
abolished by loss of Brg1 function, indicating that Brg1 is essential for the
proneural activities of Ngnr1 and NeuroD. Consistent with this, dominant-negative
interference with Brg1 function in P19 cells suppressed neuronal differentiation 
promoted by NeuroD2, showing the requirement of Brg1 for neuronal differentiation
is conserved in mammalian cells. Finally, we discovered that Brg1 physically
associates with both Ngnr1 and NeuroD and that interference with Brg1 function
blocks Neurogenin3- and NeuroD2-mediated reporter gene transactivation. Together,
our results demonstrate that Brg1 (and by inference the SWI/SNF complex) is
required for neuronal differentiation by mediating the transcriptional activities
of proneural bHLH proteins.

PMID: 15576411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5561-72. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

Eya1 and Six1 are essential for early steps of sensory neurogenesis in mammalian 
cranial placodes.

Zou D(1), Silvius D, Fritzsch B, Xu PX.

Author information: 
(1)McLaughlin Research Institute for Biomedical Sciences, 1520 23rd Street South,
Great Falls, MT 59405, USA.

Eya1 encodes a transcriptional co-activator and is expressed in cranial sensory
placodes. It interacts with and functions upstream of the homeobox gene Six1
during otic placodal development. Here, we have examined their role in cranial
sensory neurogenesis. Our data show that the initial cell fate determination for 
the vestibuloacoustic neurons and their delamination appeared to be unaffected in
the absence of Eya1 or Six1 as judged by the expression of the basic
helix-loop-helix genes, Neurog1 that specifies the neuroblast cell lineage, and
Neurod that controls neuronal differentiation and survival. However, both genes
are necessary for normal maintenance of neurogenesis. During the development of
epibranchial placode-derived distal cranial sensory ganglia, while the phenotype 
appears less severe in Six1 than in Eya1 mutants, an early arrest of neurogenesis
was observed in the mutants. The mutant epibranchial progenitor cells fail to
express Neurog2 that is required for the determination of neuronal precursors,
and other basic helix-loop-helix as well as the paired homeobox Phox2 genes that 
are essential for neural differentiation and maintenance. Failure to activate
their normal differentiation program resulted in abnormal apoptosis of the
progenitor cells. Furthermore, we show that disruption of viable ganglion
formation leads to pathfinding errors of branchial motoneurons. Finally, our
results suggest that the Eya-Six regulatory hierarchy also operates in the
epibranchial placodal development. These findings uncover an essential function
for Eya1 and Six1 as critical determination factors in acquiring both neuronal
fate and neuronal subtype identity from epibranchial placodal progenitors. These 
analyses define a specific role for both genes in early differentiation and
survival of the placodally derived cranial sensory neurons.

PMCID: PMC3882150
PMID: 15496442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5627-37. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

Conserved and acquired features of neurogenin1 regulation.

Blader P(1), Lam CS, Rastegar S, Scardigli R, Nicod JC, Simplicio N, Plessy C,
Fischer N, Schuurmans C, Guillemot F, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, 1 rue Laurent 
Fries, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

The telencephalon shows vast morphological variations among different vertebrate 
groups. The transcription factor neurogenin1 (ngn1) controls neurogenesis in the 
mouse pallium and is also expressed in the dorsal telencephalon of the
evolutionary distant zebrafish. The upstream regions of the zebrafish and
mammalian ngn1 loci harbour several stretches of conserved sequences. Here, we
show that the upstream region of zebrafish ngn1 is capable of faithfully
recapitulating endogenous expression in the zebrafish and mouse telencephalon. A 
single conserved regulatory region is essential for dorsal telencephalic
expression in the zebrafish, and for expression in the dorsal pallium of the
mouse. However, a second conserved region that is inactive in the fish
telencephalon is necessary for expression in the lateral pallium of mouse
embryos. This regulatory region, which drives expression in the zebrafish
diencephalon and hindbrain, is dependent on Pax6 activity and binds recombinant
Pax6 in vitro. Thus, the regulatory elements of ngn1 appear to be conserved among
vertebrates, with certain differences being incorporated in the utilisation of
these enhancers, for the acquisition of more advanced features in amniotes. Our
data provide evidence for the co-option of regulatory regions as a mechanism of
evolutionary diversification of expression patterns, and suggest that an
alteration in Pax6 expression was crucial in neocortex evolution.

PMID: 15496438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Dev Biol. 2004 Sep 15;273(2):373-89.

A screen for downstream effectors of Neurogenin2 in the embryonic neocortex.

Mattar P(1), Britz O, Johannes C, Nieto M, Ma L, Rebeyka A, Klenin N, Polleux F, 
Guillemot F, Schuurmans C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1.

Neurogenin (Ngn) 1 and Ngn2 encode basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factors
expressed in the developing neocortex. Like other proneural genes, Ngns
participate in the specification of neural fates and neuronal identities, but
downstream effectors remain poorly defined. We set out to identify Ngn2 effectors
in the cortex using a subtractive hybridization screen and identified several
regionally expressed genes that were misregulated in Ngn2 and Ngn1;Ngn2 mutants. 
Included were genes down-regulated in germinal zone progenitors (e.g., Nlgn1,
Unc5H4, and Dcc) and in postmitotic neurons in the cortical plate (e.g., Bhlhb5
and NFIB) and subplate (e.g., Mef2c, srGAP3, and protocadherin 9). Further
analysis revealed that Ngn2 mutant subplate neurons were misspecified and that
thalamocortical afferents (TCAs) that normally target this layer instead
inappropriately projected towards the germinal zone. Strikingly, EphA5 and
Sema3c, which encode repulsive guidance cues, were down-regulated in the Ngn2 and
Ngn1;Ngn2 mutant germinal zones, providing a possible molecular basis for axonal 
targeting defects. Thus, we identified several new components of the
differentiation cascade(s) activated downstream of Ngn1 and Ngn2 and provided
novel insights into a new developmental process controlled by these proneural
genes. Further analysis of the genes isolated in our screen should provide a
fertile basis for understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying
corticogenesis.

PMID: 15328020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. EMBO J. 2004 Jul 21;23(14):2892-902. Epub 2004 Jul 1.

Sequential phases of cortical specification involve Neurogenin-dependent and
-independent pathways.

Schuurmans C(1), Armant O, Nieto M, Stenman JM, Britz O, Klenin N, Brown C,
Langevin LM, Seibt J, Tang H, Cunningham JM, Dyck R, Walsh C, Campbell K, Polleux
F, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, Illkirch, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Neocortical projection neurons, which segregate into six cortical layers
according to their birthdate, have diverse morphologies, axonal projections and
molecular profiles, yet they share a common cortical regional identity and
glutamatergic neurotransmission phenotype. Here we demonstrate that distinct
genetic programs operate at different stages of corticogenesis to specify the
properties shared by all neocortical neurons. Ngn1 and Ngn2 are required to
specify the cortical (regional), glutamatergic (neurotransmitter) and laminar
(temporal) characters of early-born (lower-layer) neurons, while simultaneously
repressing an alternative subcortical, GABAergic neuronal phenotype.
Subsequently, later-born (upper-layer) cortical neurons are specified in an
Ngn-independent manner, requiring instead the synergistic activities of Pax6 and 
Tlx, which also control a binary choice between cortical/glutamatergic and
subcortical/GABAergic fates. Our study thus reveals an unanticipated
heterogeneity in the genetic mechanisms specifying the identity of neocortical
projection neurons.

PMCID: PMC514942
PMID: 15229646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 15;271(2):479-87.

Separable enhancer sequences regulate the expression of the neural bHLH
transcription factor neurogenin 1.

Nakada Y(1), Parab P, Simmons A, Omer-Abdalla A, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9111, USA.

Ngn1 is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor expressed in
specific regions within the developing brain and spinal cord, sensory ganglia,
and olfactory epithelium. We have identified sequences both 5' and 3' of the
mouse ngn1 gene that function in regulating ngn1 expression, and each of these
sequences contains distinct regulatory cassettes for different subregions of the 
expression domain. Enhancers for expression in ngn1 domains of the midbrain,
hindbrain, trigeminal ganglia, and ventral-neural tube appear redundant and are
spread both 5' and 3' of the ngn1 coding sequence. In contrast, a single discrete
dorsal-neural tube enhancer was located in the 5' sequence that is conserved
among mouse, human, chick, and zebrafish ngn1 genes. Functionally, this enhancer 
is both necessary and sufficient for driving expression of a heterologous
reporter in transgenic mice specifically to the dorsal domain of ngn1 expression 
in the spinal neural tube. Thus, sequences are identified that can be used to
direct temporally and spatially restricted expression of heterologous genes to
the developing neural tube.

PMID: 15223348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2004 Jun;24(3):343-56.

Neurogenin1 is sufficient to induce neuronal differentiation of embryonal
carcinoma P19 cells in the absence of retinoic acid.

Kim S(1), Yoon YS, Kim JW, Jung M, Kim SU, Lee YD, Suh-Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Ajou University, School of Medicine, Suwon, South
Korea.

1. Neurogenin1 (Ngn1) is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
that is expressed in neuronal precursors during development of the nervous
system. 2. In the present work, we investigated a instructive potential of Ngn1
in pluripotent embryonal carcinoma P19 cells. Treatment with retinoic acid (RA)
induced expression of Ngn1 as well as NeuroD in P19 cells in early period of
neuronal differentiation. P19 cells contained endogenous E47, a heterodimeric
partner of neurogenic bHLH factors, and overexpression of Ngn1 alone was
sufficient to induce the maximum activation of the E-box-mediated gene
expression. 3. Sustained expression of Ngn1 in the absence of RA was sufficient
to induce substantial expression of neuronal markers. The data indicate that Ngn1
is able to commit pluripotent P19 cells to adopt a neural cell phenotype in the
absence of RA, which may finally lead to enhanced neuronal differentiation. The
results also suggest that RA may induce neuronal differentiation of P19 cells by 
promoting a bHLH cascade including Ngn1.

PMID: 15206818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Development. 2004 Jul;131(13):3133-45. Epub 2004 Jun 2.

Asymmetric production of surface-dividing and non-surface-dividing cortical
progenitor cells.

Miyata T(1), Kawaguchi A, Saito K, Kawano M, Muto T, Ogawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Cell Culture Development, Brain Science Institute, RIKEN,
Saitama 351-0198, Japan. tmiyata@med.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Mature neocortical layers all derive from the cortical plate (CP), a transient
zone in the dorsal telencephalon into which young neurons are continuously
delivered. To understand cytogenetic and histogenetic events that trigger the
emergence of the CP, we have used a slice culture technique. Most divisions at
the ventricular surface generated paired cycling daughters (P/P divisions) and
the majority of the P/P divisions were asymmetric in daughter cell behavior; they
frequently sent one daughter cell to a non-surface (NS) position, the
subventricular zone (SVZ), within a single cell-cycle length while keeping the
other mitotic daughter for division at the surface. The NS-dividing cells were
mostly Hu+ and their daughters were also Hu+, suggesting their commitment to the 
neuronal lineage and supply of early neurons at a position much closer to their
destiny than from the ventricular surface. The release of a cycling daughter cell
to SVZ was achieved by collapse of the ventricular process of the cell, followed 
by its NS division. Neurogenin2 (Ngn2) was immunohistochemically detected in a
certain cycling population during G1 phase and was further restricted during G2-M
phases to the SVZ-directed population. Its retroviral introduction converted
surface divisions to NS divisions. The asymmetric P/P division may therefore
contribute to efficient neuron/progenitor segregation required for CP initiation 
through cell cycle-dependent and lineage-restricted expression of Ngn2.

PMID: 15175243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Development. 2004 Jun;131(12):2957-69.

her3, a zebrafish member of the hairy-E(spl) family, is repressed by Notch
signalling.

Hans S(1), Scheer N, Riedl I, v Weizsäcker E, Blader P, Campos-Ortega JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität zu Köln, 50923 Köln, Germany.
stefan@uoneuro.uoregon.edu

her3 encodes a zebrafish bHLH protein of the Hairy-E(Spl) family. During
embryogenesis, the gene is transcribed exclusively in the developing central
nervous system, according to a fairly simple pattern that includes territories in
the mesencephalon/rhombencephalon and the spinal cord. In all territories, the
her3 transcription domain encompasses regions in which neurogenin 1 (neurog1) is 
not transcribed, suggesting regulatory interactions between the two genes.
Indeed, injection of her3 mRNA leads to repression of neurog1 and to a reduction 
in the number of primary neurones, whereas her3 morpholino oligonucleotides cause
ectopic expression of neurog1 in the rhombencephalon. Fusions of Her3 to the
transactivation domain of VP16 and to the repression domain of Engrailed show
that Her3 is indeed a transcriptional repressor. Dissection of the Her3 protein
reveals two possible mechanisms for transcriptional repression: one mediated by
the bHLH domain and the C-terminal WRPW tetrapeptide; and the other involving the
N-terminal domain and the orange domain. Gel retardation assays suggest that the 
repression of neurog1 transcription occurs by binding of Her3 to specific DNA
sequences in the neurog1 promoter. We have examined interrelationships of her3
with members of the Notch signalling pathway by the Gal4-UAS technique and mRNA
injections. The results indicate that Her3 represses neurog1 and, probably as a
consequence of the neurog1 repression, deltaA, deltaD and her4. Moreover, Her3
represses its own transcription as well. Surprisingly, and in sharp contrast to
other members of the E(spl) gene family, transcription of her3 is repressed
rather than activated by Notch signalling.

PMID: 15169758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Dev Biol. 2004 May 15;269(2):580-94.

Sox1 acts through multiple independent pathways to promote neurogenesis.

Kan L(1), Israsena N, Zhang Z, Hu M, Zhao LR, Jalali A, Sahni V, Kessler JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University's Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611-3008, USA. 1-kan@northwestern.edu

Although Sox1, Sox2, and Sox3 are all part of the Sox-B1 group of transcriptional
regulators, only Sox1 appears to play a direct role in neural cell fate
determination and differentiation. We find that overexpression of Sox1 but not
Sox2 or Sox3 in cultured neural progenitor cells is sufficient to induce neuronal
lineage commitment. Sox1 binds directly to the Hes1 promoter and suppresses Hes1 
transcription, thus attenuating Notch signaling. Sox1 also binds to beta-catenin 
and suppresses beta-catenin-mediated TCF/LEF signaling, thus potentially
attenuating the wnt signaling pathway. The C-terminus of Sox1 is required for
both of these interactions. Sox1 also promotes exit of cells from cell cycle and 
up-regulates transcription of the proneural bHLH transcription factor neurogenin 
1 (ngn1). These observations suggest that Sox1 works through multiple independent
pathways to promote neuronal cell fate determination and differentiation.

PMID: 15110721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Comp Neurol. 2004 May 3;472(3):292-307.

Loss of Gli3 and Shh function disrupts olfactory axon trajectories.

Balmer CW(1), LaMantia AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell & Molecular Physiology, Curriculum in Neurobiology and
University of North Carolina Neuroscience Center, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

The transcriptional regulator Gli3 and the secreted signal Shh influence
induction, patterning, and differentiation at several sites of
mesenchymal/epithelial (M/E) interaction including the limbs, heart, face, and
forebrain. We asked whether loss of function of these two genes has specific
consequences for early differentiation of the primary olfactory pathway-which
comprises both craniofacial and forebrain structures and depends on M/E induction
during initial stages of development. Loss of Gli3 or Shh function does not
compromise several aspects of olfactory receptor neuron (ORN) and olfactory
ensheathing cell maturation; however, directed outgrowth of ORN axons and their
initial targeting to the telencephalon is altered. In Gli3 mutant extra
toes-Jackson (Xt(J)Xt(J)) embryos, ORN axons defasciculate and project aberrantly
near the forebrain. They rarely enter the central nervous system, and their
association with mesenchymal laminin is disrupted. In Shh-/-embryos, ORN axons
exit a single olfactory epithelium (OE) that develops centrally within an altered
mesenchymal environment in a dysmorphic proboscis. These axons project as a
single nerve toward the mutant forebrain; however, their trajectory varies
according to the position of the proboscis relative to the forebrain. These
alterations in axon outgrowth probably reflect compromised inductive interactions
in the olfactory primordia because neither Gli3 nor Shh are expressed in
olfactory neurons. Thus, two genes that influence induction and subsequent
differentiation of craniofacial structures and the forebrain have distinct
consequences for ORN axon growth during the initial genesis of the olfactory
pathway.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15065125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Apr 15;359(3):151-4.

Alterations in human tau transcripts correlate with those of neurofilament in
sporadic tauopathies.

Umeda Y(1), Taniguchi S, Arima K, Piao YS, Takahashi H, Iwatsubo T, Mann D,
Hasegawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neurobiology, Tokyo Institute of Psychiatry, Tokyo
Metropolitan Organization for Medical Research, 2-1-8 Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku, 
Tokyo 156-8585, Japan.

Abnormalities in tau mRNA splicing cause frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism
linked to chromosome 17, and similar alterations are suggested in sporadic
tauopathies such as progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) or corticobasal
degeneration (CBD). We have analyzed the expression of three-repeat (3R) and
four-repeat (4R) tau isoforms in brains with familial and sporadic tauopathies.
By RT-PCR analysis, decreased levels of 3R tau mRNA were detected not only in
severely affected cases with progressive supranuclear palsy or corticobasal
degeneration but also in cases with Alzheimer's disease or Pick's disease. Levels
of 3R tau transcripts were closely correlated with levels of neurofilament
transcripts. By contrast, expressions of glial fibrillary acidic protein and
myelin basic protein were similar in all brains. These results suggest that
decrease of 3R tau mRNA associated with loss of neuronal element may largely
contribute to the increased ratio of 4R/3R tau mRNA in sporadic tauopathies.

PMID: 15050686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Brain Res Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Jan;1(2):89-93.

Microarray analysis of brain RNA in mice with methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase
deficiency and hyperhomocysteinemia.

Chen Z(1), Ge B, Hudson TJ, Rozen R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McGill University, Montreal, Canada.

Methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (MTHFR) deficiency is the most common genetic
cause of hyperhomocysteinemia, which is associated with increased risk for
cardiovascular disease, stroke and possibly other neurological disorders.
Microarray analysis of brain RNA from day 14 Mthfr(-/-) mice revealed several
genes with altered expression. Expression changes in inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate 
receptor, type 1 (Itpr1), proteolipid protein (Plp), neurogenic differentiation
factor 1 (Neurod1), S100 calcium binding protein A8 (S100a8), and
methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (NAD+ dependent),
methenyltetrahydrofolate cyclohydrolase (Mthfd2) were confirmed by RT-PCR. We
propose that neuronal damage by hyperhomocysteinemia may involve disruption of
intracellular calcium.

PMID: 15018804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Comp Neurol. 2004 Mar 22;471(1):37-48.

Identification and morphogenesis of the eminentia thalami in the zebrafish.

Wullimann MF(1), Mueller T.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Institute of Neurobiology A.
Fessard, Development, Evolution, Plasticity of the Nervous System--Research Unit 
2197, F-91198 Gif-sur-Yvette Cedex, France. mario.wullimann@iaf.cnrs-gif.fr

This study documents early zebrafish brain expression patterns (2-5 days
postfertilization) of proliferating neural (PCNA) as well as early-determined
(Pax6, Zash-1a, Zash-1b, neurogenin1, neuroD) and differentiating (Hu-proteins)
neuronal cells. These patterns are used to outline the spatiotemporal local
dynamics of secondary neurogenesis as well as neuronal migration and
differentiation in the region of the eminentia thalami. The analysis presented
not only allows identification for the first time of the eminentia thalami in the
zebrafish model system (because it forms a neurogenin1/neuroD-guided locus of
neurogenesis in contrast to adjacent preoptic region and ventral thalamus) but
furthermore shows that the entopeduncular complex is a derivative of the
embryonic zebrafish eminentia thalami, which has never been reported for a
teleost before. An analysis of the relevant literature shows that the mammalian
entopeduncular nucleus/avian paleostriatum primitivum/reptilian globus pallidus
clearly are part of the basal ganglia (i.e., the pallidum). In amniote embryos,
an anterior entopeduncular area is recognized at the base of the medial
ganglionic eminence (i.e., the future pallidum; part of alar plate of prosomere
5), separate from the more posterior eminentia thalami (alar prosomere 4). There 
is a comparable periventricular eminentia thalami in (young and adult) amphibians
and teleosts. However, the migrated anterior entopeduncular nucleus of anuran
amphibians likely is homologous to part of the pallidum of other vertebrates and 
has no developmental relationship to the eminentia thalami. In contrast, the
migrated teleostean entopeduncular complex does not correspond to a pallidal
division but is indeed the adult derivative of the early-recognized eminentia
thalami as shown in this study.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14983474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Apr;18(4):995-1003. Epub 2004 Jan 15.

Tpit-independent function of NeuroD1(BETA2) in pituitary corticotroph
differentiation.

Lamolet B(1), Poulin G, Chu K, Guillemot F, Tsai MJ, Drouin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, 110 Avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

NeuroD1(BETA2) and Tpit are cell-specific activators of pituitary
proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene transcription. Expression of both factors
slightly precedes that of POMC at embryonic d 12.5 of mouse pituitary
development. We now report that NeuroD1(BETA2) is required for early corticotroph
differentiation. In agreement with the transcriptional synergism observed between
Tpit and basic helix-loop-helix dimers containing NeuroD1(BETA2), POMC expression
is delayed in NeuroD1-deficient mice. However, this differentiation defect does
not reflect a change of corticotroph commitment as revealed by Tpit expression.
The delay of corticotroph terminal differentiation is transient and coincides
with the developmental window of NeuroD1 expression in corticotrophs. In contrast
to their requirement in other NeuroD1-expressing cells, the neurogenin genes do
not appear to be necessary for corticotroph differentiation. Taken together with 
a similar requirement of Tpit for corticotroph differentiation but not for
commitment, the present data indicate that the POMC promoter is a point of
convergence for independent corticotroph differentiating signals.

PMID: 14726486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Nat Genet. 2004 Jan;36(1):83-7. Epub 2003 Dec 14.

Conversion of biliary system to pancreatic tissue in Hes1-deficient mice.

Sumazaki R(1), Shiojiri N, Isoyama S, Masu M, Keino-Masu K, Osawa M, Nakauchi H, 
Kageyama R, Matsui A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Health, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2005 May;42(5):782-3.

The biliary system, pancreas and liver all develop from the nearby foregut at
almost the same time in mammals. The molecular mechanisms that determine the
identity of each organ in this complex area are unknown. Hes1 encodes the basic
helix-loop-helix protein Hes1 (ref. 1), which represses positive basic
helix-loop-helix genes such as Neurog3 (ref. 3). Expression of Hes1 is controlled
by the evolutionarily conserved Notch pathway. Hes1 operates as a general
negative regulator of endodermal endocrine differentiation, and defects in Notch 
signaling lead to accelerated pancreatic endocrine differentiation. Mutations in 
JAG1, encoding a Notch ligand, cause the Alagille syndrome in humans,
characterized by poor development of the biliary system, suggesting that the
Notch pathway is also involved in normal biliary development. Here we show that
Hes1 is expressed in the extrahepatic biliary epithelium throughout development
and that Hes1-deficient mice have gallbladder agenesis and severe hypoplasia of
extrahepatic bile ducts. Biliary epithelium in Hes1-/- mice ectopically expresses
the proendocrine gene Neurog3 (refs. 12,13), differentiates into endocrine and
exocrine cells and forms acini and islet-like structures in the mutant bile
ducts. Thus, biliary epithelium has the potential for pancreatic differentiation 
and Hes1 determines biliary organogenesis by preventing the pancreatic
differentiation program, probably by directly repressing transcription of
Neurog3.

PMID: 14702043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Toxicol Sci. 2003 Dec;76(2):392-9. Epub 2003 Nov 4.

Neurodevelopmental defects in zebrafish (Danio rerio) at environmentally relevant
dioxin (TCDD) concentrations.

Hill A(1), Howard CV, Strahle U, Cossins A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Environmental Gene Regulation, School of Biological Sciences,
Biosciences Building, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, Liverpool Merseyside
L69 7ZB, United Kingdom. ajhill@pharmacy.wisc.edu

Persistent ecotoxicants, such as dioxin and PCBs, are thought to pose one of the 
greatest threats to public and ecological health in the industrial world. These
compounds cause a range of macroscopic malformations, particularly to the
craniofacial apparatus and cardiovascular system during vertebrate development.
However, little is known about microscopic effects, especially on the sensitive
early life stages or on the molecular basis of developmental neurotoxicity. Using
zebrafish (Danio rerio), we have explored neurological deficits caused by
early-life exposure to environmentally relevant concentrations of dioxin. We
show, using a quantitative stereological technique, that
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) substantially reduces the capacity for
embryonic brain development, causing a 30% reduction in total neuronal number in 
the 168-h larval brain. Using transgenic GFP-expressing zebrafish lines, we link 
this to decreased expression of key developmentally regulated genes, namely
neurogenin and sonic hedgehog. This disruption of neuronal development provides
the basis for understanding the neurotoxic effects of these compounds.

PMID: 14600291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Nat Neurosci. 2003 Nov;6(11):1162-8. Epub 2003 Sep 28.

Vertebrate neurogenesis is counteracted by Sox1-3 activity.

Bylund M(1), Andersson E, Novitch BG, Muhr J.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute of Cancer Research, Karolinska Institute, Box 240, SE-171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2003 Nov;6(11):1125.

The generation of neurons from stem cells involves the activity of proneural
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins, but the mechanism by which these proteins
irreversibly commit stem cells to neuronal differentiation is not known. Here we 
report that expression of the transcription factors Sox1, Sox2 and Sox3 (Sox1-3) 
is a critical determinant of neurogenesis. Using chick in ovo electroporation, we
found that Sox1-3 transcription factors keep neural cells undifferentiated by
counteracting the activity of proneural proteins. Conversely, the capacity of
proneural bHLH proteins to direct neuronal differentiation critically depends on 
their ability to suppress Sox1-3 expression in CNS progenitors. These data
suggest that the generation of neurons from stem cells depends on the inhibition 
of Sox1-3 expression by proneural proteins.

PMID: 14517545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Development. 2003 Nov;130(22):5351-62. Epub 2003 Sep 16.

Hedgehog signaling is directly required for the development of zebrafish dorsal
root ganglia neurons.

Ungos JM(1), Karlstrom RO, Raible DW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Program, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 
98195-7420 USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signal transduction is directly required in zebrafish DRG
precursors for proper development of DRG neurons. Zebrafish mutations in the Hh
signaling pathway result in the absence of DRG neurons and the loss of expression
of neurogenin1 (ngn1), a gene required for determination of DRG precursors. Cell 
transplantation experiments demonstrate that Hh acts directly on DRG neuron
precursors. Blocking Hh pathway activation at later stages of embryogenesis with 
the steroidal alkaloid, cyclopamine, further reveals that the requirement for a
Hh signal response in DRG precursors correlates with the onset of ngn1
expression. These results suggest that Hh signaling may normally promote DRG
development by regulating expression of ngn1 in DRG precursors.

PMID: 13129844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Dev Dyn. 2003 Aug;227(4):544-51.

Induction of neurogenin-1 expression by sonic hedgehog: Its role in development
of trigeminal sensory neurons.

Ota M(1), Ito K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Science, Osaka University, Toyonaka,
Osaka, Japan.

We have examined the roles of signaling molecules in the mechanisms underlying
the induction of neurogenin (ngn)-1 expression. ngn-1 is a basic helix-loop-helix
(bHLH) transcription factor, which is essential for the specification of
trigeminal sensory neurons. Semiquantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction using cranial explants in organ cultures showed that sonic
hedgehog (Shh) promotes ngn-1 expression. This promoting activity was not
observed in other signaling molecules examined. The promotion of ngn-1 expression
by Shh, furthermore, was inhibited by cyclopamine, a specific inhibitor of Shh
signaling. Shh did not affect the expression of ngn-2, a bHLH transcription
factor that plays an important role in the specification of epibranchial
placode-derived sensory neurons. The expression levels of ngn-1 and ngn-2
decreased after fibroblast growth factor-2 treatment. These results suggest that 
Shh induces ngn-1 expression specifically and that expression of ngn-1 and ngn-2 
is regulated by different mechanisms. The induction of ngn-1 expression by Shh
suggests that this signaling molecule participates in the specification of
trigeminal sensory neurons. We therefore examined the effect of Shh on the
development of these neurons. Immunostaining using anti-ngn-1 demonstrated that
Shh promotes ngn-1 expression in trigeminal neural crest cells. Trigeminal neural
crest cells are derived from the posterior mesencephalon and the most-anterior
rhombencephalon, and they contain a subset of precursors of trigeminal sensory
neurons. Moreover, a subpopulation of trigeminal neural crest cells expressed the
Shh receptor Patched. The number of cells that express Brn3a, a POU-domain
transcription factor that plays an important role in differentiation of sensory
neurons, also increased with Shh treatment. Our data suggest that Shh signaling
is involved in the specification of trigeminal sensory neurons through the
induction of ngn-1 expression. Furthermore, Shh promotes the differentiation of
neural crest cells into trigeminal sensory neurons.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12889063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Development. 2003 Aug;130(16):3747-55.

Delta-Notch signaling regulates oligodendrocyte specification.

Park HC(1), Appel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA.

Oligodendrocytes, the myelinating cell type of the central nervous system, arise 
from a ventral population of precursors that also produces motoneurons. Although 
the mechanisms that specify motoneuron development are well described, the
mechanisms that generate oligodendrocytes from the same precursor population are 
largely unknown. By analysing mutant zebrafish embryos, we found that Delta-Notch
signaling is required for spinal cord oligodendrocyte specification. Using a
transgenic, conditional expression system, we also learned that constitutive
Notch activity could promote formation of excess oligodendrocyte progenitor cells
(OPCs). However, excess OPCs are induced only in ventral spinal cord at the time 
that OPCs normally develop. Our data provide evidence that Notch signaling
maintains subsets of ventral spinal cord precursors during neuronal birth and,
acting with other temporally and spatially restricted factors, specifies them for
oligodendrocyte fate.

PMID: 12835391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Development. 2003 Jun;130(11):2455-66.

Ash1a and Neurogenin1 function downstream of Floating head to regulate epiphysial
neurogenesis.

Cau E(1), Wilson SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Gower Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

The homeodomain transcription factor Floating head (Flh) is required for the
generation of neurones in the zebrafish epiphysis. It regulates expression of two
basic helix loop helix (bHLH) transcription factor encoding genes, ash1a
(achaete/scute homologue 1a) and neurogenin1 (ngn1), in epiphysial neural
progenitors. We show that ash1a and ngn1 function in parallel redundant pathways 
to regulate neurogenesis downstream of flh. Comparison of the epiphysial
phenotypes of flh mutant and of ash1a/ngn1 double morphants reveals that reduced 
expression of ash1a and ngn1 can account for most of the neurogenesis defects in 
the flh-mutant epiphysis but also shows that Flh has additional activities.
Furthermore, different cell populations show different requirements for ash1a and
ngn1 within the epiphysis. These populations do not simply correspond to the two 
described epiphysial cell types: photoreceptors and projection neurones. These
results suggest that the genetic pathways that involve ash1a and ngn1 are common 
to both neuronal types.

PMID: 12702659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Mech Dev. 2003 Feb;120(2):211-8.

Multiple regulatory elements with spatially and temporally distinct activities
control neurogenin1 expression in primary neurons of the zebrafish embryo.

Blader P(1), Plessy C, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, 1 rue Laurent Fries, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de
Strasbourg, France.

The basic Helix-Loop-Helix gene neurogenin1 (ngn1) is expressed in a complex
pattern in the neural plate of zebrafish embryos, demarcating the sites of
primary neurogenesis. We have dissected the ngn1 locus to identify cis-regulatory
regions that control this expression. We have isolated two upstream elements that
drive expression in precursors of Rohon-Beard sensory neurons and hindbrain
interneurons and in clusters of neuronal precursors in the anterior neural plate,
respectively. A third regulatory region mediates later expression. Thus,
regulatory sequences with temporally and spatially distinct activities control
ngn1 expression in primary neurons of the zebrafish embryo. These regions are
highly similar to 5' sequences in the mouse and human ngn1 gene, suggesting that 
amniote embryos, despite lacking primary neurons, utilize related mechanism to
control ngn1 expression.

PMID: 12559493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Exp Mol Med. 2002 Dec 31;34(6):469-75.

Overexpression of neurogenin1 induces neurite outgrowth in F11 neuroblastoma
cells.

Kim S(1), Ghil SH, Kim SS, Myeong HH, Lee YD, Suh-Kim H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Ajou University, Suwon 442-749,
Korea.

Neurogenin1 (Ngn1) is a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
expressed in neuronal precursors in the developing nervous system. The function
of Ngn1 in neurogenesis has been shown in various aspects. In this study, we
investigated the neurogenic potential of Ngn1 using neuroblastoma cell line, F11,
which could be induced to differentiate into neurons in the presence of cAMP. To 
investigate the expression of Ngn1, expression vectors for the full-length and
the C- terminal deletion mutant of Ngn1 were constructed and their
transactivation potential was verified using reporter gene containing the E-box
sequence. Overexpression of the full-length Ngn1 induced neurite outgrowth in F11
cells in the absence of cAMP. A C-terminal deletion mutant, Ngn1(1-197),
inhibited neurite outgrowth induced by cAMP in F11 cells. These results indicate 
that the Ngn1 plays an important role in differentiation of neuroblastoma cells
and the C terminus of Ngn1 is essential for the efficient differentiation.

PMID: 12526089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2002 Nov;21(3):502-11.

Early steps in the production of sensory neurons by the neurogenic placodes.

Begbie J(1), Ballivet M, Graham A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Development Neurobiology, Kings College London, London SE1 1UL.

Neurogenic placodes are specialized regions of the embryonic ectoderm that
generate the majority of the neurons of the cranial sensory ganglia. Here we have
accurately determined the onset of neurogenesis in each of the placodes in the
chick, and we have also analyzed the expression profiles of genes that are
believed to be involved in determining the types of sensory neurons produced by
each placode. Interestingly, we find that there is a major difference in the
expression domains of neurogenin-1 and neurogenin-2 in the chick, when compared
with those reported for the mouse. We do find, however, that Brn-3a and Phox-2a
and Phox-2b which are also associated with the specification of neuronal type are
expressed in the same domains in the chick as they are in the mouse. These
results suggest that neurogenin-1 and neurogenin-2 are functionally
interchangeable in neurogenic placodes. We have also found major differences
between the ophthalmic and maxillomandibular trigeminal placodes, and while all
of the other placodes generate mitotically active cells the ophthalmic trigeminal
placode seems to throw off postmitotic neuronal cells.

PMID: 12498790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Dev Biol. 2002 Nov 1;251(1):45-58.

Neurogenin1 defines zebrafish cranial sensory ganglia precursors.

Andermann P(1), Ungos J, Raible DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle
98195-7420, USA.

Cells delaminate from epithelial placodes to form sensory ganglia in the
vertebrate head. We describe the formation of cranial neurogenic placodes in the 
zebrafish, Danio rerio, using bHLH transcription factors as molecular markers. A 
single neurogenin gene, neurogenin1 (ngn1), is required for the development of
all zebrafish cranial ganglia, which contrasts with other described vertebrates. 
Expression of ngn1 delineates zebrafish ganglionic placodes, including
trigeminal, lateral line, and epibranchial placodes. In addition, ngn1 is
expressed in a subset of cells within the otic vesicle that will delaminate to
form the octaval (statoacoustic) ganglion. The trigeminal placode is the first to
differentiate, and forms just lateral and adjacent to the neural crest.
Expression of ngn1 is transient and prefigures expression of a related bHLH
transcription factor, neuroD. Interfering with ngn1 function using a specific
antisense morpholino oligonucleotide blocks differentiation of all cranial
ganglia but not associated glial cells. Lateral line sensory neuromasts develop
independently of ngn1 function, suggesting that two derivatives of lateral line
placodes, ganglia and migrating primordia, are under separate genetic control.

PMID: 12413897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Nat Neurosci. 2002 Nov;5(11):1155-62.

Suppressor of cytokine signaling 2 regulates neuronal differentiation by
inhibiting growth hormone signaling.

Turnley AM(1), Faux CH, Rietze RL, Coonan JR, Bartlett PF.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, P.O. Royal Melbourne 
Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria 3050, Australia.

The intracellular mechanisms that determine the response of neural progenitor
cells to growth factors and regulate their differentiation into either neurons or
astrocytes remain unclear. We found that expression of SOCS2, an intracellular
regulator of cytokine signaling, was restricted to mouse progenitor cells and
neurons in response to leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)-like cytokines.
Progenitors lacking SOCS2 produced fewer neurons and more astrocytes in vitro,
and Socs2(-/-) mice had fewer neurons and neurogenin-1 (Ngn1)-expressing cells in
the developing cortex, whereas overexpression of SOCS2 increased neuronal
differentiation. We also report that growth hormone inhibited Ngn1 expression and
neuronal production, and this action was blocked by SOCS2 overexpression. These
findings indicate that SOCS2 promotes neuronal differentiation by blocking growth
hormone-mediated downregulation of Ngn1.

PMID: 12368809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4773-84.

On the organisation of the regulatory region of the zebrafish deltaD gene.

Hans S(1), Campos-Ortega JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität zu Köln, 50923 Köln, Germany.

DeltaD is one of the four zebrafish Delta homologues presently known.
Experimental evidence indicates that deltaD participates in a number of important
processes during embryogenesis, including early neurogenesis and somitogenesis,
whereby the protein it encodes acts as a ligand for members of the Notch receptor
family. In accordance with its functional role, deltaD is transcribed in several 
domains of mesodermal and ectodermal origin during embryogenesis. We have
analysed the organisation of the regulatory region of the deltaD gene using
fusions to the reporter gene gfp and germline transgenesis. Cis-regulatory
sequences are dispersed over a stretch of 12.5 kb of genomic DNA, and are
organised in a similar manner to those in the regulatory region of the Delta-like
1 gene of mouse. Germline transformation using a minigene comprising 10.5 kb of
this genomic DNA attached to the 3' end of a full-length cDNA clone rescues the
phenotype of embryos homozygous for the amorphic deltaD mutation after
eight(AR33). Several genomic regions that drive transcription in mesodermal and
neuroectodermal domains have been identified. Transcription in all the neural
expression domains, with one exception, is controlled by two relatively small
genomic regions, which are regulated by the proneural proteins neurogenin 1 and
zash1a/b acting as transcriptional activators that bind to so-called E-boxes.
Transcriptional control of deltaD by proneural proteins therefore represents a
molecular target for the regulatory feedback loop mediated by the Notch pathway
in lateral inhibition.

PMID: 12361969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Cell Biol. 2002 Aug 19;158(4):731-40. Epub 2002 Aug 19.

REN: a novel, developmentally regulated gene that promotes neural cell
differentiation.

Gallo R(1), Zazzeroni F, Alesse E, Mincione C, Borello U, Buanne P, D'Eugenio R, 
Mackay AR, Argenti B, Gradini R, Russo MA, Maroder M, Cossu G, Frati L, Screpanti
I, Gulino A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, University of L'Aquila, 67100 L'Aquila,
Italy.

Expansion and fate choice of pluripotent stem cells along the neuroectodermal
lineage is regulated by a number of signals, including EGF, retinoic acid, and
NGF, which also control the proliferation and differentiation of central nervous 
system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS) neural progenitor cells. We
report here the identification of a novel gene, REN, upregulated by neurogenic
signals (retinoic acid, EGF, and NGF) in pluripotent embryonal stem (ES) cells
and neural progenitor cell lines in association with neurotypic differentiation. 
Consistent with a role in neural promotion, REN overexpression induced neuronal
differentiation as well as growth arrest and p27Kip1 expression in CNS and PNS
neural progenitor cell lines, and its inhibition impaired retinoic acid induction
of neurogenin-1 and NeuroD expression. REN expression is developmentally
regulated, initially detected in the neural fold epithelium of the mouse embryo
during gastrulation, and subsequently throughout the ventral neural tube, the
outer layer of the ventricular encephalic neuroepithelium and in neural crest
derivatives including dorsal root ganglia. We propose that REN represents a novel
component of the neurogenic signaling cascade induced by retinoic acid, EGF, and 
NGF, and is both a marker and a regulator of neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2174014
PMID: 12186855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Development. 2002 Jun;129(11):2639-48.

Delta/Notch signaling promotes formation of zebrafish neural crest by repressing 
Neurogenin 1 function.

Cornell RA(1), Eisen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, 1254 University of Oregon, Eugene 97403, USA.
robert-cornell@uiowa.edu

Erratum in
    Development 2002 Jul;129(13):3279.

In zebrafish, cells at the lateral edge of the neural plate become Rohon-Beard
primary sensory neurons or neural crest. Delta/Notch signaling is required for
neural crest formation. ngn1 is expressed in primary neurons; inhibiting Ngn1
activity prevents Rohon-Beard cell formation but not formation of other primary
neurons. Reducing Ngn1 activity in embryos lacking Delta/Notch signaling restores
neural crest formation, indicating Delta/Notch signaling inhibits neurogenesis
without actively promoting neural crest. Ngn1 activity is also required for later
development of dorsal root ganglion sensory neurons; however, Rohon-Beard neurons
and dorsal root ganglion neurons are not necessarily derived from the same
precursor cell. We propose that temporally distinct episodes of Ngn1 activity in 
the same precursor population specify these two different types of sensory
neurons.

PMID: 12015292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Development. 2002 May;129(10):2459-72.

BMP signaling patterns the dorsal and intermediate neural tube via regulation of 
homeobox and helix-loop-helix transcription factors.

Timmer JR(1), Wang C, Niswander L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

In the spinal neural tube, populations of neuronal precursors that express a
unique combination of transcription factors give rise to specific classes of
neurons at precise locations along the dorsoventral axis. Understanding the
patterning mechanisms that generate restricted gene expression along the
dorsoventral axis is therefore crucial to understanding the creation of diverse
neural cell types. Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and other transforming
growth factor beta (TGFbeta) proteins are expressed by the dorsal-most cells of
the neural tube (the roofplate) and surrounding tissues, and evidence indicates
that they play a role in assigning cell identity. We have manipulated the level
of BMP signaling in the chicken neural tube to show that BMPs provide patterning 
information to both dorsal and intermediate cells. BMP regulation of the
expression boundaries of the homeobox proteins Pax6, Dbx2 and Msx1 generates
precursor populations with distinct developmental potentials. Within the
resulting populations, thresholds of BMP act to set expression domain boundaries 
of developmental regulators of the homeobox and basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
families, ultimately leading to the generation of a diversity of differentiated
neural cell types. This evidence strongly suggests that BMPs are the key
regulators of dorsal cell identity in the spinal neural tube.

PMID: 11973277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Development. 2002 May;129(10):2317-27.

A role for iro1 and iro7 in the establishment of an anteroposterior compartment
of the ectoderm adjacent to the midbrain-hindbrain boundary.

Itoh M(1), Kudoh T, Dedekian M, Kim CH, Chitnis AB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, NICHD/NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We have identified a novel Iroquois (Iro) gene, iro7, in zebrafish. iro7 is
expressed during gastrulation along with iro1 in a compartment of the dorsal
ectoderm that includes the prospective midbrain-hindbrain domain, the adjacent
neural crest and the trigeminal placodes in the epidermis. The iro1 and iro7
expression domain is expanded in headless and masterblind mutants, which are
characterized by exaggerated Wnt signaling. Early expansion of iro1 and iro7
expression in these mutants correlates with expansion of the midbrain-hindbrain
boundary (MHB) domain, the neural crest and trigeminal neurons, raising the
possibility that iro1 and iro7 have a role in determination of these ectodermal
derivatives. A knockdown of iro7 function revealed that iro7 is essential for the
determination of neurons in the trigeminal placode. In addition, a knockdown of
both iro1 and iro7 genes uncovered their essential roles in neural crest
development and establishment of the isthmic organizer at the MHB. These results 
suggest a new role for Iro genes in establishment of an ectodermal compartment
after Wnt signaling in vertebrate development. Furthermore, analysis of activator
or repressor forms of iro7 suggests that iro1 and iro7 are likely to function as 
repressors in establishment of the isthmic organizer and neural crest, and Iro
genes may have dual functions as repressors and activators in neurogenesis.

PMID: 11973265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Development. 2002 Apr;129(8):1871-80.

Mash1 and Ngn1 control distinct steps of determination and differentiation in the
olfactory sensory neuron lineage.

Cau E(1), Casarosa S, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, 1 rue Laurent Fries, 67404 Illkirch cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

bHLH transcription factors are expressed sequentially during the development of
neural lineages, suggesting that they operate in genetic cascades. In the
olfactory epithelium, the proneural genes Mash1 and neurogenin1 are expressed at 
distinct steps in the same olfactory sensory neuron lineage. Here, we show by
loss-of-function analysis that both genes are required for the generation of
olfactory sensory neurons. However, their mutant phenotypes are strikingly
different, indicating that they have divergent functions. In Mash1 null mutant
mice, olfactory progenitors are not produced and the Notch signalling pathway is 
not activated, establishing Mash1 as a determination gene for olfactory sensory
neurons. In neurogenin1 null mutant mice, olfactory progenitors are generated but
they express only a subset of their normal repertoire of regulatory molecules and
their differentiation is blocked. Thus neurogenin1 is required for the activation
of one of several parallel genetic programs functioning downstream of Mash1 in
the differentiation of olfactory sensory neurons. These results illustrate the
versatility of neural bHLH genes which adopt either a determination or a
differentiation function, depending primarily on the timing of their expression
in neural progenitors.

PMID: 11934853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1553-67.

Comparison of the generic neuronal differentiation and neuron subtype
specification functions of mammalian achaete-scute and atonal homologs in
cultured neural progenitor cells.

Lo L(1), Dormand E, Greenwood A, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125, USA.

In the vertebrate peripheral nervous system, the proneural genes neurogenin 1 and
neurogenin 2 (Ngn1 and Ngn2), and Mash1 are required for sensory and autonomic
neurogenesis, respectively. In cultures of neural tube-derived, primitive PNS
progenitors NGNs promote expression of sensory markers and MASH1 that of
autonomic markers. These effects do not simply reflect enhanced neuronal
differentiation, suggesting that both bHLH factors also specify neuronal identity
like their Drosophila counterparts. At high concentrations of BMP2 or in neural
crest stem cells (NCSCs), however, NGNs like MASH1 promote only autonomic marker 
expression. These data suggest that that the identity specification function of
NGNs is more sensitive to context than is that of MASH1. In NCSCs, MASH1 is more 
sensitive to Notch-mediated inhibition of neurogenesis and cell cycle arrest,
than are the NGNs. Thus, the two proneural genes differ in other functional
properties besides the neuron subtype identities they can promote. These
properties may explain cellular differences between MASH1- and NGN-dependent
lineages in the timing of neuronal differentiation and cell cycle exit.

PMID: 11923194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mech Dev. 2002 Jan;110(1-2):249-52.

Expression of Ngn1, Ngn2, Cash1, Gsh2 and Sfrp1 in the developing chick
telencephalon.

Frowein Jv(1), Campbell K, Götz M.

Author information: 
(1)MPI for Neurobiology, Am Klopferspitz 18a, 82152 Munich-Martinsried, Germany.

Patterning of the chick telencephalon has been debated, especially in regard to a
ventral (subpallial) or dorsal (pallial) nature of the dorsal ventricular ridge
(DVR). Here we report the expression patterns of chick homologues of molecules
known to be involved in telencephalic patterning in other vertebrate species. We 
show here that the transcription factors Ngn1, Ngn2, Cash1, Gsh2 and the secreted
frizzled related protein 1 (sfrp1), a wnt receptor, are expressed in
characteristic telencephalic domains during chick development. At embryonic day 7
(E7) Ngn1 and Ngn2 are localized in the dorsal pallium and the DVR, similar to
the region of Pax6 expression. In contrast, Gsh2 and Cash1 are restricted to the 
subpallium and some DVR cells. Interestingly Sfrp, a dorsoventral boundary marker
in mouse telencephalon, is expressed between the DVR and subpallium. Gsh2 and
Pax6 double-positive cells further characterize this boundary region in the
developing chick telencephalon.

PMID: 11744393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Child Neurol. 2001 Nov;16(11):849-53.

NeuroD homologue expression during cortical development in the human brain.

Franklin A(1), Kao A, Tapscott S, Unis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington,
Seattle, USA.

Neurogenesis and neuronal differentiation are determined by the NeuroD
homologues, transcription factors belonging to a family of basic helix-loop-helix
proteins. The authors used in situ hybridization with full-length riboprobes for 
NeuroD1, NeuroD2, and NeuroD3 to describe the expression of the NeuroD homologues
in a gestational sequence of human fetal brains. Acridine orange
histofluorescence was used to differentiate neuronal from non-neuronal cell
precursors. At the earliest gestational age examined (gestational week 16),
signals for all three homologues could be identified but that for NeuroD3 was
most intense. Peak expression of NeuroD1 and NeuroD2 followed at gestational
weeks 19 and 20, respectively. Although similar to the expression of these
homologues in the mouse cerebrum, notable differences were observed.
Specifically, signals for all three homologues were detected in the marginal zone
and the ventricular zone, including the ganglionic eminence. The temporal order
of expression in the human is similar to that in the mouse, in spite of these
anatomic differences. These data are consistent with NeuroD3 serving as a
determination factor, which commits the post-mitotic progenitor cell to a
neuronal fate, whereas NeuroD1 and NeuroD2 appear more likely to play a role in
neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 11732772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Neuron. 2001 Sep 13;31(5):791-807.

The bHLH transcription factor Olig2 promotes oligodendrocyte differentiation in
collaboration with Nkx2.2.

Zhou Q(1), Choi G, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, 1201 E.
California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Olig2, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, is expressed in a
restricted domain of the spinal cord ventricular zone that sequentially generates
motoneurons and oligodendrocytes. Just prior to oligo-dendrocyte precursor
formation, the domains of Olig2 and Nkx2.2 expression switch from being mutually 
exclusive to overlapping, and Neurogenins1 and 2 are extinguished within this
region. Coexpression of Olig2 with Nkx2.2 in the spinal cord promotes ectopic and
precocious oligodendrocyte differentiation. Both proteins function as
transcriptional repressors in this assay. This effect is blocked by forced
expression of Neurogenin1. By contrast, misexpression of Olig2 alone derepresses 
Neurogenins and promotes motoneuron differentiation. Olig2 therefore functions
sequentially in motoneuron and oligodendrocyte fate specification. This dual
action is enabled by spatio-temporal changes in the expression domains of other
transcription factors with which Olig2 functionally interacts.

PMID: 11567617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2000 Sep;1(2):129-43.

Neurogenin 1 null mutant ears develop fewer, morphologically normal hair cells in
smaller sensory epithelia devoid of innervation.

Ma Q(1), Anderson DJ, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    J Assoc Res Otolaryngol 2000 Dec;1(4):326.

The proneuronal gene neurogenin 1 (ngn1) is essential for development of the
inner-ear sensory neurons that are completely absent in ngn1 null mutants.
Neither afferent, efferent, nor autonomic nerve fibers were detected in the ears 
of ngn1 null mutants. We suggest that efferent and autonomic fibers are lost
secondarily to the absence of afferents. In this article we show that ngn1 null
mutants develop smaller sensory epithelia with morphologically normal hair cells.
In particular, the saccule is reduced dramatically and forms only a small recess 
with few hair cells along a duct connecting the utricle with the cochlea. Hair
cells of newborn ngn1 null mutants show no structural abnormalities, suggesting
that embryonic development of hair cells is independent of innervation. However, 
the less regular pattern of dispersal within sensory epithelia may be caused by
some effects of afferents or to the stunted growth of the sensory epithelia.
Tracing of facial and stato-acoustic nerves in control and ngn1 null mutants
showed that only the distal, epibranchial, placode-derived sensory neurons of the
geniculate ganglion exist in mutants. Tracing further showed that these
geniculate ganglion neurons project exclusively to the solitary tract. In
addition to the normal complement of facial branchial and visceral motoneurons,
ngnl null mutants have some trigeminal motoneurons and contralateral inner-ear
efferents projecting, at least temporarily, through the facial nerve. These data 
suggest that some neurons in the brainstem (e.g., inner-ear efferents, trigeminal
motoneurons) require afferents to grow along and redirect to ectopic cranial
nerve roots in the absence of their corresponding sensory roots.

PMCID: PMC2504536
PMID: 11545141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Dev Biol. 2001 Sep 15;237(2):258-69.

cSox3 expression and neurogenesis in the epibranchial placodes.

Abu-Elmagd M(1), Ishii Y, Cheung M, Rex M, Le Rouëdec D, Scotting PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Nottingham Children's Brain Tumour Research Centre, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham, NG7 2UH, United Kingdom.

Epibranchial placodes are local thickenings of the surface ectoderm, which give
rise to sensory neurons of the distal cranial ganglia. The development of these
placodes has remained unclear due to the lack of any definitive marker for these 
structures. We show here that the chick transcription factor, cSox3, is expressed
in four lateral patches at the rostral edge of the epibranchial arches and that
these mark the epibranchial placodes. These patches of cSox3 expression arise by 
gradual thinning from broader areas of cSox3 expression with concomitant loss of 
cSox3 in nonplacodal regions. Cells leaving the epithelial placodes as they
initiate neurogenesis, lose cSox3 expression and sequentially express Ngn1,
NeuroD, NeuroM, and Phox2a, but do not express Ngn2. This is in contrast to
studies in the mouse where it is Ngn2, rather than Ngn1, that is predominantly
expressed in epibranchial-derived neuroblasts. Overexpression of cSox3 interferes
with normal neuroblast migration and results in changes in ectodermal morphology.
Thus, cSox3 provides a useful tool for the study of placode formation, and loss
of cSox3 expression appears to be a necessary event in normal neurogenesis from
the epibranchial placodes.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11543612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Neuron. 2001 Aug 2;31(2):219-32.

Crossinhibitory activities of Ngn1 and Math1 allow specification of distinct
dorsal interneurons.

Gowan K(1), Helms AW, Hunsaker TL, Collisson T, Ebert PJ, Odom R, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

Distinct classes of neurons are generated from progenitor cells distributed in
characteristic dorsoventral patterns in the developing spinal neural tube. We
define restricted neural progenitor populations by the discrete, nonoverlapping
expression of Ngn1, Math1, and Mash1. Crossinhibition between these bHLH factors 
is demonstrated and provides a mechanism for the generation of discrete bHLH
expression domains. This precise control of bHLH factor expression is essential
for proper neural development since as demonstrated in both loss- and
gain-of-function experiments, expression of Math1 or Ngn1 in dorsal progenitor
cells determines whether LH2A/B- or dorsal Lim1/2-expressing interneurons will
develop. Together, the data suggest that although Math1 and Ngn1 appear to be
redundant with respect to neurogenesis, they have distinct functions in
specifying neuronal subtype in the dorsal neural tube.

PMID: 11502254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Neurosci Res. 2001 Jul 1;65(1):17-23.

Human medulloblastoma cell line DEV is a potent tool to screen for factors
influencing differentiation of neural stem cells.

Buzanska L(1), Spassky N, Belin MF, Giangrande A, Guillemot F, Klämbt C,
Labouesse M, Thomas JL, Domanska-Janik K, Zalc B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

The aim of our study was to investigate whether a human neural cell line could be
used as a reliable screening tool to examine the functional conservation, in
humans, of transcription factors involved in neuronal or glial specification in
other species. Gain-of-function experiments were performed on DEV cells, a cell
line derived from a human medulloblastoma. Genes encoding nine different
transcription factors were tested for their influence on the process of
specification of human DEV cells towards a neuronal or glial fate. In a first
series of experiments, DEV cells were transfected with murine genes encoding
transcription factors known to be involved in the neuronal differentiation
cascade. Neurogenins-1, -2, and -3; Mash-1; and NeuroD increased the
differentiation of DEV cells towards a neuronal phenotype by a factor of 2-3.5.
In a second series of experiments, we tested transcription factors involved in
invertebrate glial specification. In the embryonic Drosophila CNS, the
development of most glial cells depends on the master regulatory gene glial cell 
missing (gcm). Expression of gcm in DEV cells induced a twofold increase of
astrocytic and a sixfold increase of oligodendroglial cell types. Interestingly, 
expression of tramtrack69, which is required in all Drosophila glial cells,
resulted in a fourfold increase of only the oligodendrocyte phenotype. Expression
of the related tramtrack88 protein, which is not expressed in the fly glia, or
the C. elegans lin26 protein showed no effect. These results show that the
Drosophila transcription factor genes tested can conserve their function upon
transfection into the human DEV cells, qualifying this cell line as a screening
tool to analyze the mechanisms of neuronal and glial specification.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11433425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Genesis. 2001 Mar;29(3):123-32.

The use of in ovo electroporation for the rapid analysis of neural-specific
murine enhancers.

Timmer J(1), Johnson J, Niswander L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The identification and characterization of DNA sequences necessary for proper
gene expression have provided insights into gene regulation and generated tools
useful for further experimentation. Studies of developmentally regulated genes
have demonstrated how transcription factors interact at enhancers to generate
restricted patterns of expression during embryogenesis. In vertebrates, the
pursuit of such studies has relied on the generation of transgenic mice and thus 
has been limited by the time and expense required generating and characterizing
these mice. The recently developed technique of in ovo electroporation allows the
rapid introduction of exogenous DNA into developing chicken embryos. Here we have
used this technique to introduce DNA containing murine enhancer/reporter
constructs into cells of the chicken neural tube, resulting in appropriate
expression of the reporter. This technique has the potential to greatly reduce
the effort involved in the study of vertebrate enhancers. Furthermore, we have
characterized factors such as timing of electroporation, concentration of DNA,
and choice of basal promoters and found that they can influence the degree to
which expression of enhancer constructs reflects endogenous gene expression.

PMID: 11252053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Dev Biol. 2001 Jan 15;229(2):327-39.

Neurogenin2 expression in ventral and dorsal spinal neural tube progenitor cells 
is regulated by distinct enhancers.

Simmons AD(1), Horton S, Abney AL, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Basic Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas 75390-9111, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Neurogenin2 (NGN2) is expressed
in distinct populations of neural progenitor cells within the developing central 
and peripheral nervous systems. Transgenic mice containing ngn2/lacZ reporter
constructs were used to study the regulation of ngn2 in the developing spinal
cord. ngn2/lacZ transgenic embryos containing sequence found 5' or 3' to the ngn2
coding region express lacZ in domains that reflect the spatial and temporal
expression profile of endogenous ngn2. A 4.4-kb fragment 5' of ngn2 was
sufficient to drive lacZ expression in the ventral neural tube, whereas a 1.0-kb 
fragment located 3' of ngn2 directed expression to both dorsal and ventral
domains. Persistent -gal activity revealed that the NGN2 progenitor cells in the 
dorsal domain give rise to a subset of interneurons that send their axons to the 
floor plate, and the NGN2 progenitors in the ventral domain give rise to a subset
of motor neurons. We identified a discrete element that is required for the
activity of the ngn2 enhancer specifically in the ventral neural tube. Thus,
separable regulatory elements that direct ngn2 expression to distinct neural
progenitor populations have been defined.

PMID: 11203697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2000 Jun 30;121(2):219-22.

Expression of neural properties in olfactory cytokeratin-positive basal cell
line.

Satoh M(1), Yoshida T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Fermentation, Osaka (IFO), 2-17-85 Juso-honmachi, Yodogawa-ku,
532-8686, Osaka, Japan. satoh-motonobu@ifo.or.jp

A cytokeratin (CK)(+), horizontal basal cell (HBC)-like cell line from murine
olfactory epithelium, DBC1.2, was characterized. Histochemically, it is CK14(+), 
CK18(-), neuron-specific tubulin (NST)(+) and capable of binding Bandeiraea
simplicifolia lectin I. RT-PCR studies revealed that it expresses mRNAs for EGF
receptor, NST, Pax-6, but not for Mash-1 and neurogenin-1. Retinoic acid reduced 
the expression of CK14 and CKs recognized by polyclonal anti-keratin antibody,
whereas it induced nestin. These results suggest that DBC1.2 shares the
properties of HBCs and neural cells.

PMID: 10876035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Development. 2000 Jul;127(14):3021-30.

Misexpression of basic helix-loop-helix genes in the murine cerebral cortex
affects cell fate choices and neuronal survival.

Cai L(1), Morrow EM, Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

To investigate the role(s) of basic helix-loop-helix genes (bHLH) genes in the
developing murine cerebral cortex, Mash1, Math2, Math3, Neurogenin1 (Ngn1), Ngn2,
NeuroD, NeuroD2 and Id1 were transduced in vivo into the embryonic and postnatal 
cerebral cortex using retrovirus vectors. The morphology and location of infected
cells were analyzed at postnatal stages. The data indicate that a subset of bHLH 
genes are capable of regulating the choice of neuronal versus glial fate and
that, when misexpressed, they can be deleterious to the survival of
differentiating neurons, but not glia.

PMID: 10862740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Dev Dyn. 2000 May;218(1):189-94.

A fragment of the Neurogenin1 gene confers regulated expression of a reporter
gene in vitro and in vivo.

Murray RC(1), Tapscott SJ, Petersen JW, Calof AL, McCormick MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of California, Irvine,
College of Medicine, 92697-1275, USA.

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor neurogenin1 is required for
proper nervous system development in vertebrates. It is expressed in neuronal
precursors during embryonic development and is thought to play a role in
specifying neuronal fate. To investigate the regulation of neurogenin1
expression, the transcriptional start site of the gene was identified and a
2.7-kb fragment ending in the first exon was shown to possess basal promoter
activity. This 2.7-kb fragment was able to promote expression of reporter genes
in P19 cells under conditions in which expression of endogenous neurogenin1 was
induced. Importantly, the 2.7-kb fragment was able to drive expression of a lacZ 
reporter gene in transgenic mice in most tissues in which neurogenin1 is normally
expressed, including those peripheral ganglia that fail to develop in neurogenin1
"knockout" mice. These findings identify a regulatory region containing elements 
responsible for appropriate expression of a gene with a crucial role in
generating the vertebrate nervous system.

PMID: 10822270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Development. 2000 Feb;127(4):693-702.

Generation of neurons by transient expression of neural bHLH proteins in
mammalian cells.

Farah MH(1), Olson JM, Sucic HB, Hume RI, Tapscott SJ, Turner DL.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Health Research Institute, Neuroscience Program, and Department of
Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48104-1687, USA.

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are known to function during 
mammalian neurogenesis. Here we show that transient transfection of vectors
expressing neuroD2, MASH1, ngn1 or related neural bHLH proteins, with their
putative dimerization partner E12, can convert mouse P19 embryonal carcinoma
cells into differentiated neurons. Transfected cells express numerous
neuron-specific proteins, adopt a neuronal morphology and are electrically
excitable. Thus, the expression of neural bHLH proteins is sufficient to confer a
neuronal fate on uncommitted mammalian cells. Neuronal differentiation of
transfected cells is preceded by elevated expression of the cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) and cell cycle withdrawal. This demonstrates that the 
bHLH proteins can link neuronal differentiation to withdrawal from the cell
cycle, possibly by activating the expression of p27(Kip1). The ability to
generate mammalian neurons by transient expression of neural bHLH proteins should
create new opportunities for studying neurogenesis and devising neural repair
strategies.

PMID: 10648228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Development. 2000 Jan;127(2):425-35.

Regulation of neurogenesis by interactions between HEN1 and neuronal LMO
proteins.

Bao J(1), Talmage DA, Role LW, Gautier J.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, College of Physicians & Surgeons,
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Basic-helix-loop-helix transcription factors regulate neurogenesis and neuronal
differentiation by as yet unknown mechanisms. We show that an embryonic
neuronal-specific basic-helix-loop-helix protein, HEN1 (also known as NSCL1 or
NHLH), interacts with 'LIM only' proteins. Examination of the expression patterns
of XHEN1 and XLMO-3, the Xenopus homologues of these human genes, reveals
extensive overlap during early neurogenesis: at the onset of gastrulation on the 
dorsal side of the blastopore lip and, subsequently, in the prospective neural
plate. Binding of XLMO-3 increases the transcriptional activity of XHEN1 in vivo.
Co-expression of these two genes in Xenopus embryos induces a cascade of
expression of neuronal-specific basic-helix-loop-helix proteins that leads to
neuronal differentiation. We propose that XHEN1, in concert with XLMO-3, is a
critical regulator of neurogenesis.

PMID: 10603358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Genes Dev. 1999 Jul 1;13(13):1717-28.

Neurogenin1 and neurogenin2 control two distinct waves of neurogenesis in
developing dorsal root ganglia.

Ma Q(1), Fode C, Guillemot F, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Biology, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

Different classes of sensory neurons in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) are generated
in two waves: large-diameter trkC+ and trkB+ neurons are born first, followed by 
small-diameter trkA+ neurons. All such neurons require either neurogenin (ngn) 1 
or 2, two neuronal determination genes encoding basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors. ngn2 is required primarily if not exclusively for the
generation of trkC+ and trkB+ neurons, whereas the generation of most or all
trkA+ neurons requires ngn1. Comparison with previous lineage tracing data in the
chick suggests that this dichotomy reflects a requirement for the two ngns in
distinct sensory precursor populations. The neurogenesis defect in ngn2(-/-)
embryos is transient and later compensated by ngn1-dependent precursors,
suggesting that feedback or competitive interactions between these precursors may
control the proportion of different neuronal subtypes they normally produce.
These data reveal remarkable parallels in the roles of bHLH factors during
neurogenesis in the DRG, and myogenesis in the neighboring myotome.

PMCID: PMC316844
PMID: 10398684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Development. 1999 Jun;126(12):2727-37.

The zebrafish detour gene is essential for cranial but not spinal motor neuron
induction.

Chandrasekhar A(1), Schauerte HE, Haffter P, Kuwada JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1048, USA. 
anandc@missouri.edu

The zebrafish detour (dtr) mutation generates a novel neuronal phenotype. In dtr 
mutants, most cranial motor neurons, especially the branchiomotor, are missing.
However, spinal motor neurons are generated normally. The loss of cranial motor
neurons is not due to aberrant hindbrain patterning, failure of neurogenesis,
increased cell death or absence of hh expression. Furthermore, activation of the 
Hh pathway, which normally induces branchiomotor neurons, fails to induce motor
neurons in the dtr hindbrain. Despite this, not all Hh-mediated regulation of
hindbrain development is abolished since the regulation of a neural gene by Hh is
intact in the dtr hindbrain. Finally, dtr can function cell autonomously to
induce branchiomotor neurons. These results suggest that detour encodes a
component of the Hh signaling pathway that is essential for the induction of
motor neurons in the hindbrain but not in the spinal cord and that dtr function
is required for the induction of only a subset of Hh-mediated events in the
hindbrain.

PMID: 10331983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Dev Dyn. 1998 Sep;213(1):92-104.

Expression of zebrafish bHLH genes ngn1 and nrd defines distinct stages of neural
differentiation.

Korzh V(1), Sleptsova I, Liao J, He J, Gong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Agrobiology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore. vlad@ima.org.sg

Two zebrafish bHLH genes, neurogenin-related gene I (ngn1) and neuroD (nrd), have
been isolated. ngn1 expression is initiated at the end of gastrulation in the
neural plate and defines broad domains of cells that probably possess an ability 
to develop as neurons. This finding suggests that ngn1 may play a role during
determination of cell fate in neuroblasts. ngn1 and pax-b are expressed in a
mutually exclusive manner. nrd expression follows that of ngn1 in restricted
populations of cells selected from ngn1-positive clusters of cells. The earliest 
nrd-positive cells in the brain and the trunk are a subset of the primary
neurons. ngn1 is not expressed in the eye. Here, nrd transcription is activated
at 25 hours postfertilization in the ventral retina. Expression of islet-1 occurs
in nrd-positive cells after expression of nrd, and the expression of the two
genes partially overlaps in time. These observations suggest that during eye
development nrd expression may follow expression of some other neurodetermination
gene(s). This supports the idea that expression of nrd is a necessary step
leading toward overt neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 9733104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Neuron. 1998 Mar;20(3):469-82.

neurogenin1 is essential for the determination of neuronal precursors for
proximal cranial sensory ganglia.

Ma Q(1), Chen Z, del Barco Barrantes I, de la Pompa JL, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California Institute of 
Technology, Pasadena 91125, USA.

The NEUROGENINS (NGNs) are neural-specific basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
transcription factors. Mouse embryos lacking ngn1 fail to generate the proximal
subset of cranial sensory neurons. ngn1 is required for the activation of a
cascade of downstream bHLH factors, including NeuroD, MATH3, and NSCL1. ngn1 is
expressed by placodal ectodermal cells and acts prior to neuroblast delamination.
Moreover, NGN1 positively regulates the Delta homolog DLL1 and can be negatively 
regulated by Notch signaling. Thus, ngn1 functions similarly to the proneural
genes in Drosophila. However, the initial pattern of ngn1 expression appears to
be Notch independent. Taken together with the fact that ectopic ngn1 expression
can convert ectodermal cells to neurons in Xenopus (Ma et al., 1996), these data 
and those of Fode et al. (1998 [this issue of Neuron]) identify ngns as
vertebrate neuronal determination genes, analogous to myoD and myf5 in
myogenesis.

PMID: 9539122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Development. 1997 Nov;124(22):4557-69.

The activity of neurogenin1 is controlled by local cues in the zebrafish embryo.

Blader P(1), Fischer N, Gradwohl G, Guillemot F, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, France.

Zebrafish neurogenin1 encodes a basic helix-loop-helix protein which shares
structural and functional characteristics with proneural genes of Drosophila
melanogaster. neurogenin1 is expressed in the early neural plate in domains
comprising more cells than the primary neurons known to develop from these
regions and its expression is modulated by Delta/Notch signalling, suggesting
that it is a target of lateral inhibition. Misexpression of neurogenin1 in the
embryo results in development of ectopic neurons. Markers for different neuronal 
subtypes are not ectopically expressed in the same patterns in
neurogenin1-injected embryos suggesting that the final identity of the
ectopically induced neurons is modulated by local cues. Induction of ectopic
motor neurons by neurogeninl requires coexpression of a dominant negative
regulatory subunit of protein kinase A, an intracellular transducer of hedgehog
signals. Moreover, the pattern of endogenous neurogenin1 expression in the neural
plate is expanded in response to elevated levels of Hedgehog (Hh) signalling or
abolished as a result of inhibition of Hh signalling. Together these data suggest
that Hh signals regulate neurogenin1 expression and subsequently modulate the
type of neurons produced by Neurogenin1 activity.

PMID: 9409673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. J Neurosci. 1997 May 15;17(10):3644-52.

Mash1 and neurogenin1 expression patterns define complementary domains of
neuroepithelium in the developing CNS and are correlated with regions expressing 
notch ligands.

Ma Q(1), Sommer L, Cserjesi P, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, California
Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, USA.

Genetic studies in Drosophila and in vertebrates have implicated basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) genes in neuronal fate determination and cell type
specification. We have compared directly the expression of Mash1 and neurogenin1 
(ngn1), two bHLH genes that are expressed specifically at early stages of
neurogenesis. In the PNS these genes are expressed in complementary autonomic and
sensory lineages. In the CNS in situ hybridization to serial sections and
double-labeling experiments indicate that Mash1 and ngn1 are expressed in
adjacent and nonoverlapping regions of the neuroepithelium that correspond to
future functionally distinct areas of the brain. We also showed that in the PNS
several other bHLH genes exhibit similar lineal restriction, as do ngn1 and
Mash1, suggesting that complementary cascades of bHLH factors are involved in PNS
development. Finally, we found that there is a close association between
expression of ngn1 and Mash1 and that of two Notch ligands. These observations
suggest a basic plan for vertebrate neurogenesis whereby regionalization of the
neuroepithelium is followed by activation of a relatively small number of bHLH
genes, which are used repeatedly in complementary domains to promote neural
determination and differentiation.

PMID: 9133387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Development. 1997 Apr;124(8):1611-21.

Mash1 activates a cascade of bHLH regulators in olfactory neuron progenitors.

Cau E(1), Gradwohl G, Fode C, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, Illkirch, CU de Strasbourg, France.

The lineage of olfactory neurons has been relatively well characterized at the
cellular level, but the genes that regulate the proliferation and differentiation
of their progenitors are currently unknown. In this study, we report the
isolation of a novel murine gene, Math4C/neurogenin1, which is distantly related 
to the Drosophila proneural gene atonal. We show that Math4C/neurogenin1 and the 
basic helix-loop-helix gene Mash1 are expressed in the olfactory epithelium by
different dividing progenitor populations, while another basic helix-loop-helix
gene, NeuroD, is expressed at the onset of neuronal differentiation. These
expression patterns suggest that each gene marks a distinct stage of olfactory
neuron progenitor development, in the following sequence:
Mash1>Math4C/neurogenin1>NeuroD. We have previously reported that inactivation of
Mash1 function leads to a severe reduction in the number of olfactory neurons. We
show here that most cells in the olfactory epithelium of Mash1 mutant embryos
fail to express Math4C/neurogenin1 or NeuroD. Strikingly, a subset of progenitor 
cells in a ventrocaudal domain of Mash1 mutant olfactory epithelium still express
Math4C/neurogenin1 and NeuroD and differentiate into neurons. Cells in this
domain also express Math4A/neurogenin2, another member of the Math4/neurogenin
gene family, and not Mash1. Our results demonstrate that Mash1 is required at an 
early stage in the olfactory neuron lineage to initiate a differentiation program
involving Math4C/neurogenin1 and NeuroD. Another gene activates a similar program
in a separate population of olfactory neuron progenitors.

PMID: 9108377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Genomics. 1997 Mar 1;40(2):355-7.

NEUROD2 and NEUROD3 genes map to human chromosomes 17q12 and 5q23-q31 and mouse
chromosomes 11 and 13, respectively.

Tamimi RM(1), Steingrimsson E, Montgomery-Dyer K, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA,
Tapscott SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.

NEUROD2 and NEUROD3 are transcription factors involved in neurogenesis that are
related to the basic helix-loop-helix protein NEUROD. NEUROD2 maps to human
chromosome 17q12 and mouse chromosome 11. NEUROD3 maps to human chromosome
5q23-q31 and mouse chromosome 13.

PMID: 9119405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Oct;16(10):5792-800.

NeuroD2 and neuroD3: distinct expression patterns and transcriptional activation 
potentials within the neuroD gene family.

McCormick MB(1), Tamimi RM, Snider L, Asakura A, Bergstrom D, Tapscott SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.

We have identified two new genes, neuroD2 and neuroD3, on the basis of their
similarity to the neurogenic basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene neuroD. The
predicted amino acid sequence of neuroD2 shows a high degree of homology to
neuroD and MATH-2/NEX-1 in the bHLH region, whereas neuroD3 is a more distantly
related family member. neuroD3 is expressed transiently during embryonic
development, with the highest levels of expression between days 10 and 12.
neuroD2 is initially expressed at embryonic day 11, with persistent expression in
the adult nervous system. In situ and Northern (RNA) analyses demonstrate that
different regions of the adult nervous system have different relative amounts of 
neuroD and neuroD2 RNA. Similar to neuroD, expression of neuroD2 in developing
Xenopus laevis embryos results in ectopic neurogenesis, indicating that neuroD2
mediates neuronal differentiation. Transfection of vectors expressing neuroD and 
neuroD2 into P19 cells shows that both can activate expression through simple
E-box-driven reporter constructs and can activate a reporter driven by the
neuroD2 promoter region, but the GAP-43 promoter is preferentially activated by
neuroD2. The noncongruent expression pattern and target gene specificity of these
highly related neurogenic bHLH proteins make them candidates for conferring
specific aspects of the neuronal phenotype.

PMCID: PMC231580
PMID: 8816493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


