
1. Nature. 2016 Mar 3;531(7592):47-52. doi: 10.1038/nature16965. Epub 2016 Feb 24.

Genomic analyses identify molecular subtypes of pancreatic cancer.

Bailey P, Chang DK, Nones K, Johns AL, Patch AM, Gingras MC, Miller DK, Christ
AN, Bruxner TJ, Quinn MC, Nourse C, Murtaugh LC, Harliwong I, Idrisoglu S,
Manning S, Nourbakhsh E, Wani S, Fink L, Holmes O, Chin V, Anderson MJ, Kazakoff 
S, Leonard C, Newell F, Waddell N, Wood S, Xu Q, Wilson PJ, Cloonan N, Kassahn
KS, Taylor D, Quek K, Robertson A, Pantano L, Mincarelli L, Sanchez LN, Evers L, 
Wu J, Pinese M, Cowley MJ, Jones MD, Colvin EK, Nagrial AM, Humphrey ES,
Chantrill LA, Mawson A, Humphris J, Chou A, Pajic M, Scarlett CJ, Pinho AV,
Giry-Laterriere M, Rooman I, Samra JS, Kench JG, Lovell JA, Merrett ND, Toon CW, 
Epari K, Nguyen NQ, Barbour A, Zeps N, Moran-Jones K, Jamieson NB, Graham JS,
Duthie F, Oien K, Hair J, Grützmann R, Maitra A, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Wolfgang
CL, Morgan RA, Lawlor RT, Corbo V, Bassi C, Rusev B, Capelli P, Salvia R, Tortora
G, Mukhopadhyay D, Petersen GM; Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative,
Munzy DM, Fisher WE, Karim SA, Eshleman JR, Hruban RH, Pilarsky C, Morton JP,
Sansom OJ, Scarpa A, Musgrove EA, Bailey UM, Hofmann O, Sutherland RL, Wheeler
DA, Gill AJ, Gibbs RA, Pearson JV, Waddell N, Biankin AV, Grimmond SM.

Collaborators: Biankin AV, Johns AL, Axford CJ, Mawson A, Chang DK, Scarlett CJ, 
Brancato MA, Simpson SH, Martyn-Smith M, Chantrill LA, Chin VT, Chou A, Cowley
MJ, Humphris JL, Mead R, Nagrial AM, Pajic M, Pettit J, Pinese M, Rooman I, Wu J,
Watson C, Steinmann A, Lee HC, Wong R, Pinho AV, Giry-Laterriere M, Daly RJ,
Musgrove EA, Sutherland RL, Grimmond SM, Waddell N, Kassahn KS, Miller DK, Wilson
PJ, Patch AM, Song S, Harliwong I, Idrisoglu S, Nourse C, Nourbakhsh E, Manning
S, Wani S, Gongora M, Anderson M, Holmes O, Leonard C, Taylor D, Wood S, Xu C,
Nones K, Fink J, Christ A, Bruxner T, Cloonan N, Newell F, Pearson JV, Bailey P, 
Quinn M, Nagaraj S, Kazakoff S, Waddell N, Krisnan K, Quek K, Wood D, Samra JS,
Gill AJ, Pavlakis N, Guminski A, Toon C, Asghari R, Merrett ND, Pavey D, Das A,
Cosman PH, Ismail K, O'Connnor C, Lam VW, McLeod D, Pleass HC, Richardson A,
James V, Kench JG, Cooper CL, Joseph D, Sandroussi C, Crawford M, Gallagher J,
Texler M, Forest C, Laycock A, Epari KP, Ballal M, Fletcher DR, Mukhedkar S,
Gairdner C, Spry NA, DeBoer B, Chai M, Zeps N, Beilin M, Feeney K, Nguyen NQ,
Ruszkiewicz AR, Worthley C, Tan CP, Chen J, Brooke-Smith ME, Papangelis V, Tang
H, Barbour AP, Clouston AD, Martin P, O'Rourke TJ, Fawcett JW, Slater K, Yeung S,
Hatzifotis M, Hodgkinson P, Christophi C, Nikfarjam M, Mountain A, Scarpa A,
Lawlor RT, Sperandio N, Bonizzato G, Grimaldi S, Cantù C, Merlini P, Turri G, Pea
A, Pedrazzani C, Ruzzenente A, Gobbo S, Martignoni G, Girelli R, Biankin AV,
Grimmond SM, Chang DK, Musgrove EA, Jones MD, Nourse C, Jamieson NB, Graham JS,
Biankin AV, Chang DK, Jones MD, Jamieson NB, Graham JS.

Integrated genomic analysis of 456 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas identified
32 recurrently mutated genes that aggregate into 10 pathways: KRAS, TGF-ß, WNT,
NOTCH, ROBO/SLIT signalling, G1/S transition, SWI-SNF, chromatin modification,
DNA repair and RNA processing. Expression analysis defined 4 subtypes: (1)
squamous; (2) pancreatic progenitor; (3) immunogenic; and (4) aberrantly
differentiated endocrine exocrine (ADEX) that correlate with histopathological
characteristics. Squamous tumours are enriched for TP53 and KDM6A mutations,
upregulation of the TP63<U+2206>N transcriptional network, hypermethylation of
pancreatic endodermal cell-fate determining genes and have a poor prognosis.
Pancreatic progenitor tumours preferentially express genes involved in early
pancreatic development (FOXA2/3, PDX1 and MNX1). ADEX tumours displayed
upregulation of genes that regulate networks involved in KRAS activation,
exocrine (NR5A2 and RBPJL), and endocrine differentiation (NEUROD1 and NKX2-2).
Immunogenic tumours contained upregulated immune networks including pathways
involved in acquired immune suppression. These data infer differences in the
molecular evolution of pancreatic cancer subtypes and identify opportunities for 
therapeutic development.

PMID: 26909576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Neurochem Res. 2016 Feb;41(1-2):450-62. doi: 10.1007/s11064-016-1861-9. Epub 2016
Feb 11.

Keratan Sulfate Regulates the Switch from Motor Neuron to Oligodendrocyte
Generation During Development of the Mouse Spinal Cord.

Hashimoto H(1), Ishino Y(1), Jiang W(1,)(2), Yoshimura T(1,)(2), Takeda-Uchimura 
Y(3), Uchimura K(3), Kadomatsu K(3), Ikenaka K(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics, National Institute for
Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. (2)Department of
Physiological Sciences, School of Life Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), Hayama, Kanagawa, 240-0193, Japan.
(3)Department of Biochemistry, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Aichi, 466-8550, Japan. (4)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics,
National Institute for Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan.
ikenaka@nips.ac.jp. (5)Department of Physiological Sciences, School of Life
Sciences, SOKENDAI (The Graduate University for Advanced Studies), Hayama,
Kanagawa, 240-0193, Japan. ikenaka@nips.ac.jp.

Keratan sulfate (KS) is a sulfated glycosaminoglycan and has been shown to bind
to sonic hedgehog (Shh), which act as a morphogen to regulate the embryonic
spinal cord development. We found highly sulfated KS was present in the floor
plate (including lateral floor plate) and the notochord . This expression
colocalized with Shh expression. To understand the roles of KS, we analyzed the
embryonic spinal cord of GlcNAc6ST-1, KS chain synthesizing enzyme, knock-out
(KO) mice. At E12.5, the pMN domain, whose formation is controlled by Shh
signaling, became shifted ventrally in GlcNAc6ST-1 KO mice. In addition, the
expression patterns of Patched1 and Gli1, two Shh signaling reporter genes,
differed between wild type (WT) and GlcNAc6ST-1 KO mice at E12.5. Next, we
focused on cell types generated from the pMN domain; namely, motor neurons and
subsequently oligodendrocytes. The number of PDGFRa(+) [a marker for
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs)] cells was low in the E12.5 mutant spinal 
cord, while motor neuron production was increased. Thus the switch from motor
neuron generation to OPC generation was delayed in the pMN domain. Furthermore,
we investigated the cause for this delayed switch in the pMN domain. The number
of Olig2, Nkx2.2 double-positive cells was less in GlcNAc6ST-1 KO mice than in WT
mice. In contrast, the number of Olig2, Neurogenin2 (Ngn2) double-positive cells 
related to the motor neuron specification was significantly greater in the KO
mice. These results indicate that KS is important for the late phase Shh
signaling and contributes to motor neuron to OPC generation switch.

PMID: 26869039  [PubMed - in process]


3. Mod Pathol. 2016 Apr;29(4):370-80. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.31. Epub 2016 Feb 
5.

Evaluation of NKX2-2 expression in round cell sarcomas and other tumors with
EWSR1 rearrangement: imperfect specificity for Ewing sarcoma.

Hung YP(1), Fletcher CD(1), Hornick JL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

Ewing sarcoma shows considerable histologic overlap with other round cell tumors.
NKX2-2, a homeodomain transcription factor involved in neuroendocrine/glial
differentiation and a downstream target of EWSR1-FLI1, has been reported as an
immunohistochemical marker for Ewing sarcoma. We assessed the specificity of
NKX2-2 for Ewing sarcoma compared with other round cell malignant neoplasms and
other soft tissue tumors with EWSR1 translocations. We evaluated whole-tissue
sections from 270 cases: 40 Ewing sarcomas (4 with atypical/large cell features),
20 CIC-DUX4 sarcomas, 5 BCOR-CCNB3 sarcomas, 9 unclassified round cell sarcomas, 
10 poorly differentiated synovial sarcomas, 10 lymphoblastic lymphomas, 10
alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas, 10 embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas, 10 Merkel cell
carcinomas, 10 small cell carcinomas, 20 melanomas, 5 NUT midline carcinomas, 10 
Wilms tumors, 10 neuroblastomas, 10 olfactory neuroblastomas, 12 mesenchymal
chondrosarcomas, 10 angiomatoid fibrous histiocytomas, 10 clear cell sarcomas, 5 
gastrointestinal clear cell sarcoma-like tumors, 5 desmoplastic small round cell 
tumors, 10 extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcomas, 10 soft tissue and cutaneous
myoepitheliomas, and 19 myoepithelial carcinomas. NKX2-2 positivity was defined
as moderate-to-strong nuclear immunoreactivity in at least 5% of cells. NKX2-2
was positive in 37/40 (93%) Ewing sarcomas, including all atypical Ewing sarcomas
and cases with known EWSR1-FLI1 or EWSR1-ERG fusion; 85% of Ewing sarcomas showed
diffuse (>50%) staining. NKX2-2 was positive in 9 (75%) mesenchymal
chondrosarcomas, 8 (80%) olfactory neuroblastomas, 1 CIC-DUX4 sarcoma, 1 poorly
differentiated synovial sarcoma, 1 neuroblastoma, 2 unclassified round cell
sarcomas, and 3 small cell carcinomas; all other EWSR1-associated tumors were
negative for NKX2-2, apart from 1 desmoplastic small round cell tumor, 1
myoepithelioma, and 1 myoepithelial carcinoma. In summary, NKX2-2 is a sensitive 
but imperfectly specific marker for Ewing sarcoma. Nonetheless, NKX2-2 may be
helpful to distinguish Ewing sarcoma from some histologic mimics including
CIC-DUX4 and BCOR-CCNB3 sarcomas. Most other EWSR1-associated soft tissue tumors 
are negative for NKX2-2.

PMID: 26847175  [PubMed - in process]


4. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 14;6:19223. doi: 10.1038/srep19223.

Wnt9a deficiency discloses a repressive role of Tcf7l2 on endocrine
differentiation in the embryonic pancreas.

Pujadas G(1,)(2,)(3), Cervantes S(1,)(2), Tutusaus A(1), Ejarque M(1,)(2,)(3),
Sanchez L(1), García A(1,)(2), Esteban Y(1,)(2), Fargas L(4), Alsina B(4),
Hartmann C(5), Gomis R(1,)(2,)(3), Gasa R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Research Laboratory, Institut d'Investigations
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas, Barcelona,
Spain. (3)University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Departament de Ciències
Experimentals i de la Salut, Facultat de la Salut i de la Vida, Universitat
Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Dept. of Bone and Skeletal Research, Institute
of Experimental Musculoskeletal Medicine (IEMM), University Hospital Muenster,
Muenster, Germany.

Transcriptional and signaling networks establish complex cross-regulatory
interactions that drive cellular differentiation during development. Using
microarrays we identified the gene encoding the ligand Wnt9a as a candidate
target of Neurogenin3, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor that
functions as a master regulator of pancreatic endocrine differentiation. Here we 
show that Wnt9a is expressed in the embryonic pancreas and that its deficiency
enhances activation of the endocrine transcriptional program and increases the
number of endocrine cells at birth. We identify the gene encoding the endocrine
transcription factor Nkx2-2 as one of the most upregulated genes in Wnt9a-ablated
pancreases and associate its activation to reduced expression of the Wnt effector
Tcf7l2. Accordingly, in vitro studies confirm that Tcf7l2 represses activation of
Nkx2-2 by Neurogenin3 and inhibits Nkx2-2 expression in differentiated ß-cells.
Further, we report that Tcf7l2 protein levels decline upon initiation of
endocrine differentiation in vivo, disclosing the downregulation of this factor
in the developing endocrine compartment. These findings highlight the notion that
modulation of signalling cues by lineage-promoting factors is pivotal for
controlling differentiation programs.

PMCID: PMC4725895
PMID: 26771085  [PubMed - in process]


5. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 7;11(1):e0146503. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146503.
eCollection 2016.

CXCR7 Is Involved in Human Oligodendroglial Precursor Cell Maturation.

Kremer D(1), Cui QL(2), Göttle P(1), Kuhlmann T(3), Hartung HP(1), Antel J(2),
Küry P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University,
Düsseldorf, Germany. (2)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (3)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital
Münster, Münster, Germany.

Differentiation of oligodendroglial precursor cells (OPCs), a crucial
prerequisite for central nervous system (CNS) remyelination in diseases such as
Multiple Sclerosis (MS), is modulated by a multitude of extrinsic and intrinsic
factors. In a previous study we revealed that the chemokine CXCL12 stimulates
rodent OPC differentiation via activation of its receptor CXCR7. We could now
demonstrate that CXCR7 is also expressed on NogoA- and Nkx2.2-positive
oligodendroglial cells in human MS brains and that stimulation of cultured
primary fetal human OPCs with CXCL12 promotes their differentiation as measured
by surface marker expression and morphologic complexity. Pharmacological
inhibition of CXCR7 effectively blocks these CXCL12-dependent effects. Our
findings therefore suggest that a specific activation of CXCR7 could provide a
means to promote oligodendroglial differentiation facilitating endogenous
remyelination activities.

PMCID: PMC4704822
PMID: 26741980  [PubMed - in process]


6. Am J Surg Pathol. 2016 Mar;40(3):313-23. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000570.

CIC-rearranged Sarcomas: A Study of 20 Cases and Comparisons With Ewing Sarcomas.

Yoshida A(1), Goto K, Kodaira M, Kobayashi E, Kawamoto H, Mori T, Yoshimoto S,
Endo O, Kodama N, Kushima R, Hiraoka N, Motoi T, Kawai A.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology and Clinical Laboratories §Medical Oncology
<U+2225>Musculoskeletal Oncology ¶Pediatric Oncology #Head and Neck Oncology Rare
Cancer Center, National Cancer Center Hospital §§Department of Pathology, Tokyo
Metropolitan Cancer and Infectious Diseases Center Komagome Hospital, Tokyo
Departments of Diagnostic Pathology **Neurosurgery, Kainan Hospital, Aichi
Departments of Orthopedic Surgery Clinical Laboratory Medicine and Diagnostic
Pathology, Shiga University of Medical Science, Shiga, Japan.

The CIC gene rearrangement exists in a subset of small round cell sarcomas. As
the nosologic relationship of these sarcomas to Ewing sarcomas remains
undetermined, we examined 20 CIC-rearranged sarcomas to compare their
clinicopathologic features with those of Ewing sarcomas. The CIC-rearranged
sarcomas were from a group of 14 men and 6 women with a median age of 24.5 years.
The primary tumor sites included the limbs, trunk wall, internal trunk, lung,
cerebrum, and pharynx. A comparison of the demographic and clinical
characteristics of the 20 patients with CIC-rearranged sarcomas with those of the
53 near-consecutive patients with EWSR1-rarranged Ewing sarcomas showed that
there were no differences with respect to their ages and sexes. Although none of 
the CIC-rearranged sarcomas arose in the bone, 40% of the Ewing sarcomas
primarily affected the skeleton. The overall survival of patients with Ewing
sarcomas was significantly better than that for patients with CIC-rearranged
sarcomas. A histologic comparison of the CIC-rearranged sarcomas with 20
EWSR1-rearranged Ewing sarcomas showed significantly higher degrees of
lobulation, nuclear pleomorphism, the prominence of the nucleoli, spindle cell
elements, and myxoid changes in the CIC-rearranged sarcomas. Distinguishing
immunohistochemical features included heterogenous CD99 reactivity, nuclear WT1
expression, and calretinin expression in the CIC-rearranged sarcomas and NKX2.2
expression in the Ewing sarcomas. CIC-rearranged sarcomas are distinct from Ewing
sarcomas clinically, morphologically, and immunohistochemically, and they should 
be considered a separate entity rather than being grouped within the same family 
of tumors.

PMID: 26685084  [PubMed - in process]


7. Glia. 2016 Apr;64(4):583-602. doi: 10.1002/glia.22950. Epub 2015 Dec 17.

IL-1ß induces hypomyelination in the periventricular white matter through
inhibition of oligodendrocyte progenitor cell maturation via FYN/MEK/ERK
signaling pathway in septic neonatal rats.

Xie D(1), Shen F(1,)(2), He S(3), Chen M(1,)(2), Han Q(1), Fang M(1), Zeng H(1), 
Chen C(1), Deng Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care and Emergency, Guangdong General Hospital,
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Shantou University Medical College (FCS), Shantou, Guangdong, People's
Republic of China. 515063. (3)Department of Neonatology, Guangdong General
Hospital, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.

Neuroinflammation elicited by microglia plays a key role in periventricular white
matter (PWM) damage (PWMD) induced by infectious exposure. This study aimed to
determine if microglia-derived interleukin-1ß (IL-1ß) would induce
hypomyelination through suppression of maturation of oligodendrocyte progenitor
cells (OPCs) in the developing PWM. Sprague-Dawley rats (1-day old) were injected
with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (1 mg/kg) intraperitoneally, following which
upregulated expression of IL-1ß and IL-1 receptor 1 (IL-1R1 ) was observed. This 
was coupled with enhanced apoptosis and suppressed proliferation of OPCs in the
PWM. The number of PDGFR-a and NG2-positive OPCs was significantly decreased in
the PWM at 24 h and 3 days after injection of LPS, whereas it was increased at 14
days and 28 days. The protein expression of Olig1, Olig2, and Nkx2.2 was
significantly reduced, and mRNA expression of Tcf4 and Axin2 was upregulated in
the developing PWM after LPS injection. The expression of myelin basic protein
(MBP) and 2',3'-cyclic-nucleotide 3"-phosphodiesterase (CNPase) was downregulated
in the PWM at 14 days and 28 days after LPS injection; this was linked to
reduction of the proportion of myelinated axons and thinner myelin sheath as
revealed by electron microscopy. Primary cultured OPCs treated with IL-1ß showed 
the failure of maturation and proliferation. Furthermore, FYN/MEK/ERK signaling
pathway was involved in suppression of maturation of primary OPCs induced by
IL-1ß administration. Our results suggest that following LPS injection, microglia
are activated and produce IL-1ß in the PWM in the neonatal rats. Excess IL-1ß
inhibits the maturation of OPCs via suppression of FYN/MEK/ERK phosphorylation
thereby leading to axonal hypomyelination. GLIA 2016;64:583-602.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26678483  [PubMed - in process]


8. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 3;10(12):e0144100. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144100.
eCollection 2015.

The Role of ARX in Human Pancreatic Endocrine Specification.

Gage BK(1), Asadi A(1), Baker RK(1), Webber TD(1), Wang R(2), Itoh M(3), Hayashi 
M(4), Miyata R(4), Akashi T(5), Kieffer TJ(1,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (2)Departments of Physiology,
Pharmacology & Medicine, Child Health Research Institute, the University of
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada. (3)National Center of Neurology and
Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science,
Tokyo, Japan. (5)Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department
of Surgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

The in vitro differentiation of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) offers a model
system to explore human development. Humans with mutations in the transcription
factor Aristaless Related Homeobox (ARX) often suffer from the syndrome X-linked 
lissencephaly with ambiguous genitalia (XLAG), affecting many cell types
including those of the pancreas. Indeed, XLAG pancreatic islets lack glucagon and
pancreatic polypeptide-positive cells but retain somatostatin, insulin, and
ghrelin-positive cells. To further examine the role of ARX in human pancreatic
endocrine development, we utilized genomic editing in hESCs to generate deletions
in ARX. ARX knockout hESCs retained pancreatic differentiation capacity and ARX
knockout endocrine cells were biased toward somatostatin-positive cells (94% of
endocrine cells) with reduced pancreatic polypeptide (rarely detected), glucagon 
(90% reduced) and insulin-positive (65% reduced) lineages. ARX knockout
somatostatin-positive cells shared expression patterns with human fetal and adult
d-cells. Differentiated ARX knockout cells upregulated PAX4, NKX2.2, ISL1, HHEX, 
PCSK1, PCSK2 expression while downregulating PAX6 and IRX2. Re-expression of ARX 
in ARX knockout pancreatic progenitors reduced HHEX and increased PAX6 and
insulin expression following differentiation. Taken together these data suggest
that ARX plays a key role in pancreatic endocrine fate specification of
pancreatic polypeptide, somatostatin, glucagon and insulin positive cells from
hESCs.

PMCID: PMC4669132
PMID: 26633894  [PubMed - in process]


9. Neural Dev. 2015 Oct 31;10:26. doi: 10.1186/s13064-015-0053-7.

Pax6 is required intrinsically by thalamic progenitors for the normal molecular
patterning of thalamic neurons but not the growth and guidance of their axons.

Clegg JM(1), Li Z(2), Molinek M(3), Caballero IM(4,)(5), Manuel MN(6), Price
DJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. J.M.Clegg@ed.ac.uk. (2)Centre
for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building, George
Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. Ziwen.Cass.Li@ed.ac.uk. (3)Centre for Integrative
Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building, George Square,
Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. M.Molinek@ed.ac.uk. (4)Centre for Integrative Physiology,
University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD,
UK. isabel.martin.caballero@ki.se. (5)Current address: Laboratory of Molecular
Neurobiology, Karolinska Institute, 17177, Scheeles Väg 1, Sweden.
isabel.martin.caballero@ki.se. (6)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University
of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK.
Martine.Manuel@ed.ac.uk. (7)Centre for Integrative Physiology, University of
Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK.
David.Price@ed.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: In mouse embryos, the Pax6 transcription factor is expressed in the
progenitors of thalamic neurons but not in thalamic neurons themselves. Its
null-mutation causes early mis-patterning of thalamic progenitors. It is known
that thalamic neurons generated by Pax6 (-/-) progenitors do not develop their
normal connections with the cortex, but it is not clear why. We investigated the 
extent to which defects intrinsic to the thalamus are responsible.
RESULTS: We first confirmed that, in constitutive Pax6 (-/-) mutants, the axons
of thalamic neurons fail to enter the telencephalon and, instead, many of them
take an abnormal path to the hypothalamus, whose expression of Slits would
normally repel them. We found that thalamic neurons show reduced expression of
the Slit receptor Robo2 in Pax6 (-/-) mutants, which might enhance the ability of
their axons to enter the hypothalamus. Remarkably, however, in chimeras
comprising a mixture of Pax6 (-/-) and Pax6 (+/+) cells, Pax6 (-/-) thalamic
neurons are able to generate axons that exit the diencephalon, take normal
trajectories through the telencephalon and avoid the hypothalamus. This occurs
despite abnormalities in their molecular patterning (they express Nkx2.2, unlike 
normal thalamic neurons) and their reduced expression of Robo2. In conditional
mutants, acute deletion of Pax6 from the forebrain at the time when thalamic
axons are starting to grow does not prevent the development of the
thalamocortical tract, suggesting that earlier extra-thalamic patterning and /or 
morphological defects are the main cause of thalamocortical tract failure in Pax6
(-/-) constitutive mutants.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that Pax6 is required by thalamic progenitors
for the normal molecular patterning of the thalamic neurons that they generate
but thalamic neurons do not need normal Pax6-dependent patterning to become
competent to grow axons that can be guided appropriately.

PMCID: PMC4628245
PMID: 26520399  [PubMed - in process]


10. Mol Psychiatry. 2016 Jan;21(1):49-61. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.161. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Generation of functional human serotonergic neurons from fibroblasts.

Vadodaria KC(1), Mertens J(1), Paquola A(1), Bardy C(1), Li X(1,)(2), Jappelli
R(1), Fung L(1,)(2), Marchetto MC(1), Hamm M(3), Gorris M(1), Koch P(4), Gage
FH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla,
CA, USA. (2)University of California, San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, CA, USA. (3)The
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA. (4)Institute of
Reconstructive Neurobiology, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

The brain's serotonergic system centrally regulates several physiological
processes and its dysfunction has been implicated in the pathophysiology of
several neuropsychiatric disorders. While in the past our understanding of
serotonergic neurotransmission has come mainly from mouse models, the development
of pluripotent stem cell and induced fibroblast-to-neuron (iN)
transdifferentiation technologies has revolutionized our ability to generate
human neurons in vitro. Utilizing these techniques and a novel lentiviral
reporter for serotonergic neurons, we identified and overexpressed key
transcription factors to successfully generate human serotonergic neurons. We
found that overexpressing the transcription factors NKX2.2, FEV, GATA2 and LMX1B 
in combination with ASCL1 and NGN2 directly and efficiently generated
serotonergic neurons from human fibroblasts. Induced serotonergic neurons (iSNs) 
showed increased expression of specific serotonergic genes that are known to be
expressed in raphe nuclei. iSNs displayed spontaneous action potentials, released
serotonin in vitro and functionally responded to selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors (SSRIs). Here, we demonstrate the efficient generation of functional
human serotonergic neurons from human fibroblasts as a novel tool for studying
human serotonergic neurotransmission in health and disease.

PMID: 26503761  [PubMed - in process]


11. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2015 Dec 15;309(12):G975-87. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00244.2015. Epub 2015 Oct 22.

Nkx2.2 is expressed in a subset of enteroendocrine cells with expanded lineage
potential.

Gross S(1), Balderes D(1), Liu J(2), Asfaha S(3), Gu G(2), Wang TC(4), Sussel
L(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, New York; (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee; (3)Department of Digestive and
Liver Diseases, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York; and.
(4)Department of Digestive and Liver Diseases, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, New York; and Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York. (5)Department of Genetics
and Development, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York;
lgs2@columbia.edu.

There are two major stem cell populations in the intestinal crypt region that
express either Bmi1 or Lgr5; however, it has been shown that other populations in
the crypt can regain stemness. In this study, we demonstrate that the
transcription factor NK2 homeobox 2 (Nkx2.2) is expressed in enteroendocrine
cells located in the villus and crypt of the intestinal epithelium and is
coexpressed with the stem cell markers Bmi1 and Lgr5 in a subset of crypt cells. 
To determine whether Nkx2.2-expressing enteroendocrine cells display cellular
plasticity and stem cell potential, we performed genetic lineage tracing of the
Nkx2.2-expressing population using Nkx2.2(Cre/+);R26RTomato mice. These studies
demonstrated that Nkx2.2+ cells are able to give rise to all intestinal
epithelial cell types in basal conditions. The proliferative capacity of
Nkx2.2-expressing cells was also demonstrated in vitro using crypt organoid
cultures. Injuring the intestine with irradiation, systemic inflammation, and
colitis did not enhance the lineage potential of Nkx2.2-expressing cells. These
findings demonstrate that a rare mature enteroendocrine cell subpopulation that
is demarcated by Nkx2.2 expression display stem cell properties during normal
intestinal epithelial homeostasis, but is not easily activated upon injury.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4683302 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 26492922  [PubMed - in process]


12. Dev Growth Differ. 2015 Oct;57(8):557-69. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12237. Epub 2015 Oct
5.

Development of the pancreas in medaka, Oryzias latipes, from embryo to adult.

Otsuka T(1), Tsukahara T(1), Takeda H(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan. (2)JST, CREST, 4-1-8 Honcho,
Kawaguchi, Saitama, 332-0012, Japan.

To address conserved and unique features of fish pancreas development, we
performed extensive analyses of pancreatic development in medaka embryos and
adults using pdx1- and ptf1a-transgenic medaka, in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. The markers used in these analyses included pdx1, nkx6.1,
nkx6.2, nkx2.2, Islet1, insulin, Somatostatin, glucagon, ptf1a, ela3l, trypsin,
and amylase. The double transgenic (Tg) fish produced in the present study
visualizes the development of endocrine (pdx1+) and exocrine (ptf1a+) parts
simultaneously in living fishes. Like other vertebrates, the medaka pancreas
develops as two (dorsal and ventral) buds in the anterior gut tube, which soon
fuse into a single anlagen. The double Tg fish demonstrates that the differential
property between the two buds is already established at the initial phase of bud 
development as indicated by strong pdx1 expression in the dorsal one. This Tg
fish also allowed us to examine the gross morphology and the structure of adult
pancreas and revealed unique characters of medaka pancreas such as broad and
multiple connections with the gut tube along the anterior-posterior axis.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 26435359  [PubMed - in process]


13. Alcohol Alcohol. 2015 Nov;50(6):680-9. doi: 10.1093/alcalc/agv102. Epub 2015 Sep 
15.

Differential Contributions of Alcohol and Nicotine-Derived Nitrosamine Ketone
(NNK) to White Matter Pathology in the Adolescent Rat Brain.

Tong M(1), Yu R(2), Silbermann E(3), Zabala V(4), Deochand C(5), de la Monte
SM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, and the Liver Research
Center, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, USA Warren Alpert Medical School
of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA. (2)Departments of Pathology and
Neurology, and the Division of Neuropathology, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence,
RI, USA. (3)Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI,
USA. (4)Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology Graduate Program, Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA. (5)Biotechnology Graduate Program, Brown University,
Providence, RI, USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, and
the Liver Research Center, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, RI, USA Warren
Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Providence, RI, USA Departments of
Pathology and Neurology, and the Division of Neuropathology, Rhode Island
Hospital, Providence, RI, USA suzanne_delamonte_md@brown.edu.

AIM: Epidemiologic studies have demonstrated high rates of smoking among
alcoholics, and neuroimaging studies have detected white matter atrophy and
degeneration in both smokers and individuals with alcohol-related brain disease
(ARBD). These findings suggest that tobacco smoke exposure may be a co-factor in 
ARBD. The present study examines the differential and additive effects of
tobacco-specific nitrosamine (NNK) and ethanol exposures on the structural and
functional integrity of white matter in an experimental model.
METHODS: Adolescent Long Evans rats were fed liquid diets containing 0 or 26%
ethanol for 8 weeks. In weeks 3-8, rats were treated with nicotine-derived
nitrosamine ketone (NNK) (2 mg/kg, 3×/week) or saline by i.p. injection. In weeks
7-8, the ethanol group was binge-administered ethanol (2 g/kg; 3×/week).
RESULTS: Ethanol, NNK and ethanol + NNK caused striking degenerative
abnormalities in white matter myelin and axons, with accompanying reductions in
myelin-associated glycoprotein expression. Quantitative RT-PCR targeted array and
heatmap analyses demonstrated that ethanol modestly increased, whereas ethanol + 
NNK sharply increased expression of immature and mature oligodendroglial genes,
and that NNK increased immature but inhibited mature oligodendroglial genes. In
addition, NNK modulated expression of neuroglial genes in favor of growth cone
collapse and synaptic disconnection. Ethanol- and NNK-associated increases in
FOXO1, FOXO4 and NKX2-2 transcription factor gene expression could reflect
compensatory responses to brain insulin resistance in this model.
CONCLUSION: Alcohol and tobacco exposures promote ARBD by impairing myelin
synthesis, maturation and integrity via distinct but overlapping mechanisms.
Public health measures to reduce ARBD should target both alcohol and tobacco
abuses.

© The Author 2015. Medical Council on Alcohol and Oxford University Press. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4608624 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26373813  [PubMed - in process]


14. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Aug 10;9:107. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00107. eCollection
2015.

Prepatterning and patterning of the thalamus along embryonic development of
Xenopus laevis.

Bandín S(1), Morona R(1), González A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University Complutense Madrid,
Spain.

Previous developmental studies of the thalamus (alar part of the diencephalic
prosomere p2) have defined the molecular basis for the acquisition of the
thalamic competence (preparttening), the subsequent formation of the secondary
organizer in the zona limitans intrathalamica, and the early specification of two
anteroposterior domains (rostral and caudal progenitor domains) in response to
inducing activities and that are shared in birds and mammals. In the present
study we have analyzed the embryonic development of the thalamus in the anuran
Xenopus laevis to determine conserved or specific features in the amphibian
diencephalon. From early embryonic stages to the beginning of the larval period, 
the expression patterns of 22 markers were analyzed by means of combined In situ 
hybridization (ISH) and immunohistochemical techniques. The early
genoarchitecture observed in the diencephalon allowed us to discern the
boundaries of the thalamus with the prethalamus, pretectum, and epithalamus.
Common molecular features were observed in the thalamic prepatterning among
vertebrates in which Wnt3a, Fez, Pax6 and Xiro1 expression were of particular
importance in Xenopus. The formation of the zona limitans intrathalamica was
observed, as in other vertebrates, by the progressive expression of Shh. The
largely conserved expressions of Nkx2.2 in the rostral thalamic domain vs. Gbx2
and Ngn2 (among others) in the caudal domain strongly suggest the role of Shh as 
morphogen in the amphibian thalamus. All these data showed that the molecular
characteristics observed during preparttening and patterning in the thalamus of
the anuran Xenopus (anamniote) share many features with those described during
thalamic development in amniotes (common patterns in tetrapods) but also with
zebrafish, strengthening the idea of a basic organization of this diencephalic
region across vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC4530589
PMID: 26321920  [PubMed]


15. Development. 2015 Oct 1;142(19):3286-93. doi: 10.1242/dev.124636. Epub 2015 Aug
20.

A direct fate exclusion mechanism by Sonic hedgehog-regulated transcriptional
repressors.

Nishi Y(1), Zhang X(2), Jeong J(3), Peterson KA(1), Vedenko A(4), Bulyk ML(5),
Hide WA(6), McMahon AP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Eli and Edythe
Broad CIRM Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of
Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.
(2)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (3)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA Department of Biostatistics, Harvard
School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (4)Division of Genetics,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (5)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham
and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA Department
of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
02115, USA. (6)Department of Biostatistics, Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA 02115, USA Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience,
Department of Neuroscience, University of Sheffield, 385A Glossop Road, Sheffield
S10 2HQ, UK. (7)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Eli
and Edythe Broad CIRM Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90089,
USA amcmahon@med.usc.edu.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling patterns the vertebrate spinal cord by activating 
a group of transcriptional repressors in distinct neural progenitors of somatic
motor neuron and interneuron subtypes. To identify the action of this network, we
performed a genome-wide analysis of the regulatory actions of three key ventral
determinants in mammalian neural tube patterning: Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1 and Olig2.
Previous studies have demonstrated that each factor acts predominantly as a
transcriptional repressor, at least in part, to inhibit alternative progenitor
fate choices. Here, we reveal broad and direct repression of multiple alternative
fates as a general mechanism of repressor action. Additionally, the repressor
network targets multiple Shh signaling components providing negative feedback to 
ongoing Shh signaling. Analysis of chromatin organization around Nkx2.2-, Nkx6.1-
and Olig2-bound regions, together with co-analysis of engagement of the
transcriptional activator Sox2, indicate that repressors bind to, and probably
modulate the action of, neural enhancers. Together, the data suggest a model for 
neural progenitor specification downstream of Shh signaling, in which Nkx2.2 and 
Olig2 direct repression of alternative neural progenitor fate determinants, an
action augmented by the overlapping activity of Nkx6.1 in each cell type.
Integration of repressor and activator inputs, notably activator inputs mediated 
by Sox2, is probably a key mechanism in achieving cell type-specific
transcriptional outcomes in mammalian neural progenitor fate specification.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4631756 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26293298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Nov 15;24(22):2723-32. doi: 10.1089/scd.2015.0122. Epub 2015
Aug 12.

Directed Differentiation of V3 Interneurons from Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells.

Xu H(1), Sakiyama-Elbert SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Center of Regenerative Medicine,
Washington University in St. Louis. , St. Louis, Missouri.

Excitatory commissural V3 interneurons (INs) of the ventral spinal cord have been
shown to balance locomotor rhythm regularity and robustness in vivo.
Unfortunately, due to the scarcity of these cells in the spinal cord, in vitro
studies of dissociated V3 INs have yet to be reported. In this study, we
developed an induction protocol for V3 INs from mouse embryonic stem cells. The
effect of the concentration of a strong sonic hedgehog (Shh) agonist (smoothened 
agonist [SAG]) and retinoic acid (RA) on expression of progenitor p3 and
postmitotic V3 IN transcription factor markers (ie, Nkx2.2 and Sim1) was
examined. Cells were differentiated toward a more ventral fate by increasing the 
duration of SAG exposure from 4 days in a previously established motoneuron
induction protocol to 6 days. At the end of the induction period, transcription
factor expression was assessed using quantitative real-time polymerase chain
reaction, immunocytochemistry, in situ hybridization, and flow cytometry. Lower
concentrations of RA and a longer duration of SAG exposure led to increased
levels of p3 and V3 marker expression. This novel induction protocol reveals the 
importance of Shh signaling duration in the dorsal-ventral patterning of the
neural tube, and it provides a method to obtain V3 INs for future studies to
allow better understanding their role in rewiring and regeneration after spinal
cord injury.

PMCID: PMC4652188 [Available on 2016-11-15]
PMID: 26165862  [PubMed - in process]


17. Peptides. 2016 Mar;77:21-7. doi: 10.1016/j.peptides.2015.06.006. Epub 2015 Jul 3.

High fat diet impairs the function of glucagon-like peptide-1 producing L-cells.

Richards P(1), Pais R(1), Habib AM(1), Brighton CA(1), Yeo GS(1), Reimann F(2),
Gribble FM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Laboratories and MRC Metabolic Diseases Unit, WT-MRC
Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
(2)Metabolic Research Laboratories and MRC Metabolic Diseases Unit, WT-MRC
Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK.
Electronic address: fr222@cam.ac.uk. (3)Metabolic Research Laboratories and MRC
Metabolic Diseases Unit, WT-MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge CB2 0QQ, UK. Electronic address: fmg23@cam.ac.uk.

Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) acts as a satiety signal and enhances insulin
release. This study examined how GLP-1 production from intestinal L-cells is
modified by dietary changes.METHODS: Transgenic mouse models were utilized in
which L-cells could be purified by cell specific expression of a yellow
fluorescent protein, Venus. Mice were fed on chow or 60% high fat diet (HFD) for 
2 or 16 weeks. L-cells were purified by flow cytometry and analysed by microarray
and quantitative RT-PCR. Enteroendocrine cell populations were examined by FACS
analysis, and GLP-1 secretion was assessed in primary intestinal cultures.
RESULTS: Two weeks HFD reduced the numbers of GLP-1 positive cells in the colon, 
and of GIP positive cells in the small intestine. Purified small intestinal
L-cells showed major shifts in their gene expression profiles. In mice on HFD for
16 weeks, significant reductions were observed in the expression of L-cell
specific genes, including those encoding gut hormones (Gip, Cck, Sct, Nts),
prohormone processing enzymes (Pcsk1, Cpe), granins (Chgb, Scg2), nutrient
sensing machinery (Slc5a1, Slc15a1, Abcc8, Gpr120) and enteroendocrine-specific
transcription factors (Etv1, Isl1, Mlxipl, Nkx2.2 and Rfx6). A corresponding
reduction in the GLP-1 secretory responsiveness to nutrient stimuli was observed 
in primary small intestinal cultures.
CONCLUSION: Mice fed on HFD exhibited reduced expression in L-cells of many
L-cell specific genes, suggesting an impairment of enteroendocrine cell function.
Our results suggest that a western style diet may detrimentally affect the
secretion of gut hormones and normal post-prandial signaling, which could impact 
on insulin secretion and satiety.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788507
PMID: 26145551  [PubMed - in process]


18. Nat Protoc. 2015 Aug;10(8):1143-54. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2015.075. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

Generation and isolation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells from human
pluripotent stem cells.

Douvaras P(1), Fossati V(1).

Author information: 
(1)The New York Stem Cell Foundation Research Institute, New York, New York, USA.

In the CNS, oligodendrocytes act as the myelinating cells. Oligodendrocytes have 
been identified to be key players in several neurodegenerative disorders. This
protocol describes a robust, fast and reproducible differentiation protocol to
generate human oligodendrocytes from pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) using a
chemically defined, growth factor-rich medium. Within 8 d, PSCs differentiate
into paired box 6-positive (PAX6(+)) neural stem cells, which give rise to
OLIG2(+) progenitors by day 12. Oligodendrocyte lineage transcription factor
2-positive (OLIG2(+)) cells begin to express the transcription factor NKX2.2
around day 18, followed by SRY-box 10 (SOX10) around day 40. Oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (OPCs) that are positive for the cell surface antigen recognized
by the O4 antibody (O4(+)) appear around day 50 and reach, on average, 43% of the
cell population after 75 d of differentiation. O4(+) OPCs can be isolated by cell
sorting for myelination studies, or they can be terminally differentiated to
myelin basic protein-positive (MBP(+)) oligodendrocytes. This protocol also
describes an alternative strategy for markedly reducing the length and the costs 
of the differentiation and generating ~30% O4(+) cells after only 55 d of
culture.

PMID: 26134954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Glia. 2015 Dec;63(12):2152-67. doi: 10.1002/glia.22882. Epub 2015 Jun 30.

Pluripotent stem cell-derived radial glia-like cells as stable intermediate for
efficient generation of human oligodendrocytes.

Gorris R(1), Fischer J(1), Erwes KL(1), Kesavan J(1), Peterson DA(1,)(2),
Alexander M(3), Nöthen MM(3), Peitz M(1,)(4), Quandel T(1), Karus M(1), Brüstle
O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, LIFE & BRAIN Center, University of
Bonn, Germany. (2)Center for Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Department of
Neuroscience, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, Chicago,
Illinois. (3)Institute of Human Genetics, LIFE & BRAIN Center, University of
Bonn, Germany. (4)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Bonn, Germany.

Neural precursor cells (NPCs) derived from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs)
represent an attractive tool for the in vitro generation of various neural cell
types. However, the developmentally early NPCs emerging during hPSC
differentiation typically show a strong propensity for neuronal differentiation, 
with more limited potential for generating astrocytes and, in particular, for
generating oligodendrocytes. This phenomenon corresponds well to the consecutive 
and protracted generation of neurons and GLIA during normal human development. To
obtain a more gliogenic NPC type, we combined growth factor-mediated expansion
with pre-exposure to the differentiation-inducing agent retinoic acid and
subsequent immunoisolation of CD133-positive cells. This protocol yields an
adherent and self-renewing population of hindbrain/spinal cord radial glia
(RG)-like neural precursor cells (RGL-NPCs) expressing typical neural stem cell
markers such as nestin, ASCL1, SOX2, and PAX6 as well as RG markers BLBP, GLAST, 
vimentin, and GFAP. While RGL-NPCs maintain the ability for tripotential
differentiation into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes, they exhibit
greatly enhanced propensity for oligodendrocyte generation. Under defined
differentiation conditions promoting the expression of the major oligodendrocyte 
fate-determinants OLIG1/2, NKX6.2, NKX2.2, and SOX10, RGL-NPCs efficiently
convert into NG2-positive oligodendroglial progenitor cells (OPCs) and are
subsequently capable of in vivo myelination. Representing a stable intermediate
between PSCs and OPCs, RGL-NPCs expedite the generation of PSC-derived
oligodendrocytes with O4-, 4860-, and myelin basic protein (MBP)-positive cells
that already appear within 7 weeks following growth factor withdrawal-induced
differentiation. Thus, RGL-NPCs may serve as robust tool for time-efficient
generation of human oligodendrocytes from embryonic and induced pluripotent stem 
cells.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26123132  [PubMed - in process]


20. Lab Invest. 2015 Sep;95(9):1077-88. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.80. Epub 2015 Jun
29.

Identification, by systematic RNA sequencing, of novel candidate biomarkers and
therapeutic targets in human soft tissue tumors.

Sarver AE(1), Sarver AL(2), Thayanithy V(1), Subramanian S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic and Translational Research, Department of Surgery,
University of Minnesota Medical School, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN,
USA. (2)Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.

Human sarcomas comprise a heterogeneous group of more than 50 subtypes broadly
classified into two groups: bone and soft tissue sarcomas. Such heterogeneity and
their relative rarity have made them challenging targets for classification,
biomarker identification, and development of improved treatment strategies. In
this study, we used RNA sequencing to analyze 35 primary human tissue samples
representing 13 different sarcoma subtypes, along with benign schwannoma, and
normal bone and muscle tissues. For each sarcoma subtype, we detected unique
messenger RNA (mRNA) expression signatures, which we further subjected to
bioinformatic functional analysis, upstream regulatory analysis, and microRNA
(miRNA) targeting analysis. We found that, for each sarcoma subtype,
significantly upregulated genes and their deduced upstream regulators included
not only previously implicated known players but also novel candidates not
previously reported to be associated with sarcoma. For example, the schwannoma
samples were characterized by high expression of not only the known associated
proteins GFAP and GAP43 but also the novel player GJB6. Further, when we
integrated our expression profiles with miRNA expression data from each sarcoma
subtype, we were able to deduce potential key miRNA-gene regulator relationships 
for each. In the Ewing's sarcoma and fibromatosis samples, two sarcomas where
miR-182-5p is significantly downregulated, multiple predicted targets were
significantly upregulated, including HMCN1, NKX2-2, SCNN1G, and SOX2. In
conclusion, despite the small number of samples per sarcoma subtype, we were able
to identify key known players; concurrently, we discovered novel genes that may
prove to be important in the molecular classification of sarcomas and in the
development of novel treatments.

PMID: 26121316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Int J Organ Transplant Med. 2015;6(2):61-76.

Generation of Islet-like Cell Aggregates from Human Adipose Tissue-derived Stem
Cells by Lentiviral Overexpression of PDX-1.

Bahrebar M(1), Soleimani M(2), Karimi MH(3), Vahdati A(1), Yaghobi R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Fars, Iran. (2)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat
Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (3)Transplant Research Center, Shiraz
University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic duodenal homeobox1 (PDX-1) is a transcription factor that 
is important in regulating pancreas development and maintaining ß-cell function. 
ß-cell replacement is an effective approach for the treatment of type 1 diabetes.
Human adipose-mesenchymal stem cells (hAMSCs) are the ideal population cells for 
differentiating into insulin-producing cells.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if islet-like cell aggregates production could be
generated from hAMSCs by lentiviral overexpression of PDX-1.
METHODS: After isolation of hAMSCs, characteristics of these cells were
identified by flow-cytometic analysis and multilineage differentiation studies.
PDX-1 gene delivered into hAMSCs through lentiviral vector for differentiating
hAMSCs into insulin-producing cells (IPCs) at the utilized protocol for 14 days. 
Characteristics of IPCs were evaluated by immunocytofluorescence, dithizone
staining, and quantitative reverse transcription PCR. In response to high glucose
medium, insulin release was detected by chemiluminescence enzyme immunoassay.
RESULTS: The islet-like cell aggregates appeared about 10 days after introduction
of PDX-1 into hAMSCs. PDX-1 induced its own expression (auto-induction), a number
of islet-related genes such as Ngn3, Nkx2-2, and insulin. The insulin-positive
cells were detected in the PDX-1 transduced cells. In response to glucose
challenge test, secretion of insulin hormone in the medium with high glucose
concentration significantly increased in the PDX-1-transduced cells related to
medium with low glucose concentration.
CONCLUSION: Introduction of lentiviral PDX-1 significantly induces hAMSCs to
differentiate into islet-like cell aggregates, which may provide a source of
adipose stem cells-derived insulin-producing cells for cell replacement therapy
in type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4464280
PMID: 26082830  [PubMed]


22. J Cent Nerv Syst Dis. 2015 May 18;7:1-14. doi: 10.4137/JCNSD.S23210. eCollection 
2015.

A Comprehensive Profile of ChIP-Seq-Based Olig2 Target Genes in Motor Neuron
Progenitor Cells Suggests the Possible Involvement of Olig2 in the Pathogenesis
of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis.

Satoh J(1), Asahina N(1), Kitano S(1), Kino Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Neuropathology, Meiji
Pharmaceutical University, Kiyose, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is an intractable
neurodegenerative disease that primarily affects motor neurons in the cerebral
cortex and the spinal cord. Recent evidence indicates that dysfunction of
oligodendrocytes is implicated in the pathogenesis of ALS. The basic
helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Olig2 plays a pivotal role in the
development of both motor neurons and oligodendrocytes in the progenitor of motor
neuron (pMN) domain of the spinal cord, supporting evidence for the shared motor 
neuron/oligodendrocyte lineage. However, a comprehensive profile of Olig2 target 
genes in pMNs and oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) with relevance to the
pathogenesis of ALS remains to be characterized.
METHODS: By analyzing the ChIP-Seq datasets numbered SRP007566 and SRP015333 with
the Strand NGS program, we identified genome-wide Olig2 target genes in pMNs and 
OPCs, followed by molecular network analysis using three distinct bioinformatics 
tools.
RESULTS: We identified 5966 Olig2 target genes in pMNs, including Nkx2.2, Pax6,
Irx3, Ngn2, Zep2 (Cip1), Trp3, Mnx1 (Hb9), and Cdkn1a, and 1553 genes in OPCs.
The genes closely related to the keyword "alternative splicing" were enriched in 
the set of 740 targets overlapping between pMNs and OPCs. Furthermore,
approximately one-third of downregulated genes in purified motor neurons of
presymptomatic mutant SOD1 transgenic mice and in lumbar spinal cord tissues of
ALS patients corresponded to Olig2 target genes in pMNs. Molecular networks of
Olig2 target genes indicate that Olig2 regulates a wide range of genes essential 
for diverse neuronal and glial functions.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations lead to a hypothesis that aberrant regulation of 
Olig2 function, by affecting biology of both motor neurons and oligodendrocytes, 
might be involved in the pathogenesis of ALS.

PMCID: PMC4437538
PMID: 26023283  [PubMed]


23. PLoS One. 2015 May 28;10(5):e0128007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128007.
eCollection 2015.

Abbreviated exposure to hypoxia is sufficient to induce CNS dysmyelination,
modulate spinal motor neuron composition, and impair motor development in
neonatal mice.

Watzlawik JO(1), Kahoud RJ(2), O'Toole RJ(3), White KA(3), Ogden AR(3), Painter
MM(1), Wootla B(1), Papke LM(1), Denic A(1), Weimer JM(3), Carey WA(4), Rodriguez
M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States of America. (2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic
College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America; Department
of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester,
Minnesota, United States of America. (3)Children's Health Research Center,
Sanford Research, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, United States of America.
(4)Department of Pediatric and Adolescent Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America.

Neonatal white matter injury (nWMI) is an increasingly common cause of cerebral
palsy that results predominantly from hypoxic injury to progenitor cells
including those of the oligodendrocyte lineage. Existing mouse models of nWMI
utilize prolonged periods of hypoxia during the neonatal period, require complex 
cross-fostering and exhibit poor growth and high mortality rates. Abnormal CNS
myelin composition serves as the major explanation for persistent neuro-motor
deficits. Here we developed a simplified model of nWMI with low mortality rates
and improved growth without cross-fostering. Neonatal mice are exposed to low
oxygen from postnatal day (P) 3 to P7, which roughly corresponds to the period of
human brain development between gestational weeks 32 and 36. CNS hypomyelination 
is detectable for 2-3 weeks post injury and strongly correlates with levels of
body and brain weight loss. Immediately following hypoxia treatment, cell death
was evident in multiple brain regions, most notably in superficial and deep
cortical layers as well as the subventricular zone progenitor compartment.
PDGFaR, Nkx2.2, and Olig2 positive oligodendrocyte progenitor cell were
significantly reduced until postnatal day 27. In addition to CNS dysmyelination
we identified a novel pathological marker for adult hypoxic animals that strongly
correlates with life-long neuro-motor deficits. Mice reared under hypoxia reveal 
an abnormal spinal neuron composition with increased small and medium diameter
axons and decreased large diameter axons in thoracic lateral and anterior
funiculi. Differences were particularly pronounced in white matter motor tracts
left and right of the anterior median fissure. Our findings suggest that 4 days
of exposure to hypoxia are sufficient to induce experimental nWMI in CD1 mice,
thus providing a model to test new therapeutics. Pathological hallmarks of this
model include early cell death, decreased OPCs and hypomyelination in early
postnatal life, followed by dysmyelination, abnormal spinal neuron composition,
and neuro-motor deficits in adulthood.

PMCID: PMC4447462
PMID: 26020269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genes Cancer. 2015 Mar;6(3-4):129-43.

EWS/FLI utilizes NKX2-2 to repress mesenchymal features of Ewing sarcoma.

Fadul J(1), Bell R(1), Hoffman LM(2), Beckerle MC(3), Engel ME(4), Lessnick
SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah, USA ; Department of Oncological Sciences, School of Medicine,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. (2)Huntsman Cancer Institute,
School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA ; Department of
Biology, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.
(3)Huntsman Cancer Institute, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah, USA ; Department of Oncological Sciences, School of Medicine,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA ; Department of Biology, School of 
Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA. (4)Huntsman Cancer
Institute, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA ;
Department of Oncological Sciences, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt 
Lake City, Utah, USA ; Center for Children's Cancer Research, School of Medicine,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA ; Division of Pediatric Hematology 
and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

In Ewing sarcoma, NKX2-2 is a critical activated target of the oncogenic
transcription factor EWS/FLI that is required for transformation. However, its
biological function in this malignancy is unknown. Here we provide evidence that 
NKX2-2 mediates the EWS/FLI-controlled block of mesenchymal features.
Transcriptome-wide RNA sequencing revealed that NKX2-2 represses cell adhesion
and extracellular matrix organization genes. NKX2-2-depleted cells form more
focal adhesions and organized actin stress fibers, and spread over a wider
area-hallmarks of mesenchymally derived cells. Furthermore, NKX2-2 represses the 
actin-stabilizing protein zyxin, suggesting that these morphological changes are 
attributable to zyxin de-repression. In addition, NKX2-2-knockdown cells display 
marked increases in migration and substrate adhesion. However, only part of the
EWS/FLI phenotype is NKX2-2-dependent; consequently, NKX2-2 is insufficient to
rescue EWS/FLI repression of mesenchymalization. Strikingly, we found that
EWS/FLI-and NKX22-repressed genes are activated by ZEB2, which was previously
shown to block Ewing sarcoma epithelialization. Together, these data support an
emerging theme wherein Ewing sarcoma cells highly express transcription factors
that maintain an undifferentiated state. Importantly, co-opting epithelial and
mesenchymal traits by Ewing sarcoma cells may explain how the primary tumor grows
rapidly while also "passively" metastasizing, without the need for transitions
toward differentiated states, as in carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC4426950
PMID: 26000096  [PubMed]


25. J Cytol. 2015 Jan-Mar;32(1):30-2. doi: 10.4103/0970-9371.155229.

Upregulation of NKX2.2, a target of EWSR1/FLI1 fusion transcript, in primary
renal Ewing sarcoma.

Yamamoto Y(1), Yamazaki K(1), Ishida Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Teikyo University, Chiba Medical Center, Ichihara,
Chiba, Japan.

Renal Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a rare malignant tumor characterized by fusion of the
EWSR1 gene with a member of the ETS family of oncogenes, arising at a specific
chromosomal translocation. Diagnosis of ES can be problematic, especially from
cytological or small bioptical specimens because the differential diagnoses
comprising a diverse group of small round blue cell tumors (SRBCTs). We report a 
case of primary renal ES in a young male, which had a t(11;22) (q24;q12)
chromosome translocation encoding a type2 EWSR1/FLI1 fusion transcript. The tumor
cells showed diffuse cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for CD99 and diffuse nuclear
immunoreactivity for NKX2.2, an important oncogenic transcriptional target of
EWSR1/FLI1, not only in the histological, but also in the cytological specimens. 
From the results of this case, we speculate that NKX2.2, in combination with
CD99, may be a useful immunocytochemical marker to distinguish renal ES from
other SRBCTs of kidney.

PMCID: PMC4408675
PMID: 25948942  [PubMed]


26. Diabetes. 2015 Sep;64(9):3182-8. doi: 10.2337/db14-1202. Epub 2015 Apr 30.

Altered Phenotype of ß-Cells and Other Pancreatic Cell Lineages in Patients With 
Diffuse Congenital Hyperinsulinism in Infancy Caused by Mutations in the
ATP-Sensitive K-Channel.

Salisbury RJ(1), Han B(2), Jennings RE(3), Berry AA(1), Stevens A(4), Mohamed
Z(4), Sugden SA(1), De Krijger R(5), Cross SE(6), Johnson PP(6), Newbould M(7),
Cosgrove KE(2), Hanley KP(1), Banerjee I(8), Dunne MJ(9), Hanley NA(10).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Institute of Human Development, Faculty
of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, The
University of Manchester, Manchester, U.K. (2)Faculty of Life Sciences, The
University of Manchester, Manchester, U.K. (3)Centre for Endocrinology and
Diabetes, Institute of Human Development, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, 
Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester,
Manchester, U.K. Department of Endocrinology, Central Manchester University
Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester, U.K. (4)Faculty of Life Sciences, The
University of Manchester, Manchester, U.K. Department of Paediatric
Endocrinology, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, U.K. (5)Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands Department of
Pathology, Reinier de Graaf Hospital, Delft, the Netherlands. (6)Diabetes
Research & Wellness Foundation Human Islet Isolation Facility, Nuffield
Department of Surgical Sciences and Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and
Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. (7)Department of Paediatric
Histopathology, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, U.K. (8)Centre for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Institute of Human
Development, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester Academic Health
Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester, U.K. Department of
Paediatric Endocrinology, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation 
Trust, Manchester, U.K. (9)Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of
Manchester, Manchester, U.K. neil.hanley@manchester.ac.uk
mark.dunne@manchester.ac.uk. (10)Centre for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Institute
of Human Development, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Manchester Academic 
Health Sciences Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester, U.K. Department
of Endocrinology, Central Manchester University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, U.K. neil.hanley@manchester.ac.uk mark.dunne@manchester.ac.uk.

Diffuse congenital hyperinsulinism in infancy (CHI-D) arises from mutations
inactivating the KATP channel; however, the phenotype is difficult to explain
from electrophysiology alone. Here we studied wider abnormalities in the ß-cell
and other pancreatic lineages. Islets were disorganized in CHI-D compared with
controls. PAX4 and ARX expression was decreased. A tendency toward increased
NKX2.2 expression was consistent with its detection in two-thirds of CHI-D d-cell
nuclei, similar to the fetal pancreas, and implied immature d-cell function.
CHI-D d-cells also comprised 10% of cells displaying nucleomegaly. In CHI-D,
increased proliferation was most elevated in duct (5- to 11-fold) and acinar (7- 
to 47-fold) lineages. Increased ß-cell proliferation observed in some cases was
offset by an increase in apoptosis; this is in keeping with no difference in
INSULIN expression or surface area stained for insulin between CHI-D and control 
pancreas. However, nuclear localization of CDK6 and P27 was markedly enhanced in 
CHI-D ß-cells compared with cytoplasmic localization in control cells. These
combined data support normal ß-cell mass in CHI-D, but with G1/S molecules
positioned in favor of cell cycle progression. New molecular abnormalities in
d-cells and marked proliferative increases in other pancreatic lineages indicate 
CHI-D is not solely a ß-cell disorder.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4542438 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 25931474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 28;10(4):e0124408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124408.
eCollection 2015.

Nkx2.2 and Nkx2.9 are the key regulators to determine cell fate of branchial and 
visceral motor neurons in caudal hindbrain.

Jarrar W(1), Dias JM(2), Ericson J(2), Arnold HH(1), Holz A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology, Zoological Institute, University of Braunschweig, 
Braunschweig, Germany. (2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska
Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.

Cranial motor nerves in vertebrates are comprised of the three principal subtypes
of branchial, visceral, and somatic motor neurons, which develop in typical
patterns along the anteroposterior and dorsoventral axes of hindbrain. Here we
demonstrate that the formation of branchial and visceral motor neurons critically
depends on the transcription factors Nkx2.2 and Nkx2.9, which together determine 
the cell fate of neuronal progenitor cells. Disruption of both genes in mouse
embryos results in complete loss of the vagal and spinal accessory motor nerves, 
and partial loss of the facial and glossopharyngeal motor nerves, while the
purely somatic hypoglossal and abducens motor nerves are not diminished. Cell
lineage analysis in a genetically marked mouse line reveals that alterations of
cranial nerves in Nkx2.2; Nkx2.9 double-deficient mouse embryos result from
changes of cell fate in neuronal progenitor cells. As a consequence progenitors
of branchiovisceral motor neurons in the ventral p3 domain of hindbrain are
transformed to somatic motor neurons, which use ventral exit points to send axon 
trajectories to their targets. Cell fate transformation is limited to the caudal 
hindbrain, as the trigeminal nerve is not affected in double-mutant embryos
suggesting that Nkx2.2 and Nkx2.9 proteins play no role in the development of
branchiovisceral motor neurons in hindbrain rostral to rhombomere 4.

PMCID: PMC4412715
PMID: 25919494  [PubMed - in process]


28. Differentiation. 2015 Mar-Apr;89(3-4):70-6. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2015.03.001. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

Generation of a Nkx2.2(Cre) knock-in mouse line: Analysis of cell lineages in the
central nervous system.

Jarrar W(1), Vauti F(1), Arnold HH(2), Holz A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology, Zoological Institute, Technische Universität
Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany. (2)Cell and
Molecular Biology, Zoological Institute, Technische Universität Braunschweig,
Spielmannstrasse 7, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany. Electronic address:
h.arnold@tu-bs.de. (3)Cell and Molecular Biology, Zoological Institute,
Technische Universität Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7, 38106 Braunschweig,
Germany. Electronic address: a.holz@tu-bs.de.

A Nkx2.2(cre) knock-in mutant mouse line was generated that on the appropriate
reporter strain enables cell fate analysis of the Nkx2.2 cell lineage in the
central nervous system and elsewhere. We here demonstrate that Nkx2.2
lineage-marked cells reside in the ventral p3 region along the entire length of
the CNS and also in pancreas of mouse embryos. Nkx2.2(+) progenitor cells develop
into V3 interneurons in spinal cord and generate the branchio-visceral motor
nuclei of cranial nerves in hindbrain. Nkx2.2(+) cells in hindbrain also form
serotonergic neurons and oligodendrocytes during later developmental stages. In
mouse mutants lacking Nkx2.2 protein the neuronal progenitor cells in spinal cord
are transformed to the distinct fate of somatic motor neurons including their
axonal projections that exit the CNS ventrally and no longer cross the midline at
the commissure. These data identify Nkx2.2 as key regulator to determine neuronal
subtypes in the p3 domain of the central nervous system.

Copyright © 2015 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25840610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Apr;54(2):R103-17. doi: 10.1530/JME-14-0290.

Role of transcription factors in the transdifferentiation of pancreatic islet
cells.

van der Meulen T(1), Huising MO(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of NeurobiologyPhysiology and Behavior, College of Biological
SciencesDepartment of Physiology and Membrane BiologySchool of Medicine,
University of California, 193 Briggs Hall, One Shields Avenue, Davis, California 
95616, USA. (2)Department of NeurobiologyPhysiology and Behavior, College of
Biological SciencesDepartment of Physiology and Membrane BiologySchool of
Medicine, University of California, 193 Briggs Hall, One Shields Avenue, Davis,
California 95616, USA Department of NeurobiologyPhysiology and Behavior, College 
of Biological SciencesDepartment of Physiology and Membrane BiologySchool of
Medicine, University of California, 193 Briggs Hall, One Shields Avenue, Davis,
California 95616, USA mhuising@ucdavis.edu.

The a and ß cells act in concert to maintain blood glucose. The a cells release
glucagon in response to low levels of glucose to stimulate glycogenolysis in the 
liver. In contrast, ß cells release insulin in response to elevated levels of
glucose to stimulate peripheral glucose disposal. Despite these opposing roles in
glucose homeostasis, a and ß cells are derived from a common progenitor and share
many proteins important for glucose sensing and hormone secretion. Results from
recent work have underlined these similarities between the two cell types by
revealing that ß-to-a as well as a-to-ß transdifferentiation can take place under
certain experimental circumstances. These exciting findings highlight unexpected 
plasticity of adult islets and offer hope of novel therapeutic paths to replenish
ß cells in diabetes. In this review, we focus on the transcription factor
networks that establish and maintain pancreatic endocrine cell identity and how
they may be perturbed to facilitate transdifferentiation.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMCID: PMC4373662
PMID: 25791577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1341:257-84. doi: 10.1007/7651_2015_230.

In Vitro Differentiation of Pluripotent Stem Cells into Functional ß Islets Under
2D and 3D Culture Conditions and In Vivo Preclinical Validation of 3D Islets.

Bose B(1), Sudheer PS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Level 03, Stem Cell Biology and Tissue Engineering Division, Yenepoya Research
Centre, Yenepoya University, University Road, Derlakatte, Mangalore, 575018,
Karnataka, India. Bipasha.bose@gmail.com. (2)Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology,
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, NTU/SBS Lab
location @ Level 2, Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences Brenner Centre for 
Molecular Medicine 30 Medical Drive, Singapore, 117609, Singapore.

Since the advent of pluripotent stem cells, (embryonic and induced pluripotent
stem cells), applications of such pluripotent stem cells are of prime importance.
Indeed, scientists are involved in studying the basic biology of pluripotent stem
cells, but equal impetus is there to direct the pluripotent stem cells into
multiple lineages for cell therapy applications. Scientists across the globe have
been successful, to a certain extent, in obtaining cells of definitive endoderm
and also pancreatic ß islets by differentiating human pluripotent stem cells.
Pluripotent stem cell differentiation protocols aim at mimicking in vivo
embryonic development. As in vivo embryonic development is a complex process and 
involves interplay of multiple cytokines, the differentiation protocols also
involve a stepwise use of multiple cytokines. Indeed the novel markers for
pancreas organogenesis serve as the roadmaps to develop new protocols for
pancreatic differentiation from pluripotent stem cells. Earliest developed
protocols for pancreas differentiation involved "Nestin selection pathway," a
pathway common for both neuronal and pancreatic differentiation lead to the
generation of cells that were a combination of cells from neuronal lineage.
Eventually with the discovery of hierarchy of ß cell transcription factors like
Pdx1, Pax4, and Nkx2.2, forced expression of such transcription factors proved
successful in converting a pluripotent stem cell into a ß cell. Protocols
developed almost half a decade ago to the recent ones rather involve stepwise
differentiations involving various cytokines and could generate as high as 25 %
functional insulin-positive cells in vitro. Most advanced protocols for ß islet
differentiations from human pluripotent stem cells focused on 3D culture
conditions, which reportedly produced 60-65 % functional ß islet cells. Here, we 
describe the protocol for differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into
functional ß cells under both 2D and 3D culture conditions.

PMID: 25783769  [PubMed - in process]


31. Int J Endocrinol. 2015;2015:580908. doi: 10.1155/2015/580908. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Regulation of the Human Ghrelin Promoter Activity by Transcription Factors, NF-<U+03BA>B
and Nkx2.2.

Shiimura Y(1), Ohgusu H(1), Sato T(1), Kojima M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics, Institute of Life Science, Kurume University, Kurume,
Fukuoka 839-0864, Japan.

To examine the gene expression of ghrelin, a growth hormone releasing and
appetite stimulating hormone from stomach, we constructed human ghrelin
promoter-reporter vectors and analyzed the promoter activity. The ghrelin
promoter activity was high when cultured cells that express ghrelin mRNA
endogenously like TT or ECC10 cells were used, indicating that these cells
contain factors necessary for full expression of the human ghrelin gene. The
human ghrelin promoter contains both positive and negative regulatory regions. A 
transient decrease of the promoter activity was found when the reporter vector
with the -1600 fragment of the human ghrelin promoter was transfected into
cultured cells. We then examined the effect of several transcription factors on
the ghrelin promoter activity and found that NF-<U+03BA>B suppressed and that Nkx2.2, a 
homeodomain-containing transcription factor that is important for ghrelin cell
development in pancreas, activates the promoter activity. These transcription
factors may be possible targets for the control of ghrelin gene expression.

PMCID: PMC4324914
PMID: 25699080  [PubMed]


32. Front Neuroanat. 2015 Feb 3;9:3. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2015.00003. eCollection 2015.

Patterns of hypothalamic regionalization in amphibians and reptiles: common
traits revealed by a genoarchitectonic approach.

Domínguez L(1), González A(1), Moreno N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University Complutense of
Madrid Madrid, Spain.

Most studies in mammals and birds have demonstrated common patterns of
hypothalamic development highlighted by the combination of developmental
regulatory genes (genoarchitecture), supporting the notion of the hypothalamus as
a component of the secondary prosencephalon, topologically rostral to the
diencephalon. In our comparative analysis we have summarized the data on the
expression patterns of different transcription factors and neuroactive
substances, used as anatomical markers, in the developing hypothalamus of the
amphibian Xenopus laevis and the juvenile turtle Pseudemys scripta. This analysis
served to highlight the organization of the hypothalamus in the
anamniote/amniotic transition. We have identified supraoptoparaventricular and
the suprachiasmatic regions (SCs) in the alar part of the hypothalamus, and
tuberal and mammillary regions in the basal hypothalamus. Shared features in the 
two species are: (1) The supraoptoparaventricular region (SPV) is defined by the 
expression of Otp and the lack of Nkx2.1/Isl1. It is subdivided into rostral,
rich in Otp and Nkx2.2, and caudal, only Otp-positive, portions. (2) The
suprachiasmatic area contains catecholaminergic cell groups and lacks Otp, and
can be further divided into rostral (rich in Nkx2.1 and Nkx2.2) and a caudal
(rich in Isl1 and devoid of Nkx2.1) portions. (3) Expression of Nkx2.1 and Isl1
define the tuberal hypothalamus and only the rostral portion expresses Otp. (4)
Its caudal boundary is evident by the lack of Isl1 in the adjacent mammillary
region, which expresses Nkx2.1 and Otp. Differences in the anamnio-amniote
transition were noted since in the turtle, like in other amniotes, the boundary
between the alar hypothalamus and the telencephalic preoptic area shows distinct 
Nkx2.2 and Otp expressions but not in the amphibian (anamniote), and the alar SPV
is defined by the expression of Otp/Pax6, whereas in Xenopus only Otp is
expressed.

PMCID: PMC4315040
PMID: 25691860  [PubMed]


33. PLoS Genet. 2015 Feb 13;11(2):e1005008. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005008.
eCollection 2015.

Elevated in vivo levels of a single transcription factor directly convert
satellite glia into oligodendrocyte-like cells.

Weider M(1), Wegener A(1), Schmitt C(1), Küspert M(1), Hillgärtner S(1), Bösl
MR(2), Hermans-Borgmeyer I(3), Nait-Oumesmar B(4), Wegner M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie, Emil-Fischer-Zentrum, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität 
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. (2)Experimentelle Biomedizin,
Rudolf-Virchow-Zentrum, Universitätsklinikum Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany.
(3)ZMNH, Universitätsklinikum Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (4)Institut du Cerveau
et de la Moelle Epinière, ICM, Inserm U1127, Université Pierre et Marie Curie,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMR-S1127, CNRS UMR 7225, Paris, France.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr;11(4):e1005086.

Oligodendrocytes are the myelinating glia of the central nervous system and
ensure rapid saltatory conduction. Shortage or loss of these cells leads to
severe malfunctions as observed in human leukodystrophies and multiple sclerosis,
and their replenishment by reprogramming or cell conversion strategies is an
important research aim. Using a transgenic approach we increased levels of the
transcription factor Sox10 throughout the mouse embryo and thereby prompted
Fabp7-positive glial cells in dorsal root ganglia of the peripheral nervous
system to convert into cells with oligodendrocyte characteristics including
myelin gene expression. These rarely studied and poorly characterized satellite
glia did not go through a classic oligodendrocyte precursor cell stage. Instead, 
Sox10 directly induced key elements of the regulatory network of differentiating 
oligodendrocytes, including Olig2, Olig1, Nkx2.2 and Myrf. An upstream enhancer
mediated the direct induction of the Olig2 gene. Unlike Sox10, Olig2 was not
capable of generating oligodendrocyte-like cells in dorsal root ganglia. Our
findings provide proof-of-concept that Sox10 can convert conducive cells into
oligodendrocyte-like cells in vivo and delineates options for future therapeutic 
strategies.

PMCID: PMC4334169
PMID: 25680202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2015 Jun;51(6):595-603. doi:
10.1007/s11626-015-9866-2. Epub 2015 Jan 29.

Differentiation of human skin-derived precursor cells into functional islet-like 
insulin-producing cell clusters.

Mehrabi M(1), Mansouri K, Hosseinkhani S, Yarani R, Yari K, Bakhtiari M,
Mostafaie A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Razi University, Kermanshah, Iran.

Advances in cell-replacement strategies for diabetes have focused on renewable
sources of glucose-responsive, insulin-producing cells (IPCs). One of the most
proper alternatives is multipotent skin-derived precursors cells (SKPs), which
can be differentiated into IPCs. In this study, we reported the isolation and
expansion of human skin-derived precursors (hSKPs) followed by their
differentiation into IPCs in vitro, through exposure to suitable differentiation 
factors. The gene expression of endocrine ß cell markers was analyzed by reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. In addition, insulin production was
examined immunocytochemically, and insulin and C-peptide secretion were examined 
using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Dithizone-stained cellular clusters were
observed after approximately 20 d. The clusters were found to be immunoreactive
to insulin and expressed multiple genes related to pancreatic ß cell development 
and function: insulin, Pdx-1, Islet-1, NeuroD, Glut-2, Pax-4, Ngn-3, and Nkx2.2, 
but not to other pancreas-specific hormones such as glucagon and somatostatin.
Cellular clusters were also able to secrete detectable amounts of insulin and
C-peptide in a glucose dose-dependent manner. These findings suggest that human
SKPs can differentiate into functional IPCs. This may offer a safer cell source
for future stem cell-based therapies.

PMID: 25630536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jan 22;15:16. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1017-3.

Ewing sarcoma of the liver with multilocular cystic mass formation: a case
report.

Ozaki Y(1), Miura Y(2), Koganemaru S(3), Suyama K(4), Inoshita N(5), Fujii T(6), 
Hashimoto M(7), Tamura T(8), Takeuchi K(9), Takano T(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan. 1755ozaki@gmail.com. (2)Department of Medical 
Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan.
yujmiura@mac.com. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2
Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan. shigehiro_koganemaru@yahoo.co.jp.
(4)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon,
Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan. kou_susan@yahoo.co.jp. (5)Department of
Pathology, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. inonao3939@gmail.com. (6)Department 
of Pathology, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. tkshfj@gmail.com. (7)Department
of Digestive Surgery, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
masaji.hashimoto@gmail.com. (8)Department of Gastrointestinal Medicine, Toranomon
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. tetsu-t@toranomon.gr.jp. (9)Department of
Gastrointestinal Medicine, Toranomon Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
ktakeuchi@toranomon.gr.jp. (10)Department of Medical Oncology, Toranomon
Hospital, 2-2-2 Toranomon, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8470, Japan.
takano@toranomon.gr.jp.

BACKGROUND: Ewing sarcoma is a rare tumor that occurs commonly in the long bones 
of children or adolescents that can also arise in soft tissues including the
extremities, retroperitoneum, chest wall, and rarely in the liver as primary
sites. We report a case of Ewing sarcoma arising primarily in the liver and, to
our knowledge, this is the fourth reported case of Ewing sarcoma occurring in the
liver.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 27-year-old Japanese woman was admitted with sudden onset
right upper abdominal pain. Clinical examination revealed a multilocular cystic
mass consisting of thickened, irregular septa and nodal walls in the right
hepatic lobe. Ultrasound-guided aspiration biopsy of the liver mass showed
clusters of small atypical round cells and the clinical preoperative diagnosis
was mucinous cystadenoma of the liver. The patient underwent an extended right
hepatectomy and histopathological findings revealed sheet-like proliferation of
small- to medium-sized round cells. Tumor cells were positive for periodic
acid-Schiff reaction and immunoreactive for glycoprotein C99 and gene NKX2.2, as 
well as the neuroendocrine markers, CD56 and synaptophysin. EWS-FLI-1 fusion
transcript type 1 was detected by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction. Pathological and molecular analysis confirmed the diagnosis of Ewing
sarcoma arising primarily in the liver and the patient received adjuvant systemic
chemotherapy with vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide, alternating
with ifosfamide and etoposide. We found no evidence of recurrence 15 months after
completing chemotherapy.
CONCLUSION: We present an extremely rare case of Ewing sarcoma arising primarily 
in the liver. To our knowledge, this is the fourth reported case of Ewing sarcoma
occurring in the liver, and the first case with a multilocular cystic liver mass.
Imaging examinations of the other three reported cases showed solid tumors and a 
diffuse enlarged liver without mass lesion. Clinicians should consider the
possibility of Ewing sarcoma in young patients with a multilocular cystic mass
with thick and/or irregular cyst walls in the liver.

PMCID: PMC4307901
PMID: 25608963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 14;9(11):e111430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111430.
eCollection 2014.

Boolean modelling reveals new regulatory connections between transcription
factors orchestrating the development of the ventral spinal cord.

Lovrics A(1), Gao Y(1), Juhász B(1), Bock I(2), Byrne HM(3), Dinnyés A(4), Kovács
KA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biotalentum Ltd., Gödöllö, Hungary. (2)Biotalentum Ltd., Gödöllö, Hungary;
Molecular Animal Biotechnology Laboratory, Szent Istvan University, Gödöllö,
Hungary. (3)Oxford Centre for Collaborative Applied Mathematics, Mathematical
Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom. (4)Biotalentum Ltd.,
Gödöllö, Hungary; Molecular Animal Biotechnology Laboratory, Szent Istvan
University, Gödöllö, Hungary; Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (5)Biotalentum
Ltd., Gödöllö, Hungary; Institute of Science and Technology, Klosterneuburg,
Austria.

We have assembled a network of cell-fate determining transcription factors that
play a key role in the specification of the ventral neuronal subtypes of the
spinal cord on the basis of published transcriptional interactions. Asynchronous 
Boolean modelling of the network was used to compare simulation results with
reported experimental observations. Such comparison highlighted the need to
include additional regulatory connections in order to obtain the fixed point
attractors of the model associated with the five known progenitor cell types
located in the ventral spinal cord. The revised gene regulatory network
reproduced previously observed cell state switches between progenitor cells
observed in knock-out animal models or in experiments where the transcription
factors were overexpressed. Furthermore the network predicted the inhibition of
Irx3 by Nkx2.2 and this prediction was tested experimentally. Our results provide
evidence for the existence of an as yet undescribed inhibitory connection which
could potentially have significance beyond the ventral spinal cord. The work
presented in this paper demonstrates the strength of Boolean modelling for
identifying gene regulatory networks.

PMCID: PMC4232242
PMID: 25398016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 28;9(10):e111076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0111076.
eCollection 2014.

Olig3 is not involved in the ventral patterning of spinal cord.

Liu Z(1), Hu X(2), Huang C(3), Zheng K(4), Takebayashi H(5), Cao C(3), Qiu M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY, United States of America; Beijing Institute of Biotechnology,
Beijing, PR China. (2)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States of America. (3)Beijing
Institute of Biotechnology, Beijing, PR China. (4)Institute of Developmental and 
Regenerative Biology, Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Organ Development and
Regeneration, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, PR China. (5)Division of
Neurobiology and Anatomy, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata
University, Niigata, Japan. (6)Department of Anatomical Sciences and
Neurobiology, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY, United States of America;
Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Zhejiang Key Laboratory of
Organ Development and Regeneration, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou, PR
China.

At embryonic stages, Olig3 is initially expressed in the dorsal-most region of
the spinal cord, but later in the ventral marginal zone as well. Previous studies
indicated that Olig3 controlled the patterning of dorsal spinal cord and loss of 
Olig3 function led to the re-specification of dI2 and dI3 neurons into dI4
interneurons. However, the role of Olig3 in regulating the development of ventral
spinal cord has remained unknown. BrdU labeling demonstrated that ventral Olig3
was expressed in the post-mitotic neurons and Olig3+ cells seen at late embryonic
stages were born at the earlier stage but remained in the marginal zone
throughout embryogenesis. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiment
indicated that Nkx2.2 regulated the expression of Olig3 in V3 interneurons.
However, Olig3 mutation didn't apparently affect the generation and migration of 
ventral neurons. These findings suggest that Olig3 plays different roles in
regulating the development of dorsal and ventral spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC4211884
PMID: 25350849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biomed Mater Eng. 2014;24(6):3629-36. doi: 10.3233/BME-141190.

Oscillating field stimulation promotes spinal cord remyelination by inducing
differentiation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells after spinal cord injury.

Zhang C(1), Zhang G(1), Rong W(2), Wang A(1), Wu C(1), Huo X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Bioelectromagnetism, Institute of Electrical
Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No. 6 Beiertiao, Zhongguancun, Haidian 
District, Beijing 100190, China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, Beijing Tsinghua
Changgung Hospital of Tsinghua University, Tiantongyuan, Changping District,
Beijing, 102218, China.

Demyelination is part of the cascading secondary injury after the primary insult 
and contributes to the loss of function after spinal cord injury (SCI).
Oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) are the main remyelinating cells in the
central nervous system (CNS). We explored whether oscillating field stimulation
(OFS) could efficiently promote OPC differentiation and improve remyelination
after SCI. SD rats with SCI induced by the Allen method were randomly divided
into two groups, the SCI+OFS group and SCI group. The former group received
active stimulator units and the latter group received sham (inoperative)
stimulator units. Additionally, rats that only received laminectomy were referred
as the sham group. The electric field intensity was 600 µV/mm, and the polarity
was alternated every 15 minutes. The results showed that the SCI+OFS rats had
significantly less demyelination and better locomotor function recovery after
12-weeks treatment. The OFS treatment significantly increased the number of Gal
C-positive OPCs after 2-weeks treatment. Furthermore, these rats had higher
protein expression of oligodendroglial transcription factors Olig2 and NKx2.2.
These findings suggest OFS can promote locomotor recovery and remyelination in
SCI rats and this effect may be related to the improved differentiation of OPCs
in the spinal cord.

PMID: 25227077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Zhonghua Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Jun;52(6):446-9.

[The preliminary study of gene copy number variation association with scar
hyperplasia based on the whole-gene resequencing].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu C(1), Teng G, Chen M(2), Ma K, Yan T.

Author information: 
(1)Medical School of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Beijing 100853, China.
(2)Department of Burn and Plastic Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of
General Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army. Email: chenml@sohu.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the genome copy number variation (CNV) related with
keloid using the whole-gene resequencing technology.
METHODS: A keloid pedigree containing 4 generation of 27 people was studied. Five
people (4 cases of keloid patients, and 1 case of normal) were selected to
extract the genomic DNA. Then the whole-gene resequencing technique was used to
check the variations based on the Illumina Hiseq 2000.
RESULTS: Through database comparison and variation annotation analysis, 15 CNVs
associated with scar hyperplasia were obtained. DAVID software was used to do the
Gene Ontology and pathway analysis. Five CNVs were closely related to the keloid 
formation. They were growth factor receptor-bound 7 (Grb7), mitogen-activated
protein kinase kinase kinase kinase 4 (MAP4K4), mitogen-activated protein kinase 
kinase kinase 15 (MAP3K15), kruppel-like factors 7 (KLF7) and NK2 homeobox 2
(NKX2-2). These CNVs were involved in the process of epidermal cells formation
and differentiation, cell exocrine and cell adhesion.
CONCLUSIONS: There are 5 CNVs associated with scar hyperplasia. Especially
MAP3K15 and MAP4K4 deserve more research to find their function in keloid
formation.

PMID: 25219561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 11;10(9):e1004625. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004625.
eCollection 2014.

BMPs regulate msx gene expression in the dorsal neuroectoderm of Drosophila and
vertebrates by distinct mechanisms.

Esteves FF(1), Springhorn A(2), Kague E(3), Taylor E(1), Pyrowolakis G(4), Fisher
S(3), Bier E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America. (2)Institute for Biology
I, Faculty of Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; 
Spemann Graduate School of Biology and Medicine (SGBM) Albert-Ludwigs-University 
of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; Research Training Program GRK 1104,
Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany. (3)Department of Cell
and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America. (4)Institute for Biology I, Faculty of
Biology, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre
for Biological Signalling Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University of Freiburg,
Freiburg, Germany.

In a broad variety of bilaterian species the trunk central nervous system (CNS)
derives from three primary rows of neuroblasts. The fates of these neural
progenitor cells are determined in part by three conserved transcription factors:
vnd/nkx2.2, ind/gsh and msh/msx in Drosophila melanogaster/vertebrates, which are
expressed in corresponding non-overlapping patterns along the dorsal-ventral
axis. While this conserved suite of "neural identity" gene expression strongly
suggests a common ancestral origin for the patterning systems, it is unclear
whether the original regulatory mechanisms establishing these patterns have been 
similarly conserved during evolution. In Drosophila, genetic evidence suggests
that Bone Morphogenetic Proteins (BMPs) act in a dosage-dependent fashion to
repress expression of neural identity genes. BMPs also play a dose-dependent role
in patterning the dorsal and lateral regions of the vertebrate CNS, however, the 
mechanism by which they achieve such patterning has not yet been clearly
established. In this report, we examine the mechanisms by which BMPs act on
cis-regulatory modules (CRMs) that control localized expression of the Drosophila
msh and zebrafish (Danio rerio) msxB in the dorsal central nervous system (CNS). 
Our analysis suggests that BMPs act differently in these organisms to regulate
similar patterns of gene expression in the neuroectoderm: repressing msh
expression in Drosophila, while activating msxB expression in the zebrafish.
These findings suggest that the mechanisms by which the BMP gradient patterns the
dorsal neuroectoderm have reversed since the divergence of these two ancient
lineages.

PMCID: PMC4161316
PMID: 25210771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 5;9(9):e106818. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106818. eCollection
2014.

Transcriptome profiling of spinal muscular atrophy motor neurons derived from
mouse embryonic stem cells.

Maeda M(1), Harris AW(2), Kingham BF(3), Lumpkin CJ(1), Opdenaker LM(4), McCahan 
SM(5), Wang W(6), Butchbach ME(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Clinical Genomics, Nemours Biomedical Research, Nemours
Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware, United States of
America; Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware, United States of America. (2)Center for Applied Clinical Genomics,
Nemours Biomedical Research, Nemours Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children,
Wilmington, Delaware, United States of America. (3)Sequencing and Genotyping
Center, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware, United States of America.
(4)Center for Translational Cancer Research, University of Delaware, Newark,
Delaware, United States of America. (5)Center for Pediatric Research, Nemours
Biomedical Research, Nemours Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, 
Delaware, United States of America; Bioinformatics Core Facility, Nemours
Biomedical Research, Nemours Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, 
Delaware, United States of America; Department of Pediatrics, Thomas Jefferson
University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (6)Center for
Applied Clinical Genomics, Nemours Biomedical Research, Nemours Alfred I. duPont 
Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware, United States of America; Center for
Pediatric Research, Nemours Biomedical Research, Nemours Alfred I. duPont
Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware, United States of America; Department
of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware, United States
of America. (7)Center for Applied Clinical Genomics, Nemours Biomedical Research,
Nemours Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware, United
States of America; Center for Pediatric Research, Nemours Biomedical Research,
Nemours Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, Delaware, United
States of America; Department of Biological Sciences, University of Delaware,
Newark, Delaware, United States of America; Department of Pediatrics, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Proximal spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an early onset, autosomal recessive
motor neuron disease caused by loss of or mutation in SMN1 (survival motor neuron
1). Despite understanding the genetic basis underlying this disease, it is still 
not known why motor neurons (MNs) are selectively affected by the loss of the
ubiquitously expressed SMN protein. Using a mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC)
model for severe SMA, the RNA transcript profiles (transcriptomes) between
control and severe SMA (SMN2+/+;mSmn-/-) mESC-derived MNs were compared in this
study using massively parallel RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq). The MN differentiation
efficiencies between control and severe SMA mESCs were similar. RNA-Seq analysis 
identified 3,094 upregulated and 6,964 downregulated transcripts in SMA
mESC-derived MNs when compared against control cells. Pathway and network
analysis of the differentially expressed RNA transcripts showed that pluripotency
and cell proliferation transcripts were significantly increased in SMA MNs while 
transcripts related to neuronal development and activity were reduced. The
differential expression of selected transcripts such as Crabp1, Crabp2 and Nkx2.2
was validated in a second mESC model for SMA as well as in the spinal cords of
low copy SMN2 severe SMA mice. Furthermore, the levels of these selected
transcripts were restored in high copy SMN2 rescue mouse spinal cords when
compared against low copy SMN2 severe SMA mice. These findings suggest that SMN
deficiency affects processes critical for normal development and maintenance of
MNs.

PMCID: PMC4156416
PMID: 25191843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Brain Res. 2014 Oct 24;1586:64-72. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.08.046. Epub 2014
Aug 23.

Diazoxide promotes oligodendrocyte differentiation in neonatal brain in normoxia 
and chronic sublethal hypoxia.

Zhu Y(1), Wendler CC(1), Shi O(1), Rivkees SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Florida,
Gainesville, FL 32610, United States. (2)Department of Pediatrics, College of
Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32610, United States. Electronic
address: srivkees@peds.ufl.edu.

Periventricular white matter injury (PWMI) is the most common cause of brain
injury in preterm infants. It is believed that loss of late oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (OPCs) and disrupted maturation of oligodendrocytes contributes 
to defective myelination in PWMI. At present, no clinically approved drugs are
available for treating PWMI. Previously, we found that diazoxide promotes
myelination and attenuates brain injury in the chronic sublethal hypoxia model of
PWMI. In this study, we investigated the mechanisms by which diazoxide promotes
myelination. We observed that diazoxide increases the ratio of differentiated
oligodendrocytes in the cerebral white matter, promotes the expression of
differentiation-associated transcriptional factors Nkx2.2 and Sox10, and
increases the expression of myelin genes CNP and MBP. These results show that
diazoxide promotes oligodendrocyte differentiation in the developing brain.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4217210
PMID: 25157906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 6;9(8):e104318. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104318. eCollection
2014.

Generation of Pet1210-Cre transgenic mouse line reveals non-serotonergic
expression domains of Pet1 both in CNS and periphery.

Pelosi B(1), Migliarini S(1), Pacini G(1), Pratelli M(1), Pasqualetti M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Unit of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (2)Department of Biology, Unit of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy; Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Center
for Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems @UniTn, Rovereto, Italy.

Neurons producing serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) constitute one of the
most widely distributed neuronal networks in the mammalian central nervous system
(CNS) and exhibit a profuse innervation throughout the CNS already at early
stages of development. Serotonergic neuron specification is controlled by a
combination of secreted molecules and transcription factors such as Shh, Fgf4/8, 
Nkx2.2, Lmx1b and Pet1. In the mouse, Pet1 mRNA expression appears between 10 and
11 days post coitum (dpc) in serotonergic post-mitotic precursors and persists in
serotonergic neurons up to adulthood, where it promotes the expression of genes
defining the mature serotonergic phenotype such as tryptophan hydroxylase 2
(Tph2) and serotonin transporter (SERT). Hence, the generation of genetic tools
based on Pet1 specific expression represents a valuable approach to study the
development and function of the serotonergic system. Here, we report the
generation of a Pet1(210)-Cre transgenic mouse line in which the Cre recombinase 
is expressed under the control of a 210 kb fragment from the Pet1 genetic locus
to ensure a reliable and faithful control of somatic recombination in Pet1 cell
lineage. Besides Cre-mediated recombination accurately occurred in the
serotonergic system as expected and according to previous studies, Pet1(210)-Cre 
transgenic mouse line allowed us to identify novel, so far uncharacterized, Pet1 
expression domains. Indeed, we showed that in the raphe Pet1 is expressed also in
a non-serotonergic neuronal population intermingled with Tph2-expressing cells
and mostly localized in the B8 and B9 nuclei. Moreover, we detected Cre-mediated 
recombination also in the developing pancreas and in the ureteric bud derivatives
of the kidney, where it reflected a specific Pet1 expression. Thus, Pet1(210)-Cre
transgenic mouse line faithfully drives Cre-mediated recombination in all Pet1
expression domains representing a valuable tool to genetically manipulate
serotonergic and non-serotonergic Pet1 cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC4123907
PMID: 25098329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Diabetologia. 2014 Nov;57(11):2339-47. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3341-6. Epub 2014 
Aug 1.

Non-neural tyrosine hydroxylase, via modulation of endocrine pancreatic
precursors, is required for normal development of beta cells in the mouse
pancreas.

Vázquez P(1), Robles AM, de Pablo F, Hernández-Sánchez C.

Author information: 
(1)3D (Development, Differentiation, Degeneration) Lab, Department of Cellular
and Molecular Medicine, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas (CSIC), Ramiro de
Maeztu 9, 28040, Madrid, Spain.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Apart from transcription factors, little is known about the
molecules that modulate the proliferation and differentiation of pancreatic
endocrine cells. The early expression of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) in a subset of
glucagon(+) cells led us to investigate whether catecholamines have a role in
beta cell development.
METHODS: We studied the immunohistochemical characteristics of TH-expressing
cells in wild-type (Th (+/+) ) mice during early pancreas development, and
analysed the endocrine pancreas phenotype of TH-deficient (Th (-/-) ) mice. We
also studied the effect of dopamine addition and TH-inhibition on
insulin-producing cells in explant cultures.
RESULTS: In the mouse pancreas at embryonic day (E)12.5-E13.5, the ~10% of early 
glucagon(+) cells that co-expressed TH rarely proliferated and did not express
the precursor marker neurogenin 3 at E13.5. The number of insulin(+) cells in the
Th (-/-) embryonic pancreas was decreased as compared with wild-type embryos at
E13.5. While no changes in pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1
(PDX1)(+)-progenitor cell number were observed between groups at E12.5, the
number of neurogenin 3 and NK2 homeobox 2 (NKX2.2)-expressing cells was reduced
in Th (-/-) embryonic pancreas, an effect that occurred in parallel with
increased expression of the transcriptional repressor Hes1. The potential role of
dopamine as a pro-beta cell stimulus was tested by treating pancreas explants
with this catecholamine, which resulted in an increase in total insulin content
and insulin(+) cells relative to control explants.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: A non-neural catecholaminergic pathway appears to
modulate the pancreatic endocrine precursor and insulin producing cell
neogenesis. This finding may have important implications for approaches seeking
to promote the generation of beta cells to treat diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4181516
PMID: 25082160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Endocrinology. 2014 Oct;155(10):3781-92. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1843. Epub 2014 Jul
24.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate a-cell differentiation, glucagon biosynthesis, and
secretion.

Heddad Masson M(1), Poisson C, Guérardel A, Mamin A, Philippe J, Gosmain Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Hypertension and Nutrition, University 
Hospital of Geneva, Medical School, 1211 Geneva 14, Switzerland.

The Forkhead box A transcription factors are major regulators of glucose
homeostasis. They show both distinct and redundant roles during pancreas
development and in adult mouse ß-cells. In vivo ablation studies have revealed
critical implications of Foxa1 on glucagon biosynthesis and requirement of Foxa2 
in a-cell terminal differentiation. In order to examine the respective role of
these factors in mature a-cells, we used small interfering RNA (siRNA) directed
against Foxa1 and Foxa2 in rat primary pancreatic a-cells and rodent a-cell lines
leading to marked decreases in Foxa1 and Foxa2 mRNA levels and proteins. Both
Foxa1 and Foxa2 control glucagon gene expression specifically through the G2
element. Although we found that Foxa2 controls the expression of the glucagon,
MafB, Pou3f4, Pcsk2, Nkx2.2, Kir6.2, and Sur1 genes, Foxa1 only regulates
glucagon gene expression. Interestingly, the Isl1 and Gipr genes were not
controlled by either Foxa1 or Foxa2 alone but by their combination. Foxa1 and
Foxa2 directly activate and bind the promoter region the Nkx2.2, Kir6.2 and Sur1,
Gipr, Isl1, and Pou3f4 genes. We also demonstrated that glucagon secretion is
affected by the combined effects of Foxa1 and Foxa2 but not by either one alone. 
Our results indicate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 control glucagon biosynthesis and
secretion as well as a-cell differentiation with both common and unique target
genes.

PMID: 25057789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Virchows Arch. 2014 Nov;465(5):599-605. doi: 10.1007/s00428-014-1627-1. Epub 2014
Jul 17.

The combination of CD99 and NKX2.2, a transcriptional target of EWSR1-FLI1, is
highly specific for the diagnosis of Ewing sarcoma.

Shibuya R(1), Matsuyama A, Nakamoto M, Shiba E, Kasai T, Hisaoka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational and Environmental Health, 1-1 Iseigaoka, Yahatanishi-ku, Kitakyushu,
807-8555, Japan.

Ewing sarcoma (ES) is a high-grade malignant neoplasm primarily affecting
children and young adults. The diagnosis of ES is often difficult because of its 
broad differential diagnosis comprising a diverse group of small round cell
tumors (SRCTs). Although the identification of tumor type-specific fusion genes
by molecular testing is the gold standard for the diagnosis of ES, such
approaches are not always available in a routine pathology practice. Thus, a
reliable immunohistochemical marker is required. A recent study using a limited
number of tumor samples has shown that NKX2.2, a putative transcriptional target 
of EWSR1-FLI1, is a useful marker for the diagnosis of ES. In the present study, 
the immunohistochemical expression of NKX2.2 was evaluated on 46 genetically
confirmed ES and 85 non-ES SRCTs, together with comparative assessment of CD99
and other molecular targets of EWSR1-FLI1, including NR0B1, E2F3, and EZH2.
NKX2.2 was expressed in 37 (80 %) of the ES samples with a mostly diffuse and
strong staining pattern, and 14 (16 %) of the non-ES SRCTs, including olfactory
neuroblastomas, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, mesenchymal chondrosarcoma, 
small cell carcinomas, and Merkel cell carcinoma, also expressed this marker. The
sensitivity and specificity of the NKX2.2 expression in this cohort were 80 and
84 %, respectively. The specificity when combined with CD99 was 98 %, with
exceptional expression of both markers in only two non-ES SRCTs, including one
case each of mesenchymal chondrosarcoma and small cell carcinoma. NR0B1, E2F3,
and EZH2 were less sensitive for specific markers for ES when applied singly or
in any combination. In conclusion, the study reinforces that NKX2.2 is a useful
immunohistochemical marker for ES, and that the combination of CD99 and NKX2.2 is
a powerful diagnostic tool that can differentiate ES from other SRCTs.

PMID: 25031013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jul 15;15:595. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-595.

Gene network-based analysis identifies two potential subtypes of small intestinal
neuroendocrine tumors.

Kidd M(1), Modlin IM, Drozdov I.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.
mark.kidd@yale.edu.

BACKGROUND: Tumor transcriptomes contain information of critical value to
understanding the different capacities of a cell at both a physiological and
pathological level. In terms of clinical relevance, they provide information
regarding the cellular "toolbox" e.g., pathways associated with malignancy and
metastasis or drug dependency. Exploration of this resource can therefore be
leveraged as a translational tool to better manage and assess neoplastic
behavior. The availability of public genome-wide expression datasets, provide an 
opportunity to reassess neuroendocrine tumors at a more fundamental level. We
hypothesized that stringent analysis of expression profiles as well as regulatory
networks of the neoplastic cell would provide novel information that facilitates 
further delineation of the genomic basis of small intestinal neuroendocrine
tumors.
RESULTS: We re-analyzed two publically available small intestinal tumor
transcriptomes using stringent quality control parameters and network-based
approaches and validated expression of core secretory regulatory elements e.g.,
CPE, PCSK1, secretogranins, including genes involved in depolarization e.g.,
SCN3A, as well as transcription factors associated with neurodevelopment (NKX2-2,
NeuroD1, INSM1) and glucose homeostasis (APLP1). The candidate
metastasis-associated transcription factor, ST18, was highly expressed (>14-fold,
p < 0.004). Genes previously associated with neoplasia, CEBPA and SDHD, were
decreased in expression (-1.5 - -2, p < 0.02). Genomic interrogation indicated
that intestinal tumors may consist of two different subtypes, serotonin-producing
neoplasms and serotonin/substance P/tachykinin lesions. QPCR validation in an
independent dataset (n = 13 neuroendocrine tumors), confirmed up-regulated
expression of 87% of genes (13/15).
CONCLUSIONS: An integrated cellular transcriptomic analysis of small intestinal
neuroendocrine tumors identified that they are regulated at a developmental
level, have key activation of hypoxic pathways (a known regulator of malignant
stem cell phenotypes) as well as activation of genes involved in apoptosis and
proliferation. Further refinement of these analyses by RNAseq studies of
large-scale databases will enable definition of individual master regulators and 
facilitate the development of novel tissue and blood-based tools to better
understand diagnose and treat tumors.

PMCID: PMC4124138
PMID: 25023465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 15;111(28):E2885-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1408295111. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Transcription factor induction of human oligodendrocyte progenitor fate and
differentiation.

Wang J(1), Pol SU(1), Haberman AK(1), Wang C(1), O'Bara MA(1), Sim FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, School of Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214. (2)Department of Pharmacology
and Toxicology, School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences, University at
Buffalo, Buffalo, NY 14214 fjsim@buffalo.edu.

Human oligodendrocyte progenitor cell (OPC) specification and differentiation
occurs slowly and limits the potential for cell-based treatment of demyelinating 
disease. In this study, using FACS-based isolation and microarray analysis, we
identified a set of transcription factors expressed by human primary
CD140a(+)O4(+) OPCs relative to CD133(+)CD140a(-) neural stem/progenitor cells
(NPCs). Among these, lentiviral overexpression of transcription factors ASCL1,
SOX10, and NKX2.2 in NPCs was sufficient to induce Sox10 enhancer activity, OPC
mRNA, and protein expression consistent with OPC fate; however, unlike ASCL1 and 
NKX2.2, only the transcriptome of SOX10-infected NPCs was induced to a human OPC 
gene expression signature. Furthermore, only SOX10 promoted oligodendrocyte
commitment, and did so at quantitatively equivalent levels to native OPCs. In
xenografts of shiverer/rag2 animals, SOX10 increased the rate of mature
oligodendrocyte differentiation and axon ensheathment. Thus, SOX10 appears to be 
the principle and rate-limiting regulator of myelinogenic fate from human NPCs.

PMCID: PMC4104854
PMID: 24982138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Dyn. 2014 Sep;243(9):1116-29. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24158. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Mammalian Nkx2.2+ perineurial glia are essential for motor nerve development.

Clark JK(1), O'keefe A, Mastracci TL, Sussel L, Matise MP, Kucenas S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia.

BACKGROUND: All vertebrate peripheral nerves connect the central nervous system
(CNS) with targets in the periphery and are composed of axons, layers of
ensheathing glia and connective tissue. Although the structure of these conduits 
is well established, very little is known about the origin and developmental
roles of some of their elements. One understudied component, the perineurium,
ensheaths nerve fascicles and is a component of the blood-nerve-barrier. In
zebrafish, the motor nerve perineurium is composed of CNS-derived nkx2.2a(+)
perineurial glia, which establish the motor exit point (MEP) during development. 
To determine if mouse perineurial cells also originate within the CNS and perform
a similar function, we created a Nkx2.2:EGFP transgenic reporter line.
RESULTS: In conjunction with RNA expression analysis and antibody labeling, we
observed Nkx2.2(+) cells along peripheral motor nerves at all stages of
development and in adult tissue. Additionally, in mice lacking Nkx2.2, we
demonstrate that Nkx2.2(+) perineurial glia are essential for motor nerve
development and Schwann cell differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies reveal that a subset of mouse perineurial cells are
CNS-derived, express Nkx2.2, and are essential for motor nerve development. This 
work highlights an under-appreciated but essential contribution of CNS-derived
cells to the development of the mammalian peripheral nervous system (PNS).

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4180512
PMID: 24979729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Dev Biol. 2014 Sep 1;393(1):137-48. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.012. Epub 2014
Jun 23.

Arx together with FoxA2, regulates Shh floor plate expression.

Cho G(1), Lim Y(2), Cho IT(2), Simonet JC(3), Golden JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women<U+05F3>s Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of
Philadelphia, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women<U+05F3>s Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, USA. (3)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women<U+05F3>s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA; Department 
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of Philadelphia, USA.
Electronic address: jagolden@partners.org.

Mutations in the Aristaless related homeodomain transcription factor (ARX) are
associated with a diverse set of X-linked mental retardation and epilepsy
syndromes in humans. Although most studies have been focused on its function in
the forebrain, ARX is also expressed in other regions of the developing nervous
system including the floor plate (FP) of the spinal cord where its function is
incompletely understood. To investigate the role of Arx in the FP, we performed
gain-of-function studies in the chick using in ovo electroporation, and
loss-of-function studies in Arx-deficient mice. We have found that Arx, in
conjunction with FoxA2, directly induces Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression through 
binding to a Shh floor plate enhancer (SFPE2). We also observed that FoxA2
induces Arx through its transcriptional activation domain whereas Nkx2.2, induced
by Shh, abolishes this induction. Our data support a feedback loop model for Arx 
function; through interactions with FoxA2, Arx positively regulates Shh
expression in the FP, and Shh signaling in turn activates Nkx2.2, which
suppresses Arx expression. Furthermore, our data are evidence that Arx plays a
role as a context dependent transcriptional activator, rather than a primary
inducer of Shh expression, potentially explaining how mutations in ARX are
associated with diverse, and often subtle, defects.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4681535
PMID: 24968361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Development. 2014 Jul;141(14):2875-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.105387. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Sp8 plays a supplementary role to Pax6 in establishing the pMN/p3 domain boundary
in the spinal cord.

Li X(1), Liu Z(2), Qiu M(3), Yang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Brain Science and State Key Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, 
Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China 072023029@fudan.edu.cn
yangz@fudan.edu.cn. (2)Institutes of Brain Science and State Key Laboratory of
Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. (3)Institute of
Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Zhejiang Key Laboratory of Organ
Development and Regeneration, Hangzhou Normal University, Hangzhou 310036, China 
Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, School of Medicine,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY40392, USA.

Progenitor cells are segregated into multiple domains along the dorsoventral axis
of the vertebrate neural tube, and each progenitor domain generates particular
types of neurons. Selective cross-repressive interactions between pairs of class 
I and class II transcription factors play important roles in patterning neural
progenitors into domains with clear boundaries. Here, we provide evidence that
the zinc-finger protein Sp8 plays a supplementary role to Pax6 in establishing
the pMN/p3 domain boundary through mutually repressive interactions with the
class II protein Nkx2-2. The ventral limit of Sp8 expression is complementary to 
the dorsal limit of Nkx2-2 expression at the pMN/p3 boundary. Sp8 and Nkx2-2
exert cross-repressive interactions, and changing the expression of Sp8 and
Nkx2-2 is coupled with pMN and p3 progenitor fate conversion. Sp8 exerts its
neural patterning activities by acting as a transcriptional activator. The
expression of a repressive form of Sp8 results in the selective inhibition of
motor neuron generation and the ectopic induction of Nkx2-2 expression. Sp8
expression is positively regulated by, but not completely dependent on, Pax6.
Furthermore, whereas loss of Pax6 function alone results in disruption of the
pMN/p3 domain boundary only in the rostral levels of the spinal cord, loss of
both Sp8 and Pax6 functions results in disruption of the pMN/p3 domain boundary
along the whole rostrocaudal axis of the spinal cord. We conclude that Sp8 plays 
a supplementary role to Pax6 in specifying the pMN over p3 progenitor fate
through cross-repressive interactions with Nkx2-2.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 24948600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 18;9(6):e100398. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100398.
eCollection 2014.

Contribution of a non-ß-cell source to ß-cell mass during pregnancy.

Toselli C(1), Hyslop CM(1), Hughes M(1), Natale DR(2), Santamaria P(3), Huang
CT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Alberta Children's Hospital Research Institute,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(2)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California San Diego, San
Diego, California, United States of America. (3)Julia McFarlane Diabetes Research
Centre (JMDRC) and Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Infectious
Diseases, Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Institut D'Investigacions Biomediques
August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.

ß-cell mass in the pancreas increases significantly during pregnancy as an
adaptation to maternal insulin resistance. Lineage tracing studies in rodents
have presented conflicting evidence on the role of cell duplication in the
formation of new ß-cells during gestation, while recent human data suggest that
new islets are a major contributor to increased ß-cell mass in pregnancy. Here,
we aim to: 1) determine whether a non-ß-cell source contributes to the appearance
of new ß-cells during pregnancy and 2) investigate whether recapitulation of the 
embryonic developmental pathway involving high expression of neurogenin 3 (Ngn3) 
plays a role in the up-regulation of ß-cell mass during pregnancy. Using a mouse 
ß-cell lineage-tracing model, which labels insulin-producing ß-cells with red
fluorescent protein (RFP), we found that the percentage of labeled ß-cells
dropped from 97% prior to pregnancy to 87% at mid-pregnancy. This suggests
contribution of a non-ß-cell source to the increase in total ß-cell numbers
during pregnancy. In addition, we observed a population of hormone-negative,
Ngn3-positive cells in islets of both non-pregnant and pregnant mice, and this
population dropped from 12% of all islets cells in the non-pregnant mice to 5% by
day 8 of pregnancy. Concomitantly, a decrease in expression of Ngn3 and changes
in its upstream regulatory network (Sox9 and Hes-1) as well as downstream targets
(NeuroD, Nkx2.2, Rfx6 and IA1) were also observed during pregnancy. Our results
show that duplication of pre-existing ß-cells is not the sole source of new
ß-cells during pregnancy and that Ngn3 may be involved in this process.

PMCID: PMC4062500
PMID: 24940737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2014 May 20;9(5):e97820. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097820. eCollection
2014.

The epigenetic bivalency of core pancreatic ß-cell transcription factor genes
within mouse pluripotent embryonic stem cells is not affected by knockdown of the
polycomb repressive complex 2, SUZ12.

Wong JC(1), Jack MM(2), Li Y(1), O'Neill C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Developmental and Regenerative Medicine, Kolling Institute of
Medical Research, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia. (2)Department of Endocrinology, Royal North Shore Hospital,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

This study assesses changes in activator and repressor modifications to histones 
associated with the core transcription factor genes most highly upregulated or
downregulated in pancreatic ß-cells relative to expression in an embryonic stem
cell line. Epigenetic analysis of the Oct4, Utf1, Nanog and Sox2 (pluripotency)
and Pdx1, Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2 and MafA (pancreatic ß-cells) transcription factor genes
in embryonic stem cells and a ß-cell line (MIN6) showed the pluripotency genes
were enriched for active (histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4 and histone 3
acetylated at lysine 9) and depleted of repressor modifications (histone 3
trimethylated at lysine 27 and histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 9) around the
transcription start site in mouse embryonic stem cells (D3), and this was
reversed in MIN6 cells. The ß-cell transcription factors were bivalently enriched
for activating (histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4) and repressor (histone 3
trimethylated at lysine 27) modifications in embryonic stem cells but were
monovalent for the activator modification (histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 4)
in the ß-cells. The polycomb repressor complex 2 acts as a histone 3 lysine 27
methylase and an essential component of this complex, SUZ12, was enriched at the 
ß-cell transcription factors in embryonic stem cells and was reduced MIN6.
Knock-down of SUZ12 in embryonic stem cells, however, did not reduce the level of
histone 3 trimethylated at lysine 27 at ß-cell transcription factor loci or break
the transcriptional repression of these genes in embryonic stem cells. This study
shows the reduction in the total SUZ12 level was not a sufficient cause of the
resolution of the epigenetic bivalency of ß-cell transcription factors in
embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4028244
PMID: 24845830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. PLoS One. 2014 May 16;9(5):e97694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097694. eCollection
2014.

C-Abl inhibitor imatinib enhances insulin production by ß cells: c-Abl negatively
regulates insulin production via interfering with the expression of NKx2.2 and
GLUT-2.

Xia CQ(1), Zhang P(2), Li S(2), Yuan L(2), Xia T(2), Xie C(2), Clare-Salzler
MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Bejing,
China; Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, Diabetes
Center of Excellence, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States 
of America. (2)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine,
Diabetes Center of Excellence, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
United States of America.

Chronic myelogenous leukemia patients treated with tyrosine kinase inhibitor,
Imatinib, were shown to have increased serum levels of C-peptide. Imatinib
specifically inhibits the tyrosine kinase, c-Abl. However, the mechanism of how
Imatinib treatment can lead to increased insulin level is unclear. Specifically, 
there is little investigation into whether Imatinib directly affects ß cells to
promote insulin production. In this study, we showed that Imatinib significantly 
induced insulin expression in both glucose-stimulated and resting ß cells. In
line with this finding, c-Abl knockdown by siRNA and overexpression of c-Abl
markedly enhanced and inhibited insulin expression in ß cells, respectively.
Unexpectedly, high concentrations of glucose significantly induced c-Abl
expression, suggesting c-Abl may play a role in balancing insulin production
during glucose stimulation. Further studies demonstrated that c-Abl inhibition
did not affect the major insulin gene transcription factor, pancreatic and
duodenal homeobox-1 (PDX-1) expression. Of interest, inhibition of c-Abl enhanced
NKx2.2 and overexpression of c-Abl in ß cells markedly down-regulated NKx2.2,
which is a positive regulator for insulin gene expression. Additionally, we found
that c-Abl inhibition significantly enhanced the expression of glucose
transporter GLUT2 on ß cells. Our study demonstrates a previously unrecognized
mechanism that controls insulin expression through c-Abl-regulated NKx2.2 and
GLUT2. Therapeutic targeting ß cell c-Abl could be employed in the treatment of
diabetes or ß cell tumor, insulinoma.

PMCID: PMC4023982
PMID: 24835010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Glycobiology. 2014 Oct;24(10):926-34. doi: 10.1093/glycob/cwu042. Epub 2014 May
11.

Ceramide galactosyltransferase expression is regulated positively by Nkx2.2 and
negatively by OLIG2.

Okahara K(1), Kizuka Y(1), Kitazume S(1), Ota F(1), Nakajima K(2), Hirabayashi
Y(2), Maekawa M(3), Yoshikawa T(3), Taniguchi N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Disease Glycomics Team, Systems Glycobiology Research Group, RIKEN-Max Planck 
Joint Research Center, Global Research Cluster, RIKEN, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako,
Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (2)Molecular Membrane Neuroscience. (3)Laboratory for
Molecular Psychiatry, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, RIKEN, Hirosawa 2-1, Wako,
Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (4)Disease Glycomics Team, Systems Glycobiology Research
Group, RIKEN-Max Planck Joint Research Center, Global Research Cluster, RIKEN,
2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan tani52@wd5.so-net.ne.jp.

Myelin, a multilamellar structure extended from oligodendrocytes or Schwann
cells, plays a critical role in maintenance of neuronal function, and damage or
loss of myelin causes demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis. For
precise alignment of the myelin sheath, there is a requirement for expression of 
galactosylceramide (GalCer), a major glycosphingolipid in myelin. Synthesis of
GalCer is strictly limited in oligodendrocytes in a developmental stage-specific 
manner. Ceramide galactosyltransferase (CGT), a key enzyme for biosynthesis of
GalCer, exhibits restricted expression in oligodendrocytes but the mechanism is
poorly understood. Based on our assumption that particular
oligodendrocyte-lineage-specific transcription factors regulate CGT expression,
we co-expressed a series of candidate transcription factors with the human CGT
promoter-driving luciferase expression in oligodendroglioma cells to measure the 
promoter activity. We found that Nkx2.2 strongly activated the CGT promoter. In
addition, we identified a novel repressive DNA element in the first intron of CGT
and OLIG2, an oligodendrocyte-specific transcription factor, as a binding protein
of this element. Moreover, overexpression of OLIG2 completely canceled the
activating effect of Nkx2.2 on CGT promoter activity. Expression of CGT mRNA was 
also upregulated by Nkx2.2, but this upregulation was cancelled by co-expression 
of OLIG2 with Nkx2.2. Our study suggests that CGT expression is controlled by
balanced expression of the negative modulator OLIG2 and positive regulator
Nkx2.2, providing new insights into how expression of GalCer is tightly regulated
in cell-type- and stage-specific manners.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24821492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jul;41(7):4783-94. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3349-5. Epub 2014
Apr 10.

Generation of high-yield insulin producing cells from human bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells.

Jafarian A(1), Taghikhani M, Abroun S, Pourpak Z, Allahverdi A, Soleimani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat
Modares University, Tehran, Iran, ajafaryan@modares.ac.ir.

Allogenic islet transplantation is a most efficient approach for treatment of
diabetes mellitus. However, the scarcity of islets and long term need for an
immunosuppressant limits its application. Recently, cell replacement therapies
that generate of unlimited sources of ß cells have been developed to overcome
these limitations. In this study we have described a stage specific
differentiation protocol for the generation of insulin producing islet-like
clusters from human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBM-MSCs). This specific 
stepwise protocol induced differentiation of hMSCs into definitive endoderm,
pancreatic endoderm and pancreatic endocrine cells that expressed of sox17,
foxa2, pdx1, ngn3, nkx2.2, insulin, glucagon, somatostatin, pancreatic
polypeptide, and glut2 transcripts respectively. In addition, immunocytochemical 
analysis confirmed protein expression of the above mentioned genes. Western blot 
analysis discriminated insulin from proinsulin in the final differentiated cells.
In derived insulin producing cells (IPCs), secreted insulin and C-peptide was in 
a glucose dependent manner. We have developed a protocol that generates effective
high-yield human IPCs from hBM-MSCs in vitro. These finding suggest that
functional IPCs generated by this procedure can be used as a cell-based approach 
for insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 24718781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. OMICS. 2014 May;18(5):310-23. doi: 10.1089/omi.2013.0084. Epub 2014 Mar 6.

An epigenetic biomarker panel for glioblastoma multiforme personalized medicine
through DNA methylation analysis of human embryonic stem cell-like signature.

Chiang JH(1), Cheng WS, Hood L, Tian Q.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Cheng
Kung University , Tainan City, Taiwan .

Alterations of DNA methylation occur during the course of both stem cell
development and tumorigenesis. We present a novel strategy that can be used to
stratify glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) patients through the epigenetic states of 
genes associated with human embryonic stem cell (hESC) identity in order to 1)
assess linkages between the methylation signatures of these stem cell genes and
survival of GBM patients, and 2) delineate putative mechanisms leading to poor
prognosis in some patient subgroups. A DNA methylation signature was established 
for stratifying GBM patients into several hESC methylator subgroups. The hESC
methylator-negative phenotype has demonstrated poor survival and upregulation of 
glioma stem cell (GSC) markers, and is enriched in one of the previously defined 
transcriptomic phenotypes-the mesenchymal phenotype. We further identified a
refined signature of 36 genes as the gene panel, including SOX2, POU3F2, FGFR2,
GAP43, NTRK2, NTRK3, and NKX2-2, which are highly enriched in the nervous system.
Both signatures outperformed the O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT)
methylation test in predicting patient's outcome. These findings were also
validated through an independent dataset of patients. Furthermore, through
statistical analyses, both signatures were examined significantly.
Hypomethylation of hESC-associated genes predicted poorer clinical outcome in
GBM, supporting the idea that epigenetic activation of stem cell genes
contributes to GBM aggression. The gene panel presented herein may be developed
into clinical assays for patient stratification and future personalized medicine 
interventions.

PMCID: PMC4012637
PMID: 24601786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 7;9(2):e88506. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088506. eCollection 
2014.

DISC1 (disrupted-in-schizophrenia-1) regulates differentiation of
oligodendrocytes.

Hattori T(1), Shimizu S(2), Koyama Y(3), Emoto H(4), Matsumoto Y(4), Kumamoto
N(5), Yamada K(6), Takamura H(6), Matsuzaki S(7), Katayama T(6), Tohyama M(8),
Ito A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. (2)Division of Molecular Brain Science, Research
Institute of Traditional Asian Medicine, Kinki University, Sayama, Osaka, Japan. 
(3)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. (4)Pharmacology Research Laboratories, Dainippon
Sumitomo Pharma Co, Ltd, Suita, Osaka, Japan. (5)Department of Neurobiology and
Anatomy, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya City University, Nagoya,
Aichi, Japan. (6)Department of Child Development & Molecular Brain Science,
United Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka University, Kanazawa
University and Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka, Japan.
(7)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan ; Department of Child Development & Molecular
Brain Science, United Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka University,
Kanazawa University and Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Suita, Osaka,
Japan. (8)Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine,
Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan ; Department of Child Development &
Molecular Brain Science, United Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka
University, Kanazawa University and Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Suita, Osaka, Japan ; Division of Molecular Brain Science, Research Institute of 
Traditional Asian Medicine, Kinki University, Sayama, Osaka, Japan.

Disrupted-in-schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) is a gene disrupted by a translocation,
t(1;11) (q42.1;q14.3), that segregates with major psychiatric disorders,
including schizophrenia, recurrent major depression and bipolar affective
disorder, in a Scottish family. Here we report that mammalian DISC1 endogenously 
expressed in oligodendroglial lineage cells negatively regulates differentiation 
of oligodendrocyte precursor cells into oligodendrocytes. DISC1 expression was
detected in oligodendrocytes of the mouse corpus callosum at P14 and P70. DISC1
mRNA was expressed in primary cultured rat cortical oligodendrocyte precursor
cells and decreased when oligodendrocyte precursor cells were induced to
differentiate by PDGF deprivation. Immunocytochemical analysis showed that
overexpressed DISC1 was localized in the cell bodies and processes of
oligodendrocyte precursor cells and oligodendrocytes. We show that expression of 
the myelin related markers, CNPase and MBP, as well as the number of cells with a
matured oligodendrocyte morphology, were decreased following full length DISC1
overexpression. Conversely, both expression of CNPase and the number of
oligodendrocytes with a mature morphology were increased following knockdown of
endogenous DISC1 by RNA interference. Overexpression of a truncated form of DISC1
also resulted in an increase in expression of myelin related proteins and the
number of mature oligodendrocytes, potentially acting via a dominant negative
mechanism. We also identified involvement of Sox10 and Nkx2.2 in the DISC1
regulatory pathway of oligodendrocyte differentiation, both well-known
transcription factors involved in the regulation of myelin genes.

PMCID: PMC3917910
PMID: 24516667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2014 Feb;141(3):548-55. doi: 10.1242/dev.095323.

Genetic evidence that Nkx2.2 and Pdgfra are major determinants of the timing of
oligodendrocyte differentiation in the developing CNS.

Zhu Q(1), Zhao X, Zheng K, Li H, Huang H, Zhang Z, Mastracci T, Wegner M, Chen Y,
Sussel L, Qiu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville, 
Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

In the central nervous system (CNS), oligodendrocyte maturation and axonal
myelination occur on a predictable schedule, but the underlying timing mechanisms
are largely unknown. In the present study, we demonstrate that Nkx2.2 homeodomain
transcription factor is a key regulator for the timing of oligodendrocyte
differentiation during development. Whereas induced expression of Nkx2.2 in early
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) causes precocious differentiation of
oligodendrocytes, conditional ablation of Nkx2.2 temporally delays
oligodendrocyte maturation. Moreover, Nkx2.2 can directly bind to the promoter of
platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (Pdgfra) and repress its gene
expression. Genetic ablation of Pdgfra mimics the effect of Nkx2.2 overexpression
in accelerating OPC differentiation in the developing spinal cord. Together, our 
findings strongly suggest that Nkx2.2 functions as a major 'switch' to turn off
Pdgfra signaling in OPCs and initiate the intrinsic program for oligodendrocyte
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3899813
PMID: 24449836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Metab. 2014 Jan 7;19(1):146-54. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.11.021.

Analysis of transcription factors key for mouse pancreatic development
establishes NKX2-2 and MNX1 mutations as causes of neonatal diabetes in man.

Flanagan SE(1), De Franco E(1), Lango Allen H(1), Zerah M(2), Abdul-Rasoul MM(3),
Edge JA(4), Stewart H(5), Alamiri E(6), Hussain K(7), Wallis S(8), de Vries L(9),
Rubio-Cabezas O(10), Houghton JA(1), Edghill EL(1), Patch AM(1), Ellard S(1),
Hattersley AT(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter EX2 5DW, UK. (2)Presbyterian Medical Group, Albuquerque, NM 87106,
USA. (3)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Kuwait University, Safat
13110, Kuwait. (4)Oxford Children's Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust, Oxford
OX3 7LE, UK. (6)Al Qassimi Hospital, Sharjah 3500, United Arab Emirates.
(7)London Centre for Paediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS Trust, and The Institute of Child Health, University
College London, London WC1N 1EH, UK. (8)Neonatal Unit, Bradford Royal Infirmary, 
Bradford BD9 6RJ, UK. (9)Institute of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Schneider
Children's Medical Center of Israel, PetahTikva, and Sackler Faculty of Medicine,
Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv 49202, Israel. (10)Institute of Biomedical and
Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter EX2 5DW, UK;
Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Niño Jesús, Madrid
28009, Spain. (11)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of
Exeter Medical School, Exeter EX2 5DW, UK. Electronic address:
a.t.hattersley@exeter.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 May;10(5):253-5.

Understanding transcriptional regulation of pancreatic development is required to
advance current efforts in developing beta cell replacement therapies for
patients with diabetes. Current knowledge of key transcriptional regulators has
predominantly come from mouse studies, with rare, naturally occurring mutations
establishing their relevance in man. This study used a combination of
homozygosity analysis and Sanger sequencing in 37 consanguineous patients with
permanent neonatal diabetes to search for homozygous mutations in 29
transcription factor genes important for murine pancreatic development. We
identified homozygous mutations in 7 different genes in 11 unrelated patients and
show that NKX2-2 and MNX1 are etiological genes for neonatal diabetes, thus
confirming their key role in development of the human pancreas. The similar
phenotype of the patients with recessive mutations and mice with inactivation of 
a transcription factor gene support there being common steps critical for
pancreatic development and validate the use of rodent models for beta cell
development.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3887257
PMID: 24411943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Development. 2014 Feb;141(3):574-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.104372. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

Nato3 plays an integral role in dorsoventral patterning of the spinal cord by
segregating floor plate/p3 fates via Nkx2.2 suppression and Foxa2 maintenance.

Mansour AA(1), Khazanov-Zisman S, Netser Y, Klar A, Ben-Arie N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Life Sciences,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

During embryogenesis, the dorsal roof plate and the ventral floor plate (FP) act 
as organizing centers to pattern the developing neural tube. Organizer-secreted
morphogens provide signals that are interpreted via the graded expression of
transcription factors. These factors establish a combinatorial code, which
subsequently determines the fate of neuronal progenitors along the dorsoventral
axis. To further separate the fates and promote distinct identities of the neural
progenitors, mutual repression takes place among transcription factors expressed 
in progenitors situated along the dorsoventral axis. The molecular mechanisms
acting in the developing spinal cord and underlying the segregation of the
progenitor pool containing cells with a mixed FP/p3 fate into separate FP cells
and V3 neurons are not fully understood. Using in vivo ectopic expression in
chick, we found that Nato3 induces ectopic Foxa2-positive cells and indirectly
downregulates Nkx2.2 expression. To examine the role of Nato3 in the FP,
Foxa2-Nato3 signaling was blocked in Nato3 null mice and to a greater extent in
Nato3 null/Foxa2 heterozygous bigenic mutants. Complementary to the findings
obtained by gain of function in chick, the loss of function in mouse indicated
that the segregation of the FP/p3 population into its derivatives was
interrupted. Together, the data suggest that Nato3 is a novel determinant factor 
regulating the segregation of the FP and p3 identities, which is an essential
step for establishing a definitive FP fate in the embryonic spinal cord.

PMID: 24401371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 4;8(12):e82076. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082076. eCollection
2013.

Initial cell seeding density influences pancreatic endocrine development during
in vitro differentiation of human embryonic stem cells.

Gage BK(1), Webber TD, Kieffer TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have the ability to form cells derived from
all three germ layers, and as such have received significant attention as a
possible source for insulin-secreting pancreatic beta-cells for diabetes
treatment. While considerable advances have been made in generating hESC-derived 
insulin-producing cells, to date in vitro-derived glucose-responsive beta-cells
have remained an elusive goal. With the objective of increasing the in vitro
formation of pancreatic endocrine cells, we examined the effect of varying
initial cell seeding density from 1.3 x 10(4) cells/cm(2) to 5.3 x 10(4)
cells/cm(2) followed by a 21-day pancreatic endocrine differentiation protocol.
Low density-seeded cells were found to be biased toward the G2/M phases of the
cell cycle and failed to efficiently differentiate into SOX17-CXCR4 co-positive
definitive endoderm cells leaving increased numbers of OCT4 positive cells in day
4 cultures. Moderate density cultures effectively formed definitive endoderm and 
progressed to express PDX1 in approximately 20% of the culture. High density
cultures contained approximately double the numbers of PDX1 positive pancreatic
progenitor cells and also showed increased expression of MNX1, PTF1a, NGN3, ARX, 
and PAX4 compared to cultures seeded at moderate density. The cultures seeded at 
high density displayed increased formation of polyhormonal pancreatic endocrine
cell populations co-expressing insulin, glucagon and somatostatin. The maturation
process giving rise to these endocrine cell populations followed the expected
cascade of pancreatic progenitor marker (PDX1 and MNX1) expression, followed by
pancreatic endocrine specification marker expression (BRN4, PAX4, ARX, NEUROD1,
NKX6.1 and NKX2.2) and then pancreatic hormone expression (insulin, glucagon and 
somatostatin). Taken together these data suggest that initial cell seeding
density plays an important role in both germ layer specification and pancreatic
progenitor commitment, which precedes pancreatic endocrine cell formation. This
work highlights the need to examine standard culture variables such as seeding
density when optimizing hESC differentiation protocols.

PMCID: PMC3852888
PMID: 24324748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Comput Biol Chem. 2013 Dec;47:192-7. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.08.010.
Epub 2013 Sep 19.

Gene expression patterns combined with bioinformatics analysis identify genes
associated with cholangiocarcinoma.

Li C(1), Shen W, Shen S, Ai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital Affiliated in Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

To explore the molecular mechanisms of cholangiocarcinoma (CC), microarray
technology was used to find biomarkers for early detection and diagnosis. The
gene expression profiles from 6 patients with CC and 5 normal controls were
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus and compared. As a result, 204
differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) in CC patients compared to normal
controls were identified using a computational bioinformatics analysis. These
genes were mainly involved in coenzyme metabolic process, peptidase activity and 
oxidation reduction. A regulatory network was constructed by mapping the DCGs to 
known regulation data. Four transcription factors, FOXC1, ZIC2, NKX2-2 and GCGR, 
were hub nodes in the network. In conclusion, this study provides a set of
targets useful for future investigations into molecular biomarker studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Comp Neurol. 2014 Apr 1;522(5):1102-31. doi: 10.1002/cne.23471.

Characterization of the hypothalamus of Xenopus laevis during development. II.
The basal regions.

Domínguez L(1), González A, Moreno N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University Complutense of
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

The expression patterns of conserved developmental regulatory transcription
factors and neuronal markers were analyzed in the basal hypothalamus of Xenopus
laevis throughout development by means of combined immunohistochemical and in
situ hybridization techniques. The connectivity of the main subdivisions was
investigated by in vitro tracing techniques with dextran amines. The basal
hypothalamic region is topologically rostral to the basal diencephalon and is
composed of the tuberal (rostral) and mammillary (caudal) subdivisions, according
to the prosomeric model. It is dorsally bounded by the optic chiasm and the alar 
hypothalamus, and caudally by the diencephalic prosomere p3. The tuberal
hypothalamus is defined by the expression of Nkx2.1, xShh, and Isl1, and rostral 
and caudal portions can be distinguished by the distinct expression of Otp
rostrally and Nkx2.2 caudally. In the mammillary region the xShh/Nkx2.1
combination defined the rostral mammillary area, expressing Nkx2.1, and the
caudal retromammillary area, expressing xShh. The expression of xLhx1, xDll4, and
Otp in the mammillary area and Isl1 in the tuberal region highlights the boundary
between the two basal hypothalamic territories. Both regions are strongly
connected with subpallial regions, especially those conveying
olfactory/vomeronasal information, and also possess abundant intrahypothalamic
connections. They show reciprocal connections with the diencephalon (mainly the
thalamus), project to the midbrain tectum, and are bidirectionally related to the
rhombencephalon. These results illustrate that the basal hypothalamus of anurans 
shares many features of specification, regionalization, and hodology with
amniotes, reinforcing the idea of a basic bauplan in the organization of this
prosencephalic region in all tetrapods.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24122702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Genesis. 2013 Dec;51(12):844-51. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22715. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Nkx2.2:Cre knock-in mouse line: a novel tool for pancreas- and CNS-specific gene 
deletion.

Balderes DA(1), Magnuson MA, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York, 10032.

Nkx2.2 is a homeodomain-containing transcriptional regulator necessary for the
appropriate differentiation of ventral neuronal populations in the spinal cord
and hindbrain, and endocrine cell populations in the pancreas and intestine. In
each tissue, Nkx2.2 inactivation leads to reciprocal cell fate alterations. To
confirm the cell fate changes are due to respecification of Nkx2.2-expressing
progenitors and to provide a novel tool for lineage tracing in the pancreas and
CNS, we generated an Nkx2.2:Cre mouse line by knocking in a Cre-EGFP cassette
into the Nkx2.2 genomic locus and inactivating endogenous Nkx2.2. The
R26R-CAG-LSL-tdTomato reporter was used to monitor the specificity and efficiency
of Nkx2.2:Cre activity; the tomato reporter faithfully recapitulated endogenous
Nkx2.2 expression and could be detected as early as embryonic day (e) 9.25 in the
developing CNS and was initiated shortly thereafter at e9.5 in the pancreas.
Lineage analyses in the CNS confirmed the cell populations thought to be derived 
from Nkx2.2-expressing progenitor domains. Furthermore, lineage studies verified 
Nkx2.2 expression in the earliest pancreatic progenitors that give rise to all
cell types of the pancreas; however they also revealed more robust Cre activity
in the dorsal versus ventral pancreas. Thus, the Nkx2.2:Cre line provides a novel
tool for gene manipulations in the CNS and pancreas.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3902634
PMID: 23996959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 5;8(8):e70397. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070397. Print 2013.

Gastrin: a distinct fate of neurogenin3 positive progenitor cells in the
embryonic pancreas.

Suissa Y(1), Magenheim J, Stolovich-Rain M, Hija A, Collombat P, Mansouri A,
Sussel L, Sosa-Pineda B, McCracken K, Wells JM, Heller RS, Dor Y, Glaser B.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Service, Department of Internal Medicine,
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.

Neurogenin3(+) (Ngn3(+)) progenitor cells in the developing pancreas give rise to
five endocrine cell types secreting insulin, glucagon, somatostatin, pancreatic
polypeptide and ghrelin. Gastrin is a hormone produced primarily by G-cells in
the stomach, where it functions to stimulate acid secretion by gastric parietal
cells. Gastrin is expressed in the embryonic pancreas and is common in islet cell
tumors, but the lineage and regulators of pancreatic gastrin(+) cells are not
known. We report that gastrin is abundantly expressed in the embryonic pancreas
and disappears soon after birth. Some gastrin(+) cells in the developing pancreas
co-express glucagon, ghrelin or pancreatic polypeptide, but many gastrin(+) cells
do not express any other islet hormone. Pancreatic gastrin(+) cells express the
transcription factors Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2 and low levels of Pdx1, and derive from
Ngn3(+) endocrine progenitor cells as shown by genetic lineage tracing. Using
mice deficient for key transcription factors we show that gastrin expression
depends on Ngn3, Nkx2.2, NeuroD1 and Arx, but not Pax4 or Pax6. Finally, gastrin 
expression is induced upon differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to
pancreatic endocrine cells expressing insulin. Thus, gastrin(+) cells are a
distinct endocrine cell type in the pancreas and an alternative fate of Ngn3+
cells.

PMCID: PMC3734289
PMID: 23940571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Sep;8(3):769-74. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1598. Epub 2013 Jul 23.

Programming of human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells in vitro to promote
pancreatic gene expression.

Wang H(1), Yang Y, Ho G, Lin X, Wu W, Li W, Lin L, Feng X, Huo X, Jiang J, Liu X,
Huang T, Wei C, Ma L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Shantou University
Medical College, Shantou, Guangdong 515041, P.R. China.

Human umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cells (HUMSCs) are candidates for tissue
engineering and may potentially be used for transdifferentiation into pancreatic 
endocrine cells. The adenoviral vector is effective in transducing genes into
stem cells that are refractory to gene delivery by non-viral approaches. qPCR was
used to detect the pancreatic endogenous gene expression of HUMSCs transfected by
islet cell-specific transcription factors (TFs). In the present study, using
adenoviruses, the mouse TFs, pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (pdx1), V-maf
musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog A (mafa) and class B basic
helix-loop-helix factor neurogenin 3 (ngn3), which are essential for pancreatic
cell development, were introduced into HUMSCs to assess the expression of the
pancreatic genes, glucagon, pdx1 and nk2 homeobox 2 (nkx2.2). When pdx1, mafa and
ngn3 were cotransduced into HUMSCs, the expression of glucagon increased by
21-fold at days 3 and 7 following transduction, while the endogenous pdx1 gene
expression was increased by 15-fold at day 3 and decreased by 70% at day 7. When 
mafa and ngn3 were cotransduced into HUMSCs, there was a 5-fold increase in pdx1 
gene expression at day 7, but no activation was observed at day 3. When mafa
alone was introduced into HUMSCs, the pdx1 gene expression was elevated by 6-fold
at day 3 and decreased by 3-fold at day 7. Transduction of ngn3 alone into HUMSCs
induced nkx2.2 gene expression at day 3 but the expression levels were decreased 
at day 7. However, when pdx1 and ngn3 were cotransduced into HUMSCs, the
expression levels of glucagon, pdx1 and nks2.2 were all lower than those observed
with pdx1 or ngn3 transduction alone. These results suggested that the
transduction of pdx1, mafa and ngn3 genes into HUMSCs induced the expression of
the pancreatic genes, glucagon, pdx-1 and nkx2.2, and that the expression was
time dependent. In addition, different combinations of the TFs may demonstrate
synergistic or antagonistic effects. This data may be beneficial for guiding
future studies obtaining mature pancreatic endocrine cells from HUMSCs.

PMID: 23900717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Stem Cells. 2013 Nov;31(11):2432-42. doi: 10.1002/stem.1489.

Enrichment of human embryonic stem cell-derived NKX6.1-expressing pancreatic
progenitor cells accelerates the maturation of insulin-secreting cells in vivo.

Rezania A(1), Bruin JE, Xu J, Narayan K, Fox JK, O'Neil JJ, Kieffer TJ.

Author information: 
(1)BetaLogics Venture, Janssen R & D LLC, Raritan, New Jersey, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are considered a potential alternative to
cadaveric islets as a source of transplantable cells for treating patients with
diabetes. We previously described a differentiation protocol to generate
pancreatic progenitor cells from hESCs, composed of mainly pancreatic endoderm
(PDX1/NKX6.1-positive), endocrine precursors (NKX2.2/synaptophysin-positive,
hormone/NKX6.1-negative), and polyhormonal cells (insulin/glucagon-positive,
NKX6.1-negative). However, the relative contributions of NKX6.1-negative versus
NKX6.1-positive cell fractions to the maturation of functional ß-cells remained
unclear. To address this question, we generated two distinct pancreatic
progenitor cell populations using modified differentiation protocols. Prior to
transplant, both populations contained a high proportion of PDX1-expressing cells
(~85%-90%) but were distinguished by their relatively high (~80%) or low (~25%)
expression of NKX6.1. NKX6.1-high and NKX6.1-low progenitor populations were
transplanted subcutaneously within macroencapsulation devices into diabetic mice.
Mice transplanted with NKX6.1-low cells remained hyperglycemic throughout the
5-month post-transplant period whereas diabetes was reversed in NKX6.1-high
recipients within 3 months. Fasting human C-peptide levels were similar between
groups throughout the study, but only NKX6.1-high grafts displayed robust meal-, 
glucose- and arginine-responsive insulin secretion as early as 3 months
post-transplant. NKX6.1-low recipients displayed elevated fasting glucagon
levels. Theracyte devices from both groups contained almost exclusively
pancreatic endocrine tissue, but NKX6.1-high grafts contained a greater
proportion of insulin-positive and somatostatin-positive cells, whereas
NKX6.1-low grafts contained mainly glucagon-expressing cells. Insulin-positive
cells in NKX6.1-high, but not NKX6.1-low grafts expressed nuclear MAFA.
Collectively, this study demonstrates that a pancreatic endoderm-enriched
population can mature into highly functional ß-cells with only a minor
contribution from the endocrine subpopulation.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23897760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Diabetes. 2013 Oct;62(10):3500-13. doi: 10.2337/db13-0266. Epub 2013 Jul 24.

Resveratrol prevents ß-cell dedifferentiation in nonhuman primates given a
high-fat/high-sugar diet.

Fiori JL(1), Shin YK, Kim W, Krzysik-Walker SM, González-Mariscal I, Carlson OD, 
Sanghvi M, Moaddel R, Farhang K, Gadkaree SK, Doyle ME, Pearson KJ, Mattison JA, 
de Cabo R, Egan JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Investigation, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland.

Eating a "Westernized" diet high in fat and sugar leads to weight gain and
numerous health problems, including the development of type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM). Rodent studies have shown that resveratrol supplementation reduces blood 
glucose levels, preserves ß-cells in islets of Langerhans, and improves insulin
action. Although rodent models are helpful for understanding ß-cell biology and
certain aspects of T2DM pathology, they fail to reproduce the complexity of the
human disease as well as that of nonhuman primates. Rhesus monkeys were fed a
standard diet (SD), or a high-fat/high-sugar diet in combination with either
placebo (HFS) or resveratrol (HFS+Resv) for 24 months, and pancreata were
examined before overt dysglycemia occurred. Increased glucose-stimulated insulin 
secretion and insulin resistance occurred in both HFS and HFS+Resv diets compared
with SD. Although islet size was unaffected, there was a significant decrease in 
ß-cells and an increase in a-cells containing glucagon and glucagon-like peptide 
1 with HFS diets. Islets from HFS+Resv monkeys were morphologically similar to
SD. HFS diets also resulted in decreased expression of essential ß-cell
transcription factors forkhead box O1 (FOXO1), NKX6-1, NKX2-2, and PDX1, which
did not occur with resveratrol supplementation. Similar changes were observed in 
human islets where the effects of resveratrol were mediated through Sirtuin 1.
These findings have implications for the management of humans with insulin
resistance, prediabetes, and diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3781448
PMID: 23884882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Genes Genet Syst. 2013;88(2):135-42.

Promoter activity analysis and methylation characterization of LTR elements of
PERVs in NIH miniature pig.

Jung YD(1), Lee JR, Kim YJ, Ha HS, Oh KB, Im GS, Choi BH, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Natural Sciences, Pusan National
University, Busan 609-735, Republic of Korea.

The potential risk of porcine endogenous retrovirus (PERV) transmission is an
important issue in xenotransplantation (pig-to-human transplantation). Long
terminal repeats (LTRs) in PERV elements show promoter activity that could affect
neighboring functional genes. The methylation status and promoter activities of 3
LTR structures (PERV-LTR1, LTR2, and LTR3 elements) belonging to the PERV-A
family were examined using luciferase reporter genes in human liver cell lines
(HepG2 and Hep3B). The PERV LTR3 element exhibited hypomethylation and stronger
promoter activity than the other LTR elements in human liver cells. We also
performed comparative sequences analysis of the PERV LTR elements by using
bioinformatics tools. Our findings showed that several transcription factors such
as Nkx2-2 and Elk-1 positively influenced the high transcriptional activity of
the PERV LTR3 element.

PMID: 23832305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Transplant Proc. 2013 Jun;45(5):1869-74. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2013.01.051.

Pancreatic transdifferentiation in porcine liver following lentiviral delivery of
human furin-cleavable insulin.

Gerace D(1), Ren B, Hawthorne WJ, Byrne MR, Phillips PM, O'Brien BA, Nassif N,
Alexander IE, Simpson AM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical & Molecular Biosciences, University of Technology Sydney,
Sydney, Australia.

Type I diabetes mellitus (TID) results from the autoimmune destruction of the
insulin-producing pancreatic ß-cells. Gene therapy is one strategy being actively
explored to cure TID by affording non-ß-cells the ability to secrete insulin in
response to physiologic stimuli. In previous studies, we used a novel surgical
technique to express furin-cleavable human insulin (INS-FUR) in the livers of
streptozotocin (STZ)-diabetic Wistar rats and nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice with
the use of the HMD lentiviral vector. Normoglycemia was observed for 500 and 150 
days, respectively (experimental end points). Additionally, some endocrine
transdifferentiation of the liver, with storage of insulin in granules, and
expression of some ß-cell transcription factors (eg, Pdx1, Neurod1, Neurog3,
Nkx2-2, Pax4) and pancreatic hormones in both studies. The aim of this study was 
to determine if this novel approach could induce liver to pancreatic
transdifferentiation to reverse diabetes in pancreatectomized Westran pigs. Nine 
pigs were used in the study, however only one pig maintained normal fasting blood
glucose levels for the period from 10 to 44 days (experimental end point). This
animal was given 2.8 × 10(9) transducing units/kg of the lentiviral vector
expressing INS-FUR. A normal intravenous glucose tolerance test was achieved at
30 days. Reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction analysis of the liver
tissue revealed expression of several ß-cell transcription factors, including the
key factors, Pdx-1 and Neurod1, pancreatic hormones, glucagon, and somatostatin; 
however, endogenous pig insulin was not expressed. Triple immunofluorescence
showed extensive insulin expression, as was previously observed in our studies
with rodents. Additionally, a small amount of glucagon and somatostatin protein
expression was seen. Collectively, these data indicate that pancreatic
transdifferentiation of the liver tissue had occurred. Our data suggest that this
regimen may ultimately be used clinically to cure TID, however more work is
required to replicate the successful reversal of diabetes in increased numbers of
pigs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23769060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Jul;37(7):949-59. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31828ff59d.

Neuroendocrine carcinoma of the stomach: morphologic and immunohistochemical
characteristics and prognosis.

Ishida M(1), Sekine S, Fukagawa T, Ohashi M, Morita S, Taniguchi H, Katai H,
Tsuda H, Kushima R.

Author information: 
(1)Gastric Surgery Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

Neuroendocrine carcinoma (NEC) of the stomach has been recognized as a highly
malignant tumor; however, because of its rarity, limited information is available
regarding its clinicopathologic characteristics. Here, we investigated the
morphologic and immunohistochemical features and prognosis of 51 cases of gastric
NEC. Histologically, 40 lesions were large cell type, and 11 were small cell
type. The large majority of the tumors exhibited a solid growth pattern (94%),
with subsets of tumors showing trabecular (18%), scirrhous (10%), or tubular
growth patterns (6%). Thirty-six cases (71%) had adenocarcinoma components and/or
dysplasia. Among them, 26 cases (51%) were associated with intramucosal
adenocarcinoma or dysplasia. Immunohistochemically, synaptophysin, chromogranin
A, and CD56 were diffusely expressed in 48 (94%), 44 (86%), and 24 cases (47%),
respectively. Two recently reported neuroendocrine markers, ASH1 and NKX2.2, were
diffusely positive in 12 (24%) and 17 cases (33%), respectively. The diffuse or
focal expression of TTF-1 was observed in 19 cases (37%). Among the 41 patients
who underwent a curative resection, 16 patients (39%) developed radiologic
recurrences, and the liver was the most frequent site of recurrence (11 patients,
27%). The 3- and 5-year overall survival rates were 57.8% and 44.7%,
respectively. Regarding patient outcome, none of the histologic
subclassifications, including small cell versus large cell types and the presence
versus the absence of adenocarcinoma components and/or dysplasia, were
significant. In a multivariate analysis, curative surgery was identified as the
sole independent prognostic factor (P=0.03). Although gastric NECs exhibit
significant morphologic diversity, their histologic subclassification is unlikely
to be of immediate clinical relevance.

PMID: 23759931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Brain Res Bull. 2013 Aug;97:69-80. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2013.06.001. Epub 
2013 Jun 10.

Roles of long noncoding RNAs in brain development, functional diversification and
neurodegenerative diseases.

Wu P(1), Zuo X, Deng H, Liu X, Liu L, Ji A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Drug Research and Development, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical 
University, Guangzhou 510282, PR China.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been attracting immense research interest,
while only a handful of lncRNAs have been characterized thoroughly. Their
involvement in the fundamental cellular processes including regulate gene
expression at epigenetics, transcription, and post-transcription highlighted a
central role in cell homeostasis. However, lncRNAs studies are still at a
relatively early stage, their definition, conservation, functions, and action
mechanisms remain fairly complicated. Here, we give a systematic and
comprehensive summary of the existing knowledge of lncRNAs in order to provide a 
better understanding of this new studying field. lncRNAs play important roles in 
brain development, neuron function and maintenance, and neurodegenerative
diseases are becoming increasingly evident. In this review, we also highlighted
recent studies related lncRNAs in central nervous system (CNS) development and
neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's
disease (PD), Huntington's disease (HD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
and elucidated some specific lncRNAs which may be important for understanding the
pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases, also have the potential as
therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23756188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. PLoS One. 2013 May 1;8(5):e62012. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062012. Print 2013.

Novel insulin sensitizer modulates nutrient sensing pathways and maintains ß-cell
phenotype in human islets.

Rohatgi N(1), Aly H, Marshall CA, McDonald WG, Kletzien RF, Colca JR, McDaniel
ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St Louis, St 
Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Major bottlenecks in the expansion of human ß-cell mass are limited
proliferation, loss of ß-cell phenotype, and increased apoptosis. In our previous
studies, activation of Wnt and mTOR signaling significantly enhanced human ß-cell
proliferation. However, isolated human islets displayed insulin signaling pathway
resistance, due in part to chronic activation of mTOR/S6K1 signaling that results
in negative feedback of the insulin signaling pathway and a loss of Akt
phosphorylation and insulin content. We evaluated the effects of a new generation
insulin sensitizer, MSDC-0160, on restoring insulin/IGF-1 sensitivity and insulin
content in human ß-cells. This novel TZD has low affinity for binding and
activation of PPAR<U+03B3> and has insulin-sensitizing effects in mouse models of
diabetes and ability to lower glucose in Phase 2 clinical trials. MSDC-0160
treatment of human islets increased AMPK activity and reduced mTOR activity. This
was associated with the restoration of IGF-1-induced phosphorylation of Akt,
GSK-3, and increased protein expression of Pdx1. Furthermore, MSDC-0160 in
combination with IGF-1 and 8 mM glucose increased ß-cell specific gene expression
of insulin, pdx1, nkx6.1, and nkx2.2, and maintained insulin content without
altering glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Human islets were unable to
simultaneously promote DNA synthesis and maintain the ß-cell phenotype.
Lithium-induced GSK-3 inhibition that promotes DNA synthesis blocked the ability 
of MSDC-0160 to maintain the ß-cell phenotype. Conversely, MSDC-0160 prevented an
increase in DNA synthesis by blocking ß-catenin nuclear translocation. Due to the
counteracting pathways involved in these processes, we employed a sequential ex
vivo strategy to first induce human islet DNA synthesis, followed by MSDC-0160 to
promote the ß-cell phenotype and insulin content. This new generation PPAR<U+03B3>
sparing insulin sensitizer may provide an initial tool for relieving inherent
human islet insulin signaling pathway resistance that is necessary to preserve
the ß-cell phenotype during ß-cell expansion for the treatment of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3641131
PMID: 23650507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Diabetes. 2013 Oct;62(10):3514-22. doi: 10.2337/db12-1479. Epub 2013 Apr 29.

Development of the human pancreas from foregut to endocrine commitment.

Jennings RE(1), Berry AA, Kirkwood-Wilson R, Roberts NA, Hearn T, Salisbury RJ,
Blaylock J, Piper Hanley K, Hanley NA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Institute of Human Development, Faculty
of Medical & Human Sciences, Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre,
University of Manchester, Manchester, U.K.

Knowledge of human pancreas development underpins our interpretation and
exploitation of human pluripotent stem cell (PSC) differentiation toward a ß-cell
fate. However, almost no information exists on the early events of human
pancreatic specification in the distal foregut, bud formation, and early
development. Here, we have studied the expression profiles of key
lineage-specific markers to understand differentiation and morphogenetic events
during human pancreas development. The notochord was adjacent to the dorsal
foregut endoderm during the fourth week of development before pancreatic duodenal
homeobox-1 detection. In contrast to the published data from mouse embryos,
during human pancreas development, we detected only a single-phase of Neurogenin 
3 (NEUROG3) expression and endocrine differentiation from approximately 8 weeks, 
before which Nirenberg and Kim homeobox 2.2 (NKX2.2) was not observed in the
pancreatic progenitor cell population. In addition to revealing a number of
disparities in timing between human and mouse development, these data, directly
assembled from human tissue, allow combinations of transcription factors to
define sequential stages and differentiating pancreatic cell types. The data are 
anticipated to provide a useful reference point for stem cell researchers looking
to differentiate human PSCs in vitro toward the pancreatic ß-cell so as to model 
human development or enable drug discovery and potential cell therapy.

PMCID: PMC3781486
PMID: 23630303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Oct;114(10):2240-7. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24572.

Pancreatic tissue resident mesenchymal stromal cell (MSC)-like cells as a source 
of in vitro islet neogenesis.

Gopurappilly R(1), Bhat V, Bhonde R.

Author information: 
(1)Manipal Institute of Regenerative Medicine (MIRM), Manipal University,
Bangalore, India.

Insufficient ß-cell mass is a common denominator for both type 1 and type 2
diabetes. In vitro generation of ß-cells from islet precursor cells, exocrine
cells or ductal epithelia provide an alternative source of insulin-producing
cells. However the presence of multipotent precursor cells within the pancreas is
also deliberated. In this study we isolated mesenchymal stromal cell (MSC)-like
cells from adult mouse pancreas by collagenase digestion. We used Knockout DMEM
for our isolation procedure and the floating islets and acini were removed after 
48 h. This strategy permitted the adhesion of stromal cells with typical
mesenchymal morphology. These cells not only expressed MSC-specific markers like 
Sca-1, CD90.2, CD73, and CD44 but also generated osteocytes, adipocytes, and
neurons when induced with specific growth media. Upon exposure to islet
differentiation serum-free cocktail a significant upregulation of pancreatic
markers like Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Pdx1, insulin, and somatostatin was seen. The
differentiated islet-like cell aggregates (ICAs) secreted insulin which increased
over the days in culture in presence of basal glucose levels. Taken together, our
data strongly indicate that there is a tissue-resident precursor population
within the pancreas that can be exploited for islet neogenesis in vitro.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23606308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Jul;11(1):503-15. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.02.005. Epub 2013
Feb 18.

Generation of islet-like cells from mouse gall bladder by direct ex vivo
reprogramming.

Hickey RD(1), Galivo F, Schug J, Brehm MA, Haft A, Wang Y, Benedetti E, Gu G,
Magnuson MA, Shultz LD, Lagasse E, Greiner DL, Kaestner KH, Grompe M.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon Stem Cell Center, Papé Family Pediatric Research Institute, Oregon
Health & Science University, Portland, OR 97203, USA.

Cell replacement is an emerging therapy for type 1 diabetes. Pluripotent stem
cells have received a lot of attention as a potential source of transplantable
ß-cells, but their ability to form teratomas poses significant risks. Here, we
evaluated the potential of primary mouse gall bladder epithelial cells (GBCs) as 
targets for ex vivo genetic reprogramming to the ß-cell fate. Conditions for
robust expansion and genetic transduction of primary GBCs by adenoviral vectors
were developed. Using a GFP reporter for insulin, conditions for reprogramming
were then optimized. Global expression analysis by RNA-sequencing was used to
quantitatively compare reprogrammed GBCs (rGBCs) to true ß-cells, revealing both 
similarities and differences. Adenoviral-mediated expression of NEUROG3, Pdx1,
and MafA in GBCs resulted in robust induction of pancreatic endocrine genes,
including Ins1, Ins2, Neurod1, Nkx2-2 and Isl1. Furthermore, expression of
GBC-specific genes was repressed, including Sox17 and Hes1. Reprogramming was
also enhanced by addition of retinoic acid and inhibition of Notch signaling.
Importantly, rGBCs were able to engraft long term in vivo and remained
insulin-positive for 15weeks. We conclude that GBCs are a viable source for
autologous cell replacement in diabetes, but that complete reprogramming will
require further manipulations.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3940065
PMID: 23562832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Sep 1;521(13):2987-3002. doi: 10.1002/cne.23326.

Elucidation of target muscle and detailed development of dorsal motor neurons in 
chick embryo spinal cord.

Kobayashi N(1), Homma S, Okada T, Masuda T, Sato N, Nishiyama K, Sakuma C,
Shimada T, Yaginuma H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroanatomy and Embryology, School of Medicine, Fukushima
Medical University, Fukushima, Japan.

The avian cervical spinal cord includes motoneurons (MNs) that send their axons
through the dorsal roots. They have been called dorsal motoneurons (dMNs) and
assumed to correspond to MNs of the accessory nerve that innervate the cucullaris
muscle (SAN-MNs). However, their target muscles have not been elucidated to date.
The present study sought to determine the targets and the specific combination of
transcription factors expressed by dMNs and SAN-MNs and to describe the detailed 
development of dMNs. Experiments with tracing techniques confirmed that axons of 
dMNs innervated the cucullaris muscle. Retrogradely labeled dMNs were distributed
in the ventral horn of C3 and more caudal segments. In most cases, some dMNs were
also observed in the C2 segment. It was also demonstrated that SAN-MNs existed in
the ventral horn of the C1-2 segments and the adjacent caudal hindbrain. Both
SAN-MNs and dMNs expressed Isl1 but did not express Isl2, MNR2, or Lhx3. Rather, 
these MNs expressed Phox2b, a marker for branchial motoneurons (brMNs), although 
the intensity of expression was weaker. Dorsal MNs and SAN-MNs were derived from 
the Nkx2.2-positive precursor domain and migrated dorsally. Dorsal MNs remain in 
the ventral domain of the neural tube, unlike brMNs in the brainstem. These
results indicate that dMNs and SAN-MNs belong to a common MN population
innervating the cucullaris muscle and also suggest that they are similar to brMNs
of the brainstem, although there are differences in Phox2b expression and in the 
final location of each population. J. Comp. Neurol. 521: 2987-3002, 2013. © 2013 
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23504940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Transgenic Res. 2013 Oct;22(5):965-72. doi: 10.1007/s11248-013-9700-0. Epub 2013 
Mar 15.

Generation of mice encoding a conditional allele of Nkx2.2.

Mastracci TL(1), Lin CS, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Russ Berrie Medical Pavilion, Columbia
University, 1150 St. Nicholas Ave., New York, NY, 10032, USA.

Nkx2.2 is a homeobox transcription factor that is expressed in the pancreas,
intestine and central nervous system (CNS) during embryogenesis and in the adult.
In mice, global deletion of Nkx2.2 results in cell mis-specification in each of
the tissues where it is expressed, and the null mice die as neonates with severe 
hyperglycemia. Although a whole body knockout demonstrates the importance of
Nkx2.2 in cell specification and postnatal viability, it precludes assessment of 
the cell-autonomous and postnatal functions of Nkx2.2. In this study we report
the generation and functional characterization of mice encoding a conditional
allele of Nkx2.2. We demonstrate the functional integrity of the conditional
Nkx2.2 allele and report successful in vivo deletion using a pancreas-specific
Cre recombinase. The pancreas-specific deletion of Nkx2.2 results in similar
defects found in the Nkx2.2 null pancreas and the mice die shortly after birth,
demonstrating that the neonatal lethality associated with the null allele is
caused by pancreatic islet dysfunction. The generation of a conditional Nkx2.2
allele provides an important tool for identifying the cell-autonomous and
postnatal activities of Nkx2.2 in establishing and maintaining cell type
identities and functions in the pancreas, intestine and CNS.

PMCID: PMC3713092
PMID: 23494546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2013 Feb;154(4):501-4.

Effects of pancragen on the differentiation of pancreatic cells during their
ageing.

[Article in English, Russian]

Khavinson VKh(1), Durnova AO, Polyakova VO, Tolibova GH, Linkova NS, Kvetnoy IM, 
Kvetnaia TV, Tarnovskaya SI.

Author information: 
(1)I. P. Pavlov Institute of Physiology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St.
Petersburg, Russia.

Expression of differentiation markers was found to be reduced during ageing of
pancreatic cells. Tetrapeptide pancragen stimulates the expression of
differentiation factors of acinar (Pdx1, Ptfla) and islet of Langerhans (Pdx1,
Pax6, Pax4, Foxa2, NKx2.2) cells in "young" and " aged" cultures. Differentiation
of acinar and islet pancreatic cells induced by pancragen can be a mechanism
underlying its anti-diabetic and anti-inflammatory effects. Thus, transcription
factors that regulate differentiation of pancreatic cells are a pharmacological
target for pancragen, which allows considering it as an effective tool in the
treatment of diabetes mellitus and pancreatitis.

PMID: 23486591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56024. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056024. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Novel pancreatic endocrine maturation pathways identified by genomic profiling
and causal reasoning.

Gutteridge A(1), Rukstalis JM, Ziemek D, Tié M, Ji L, Ramos-Zayas R, Nardone NA, 
Norquay LD, Brenner MB, Tang K, McNeish JD, Rowntree RK.

Author information: 
(1)Pfizer Regenerative Medicine, Cambridge, United Kingdom.
alex.gutteridge@pfizer.com

We have used a previously unavailable model of pancreatic development, derived in
vitro from human embryonic stem cells, to capture a time-course of gene, miRNA
and histone modification levels in pancreatic endocrine cells. We investigated
whether it is possible to better understand, and hence control, the biological
pathways leading to pancreatic endocrine formation by analysing this information 
and combining it with the available scientific literature to generate models
using a casual reasoning approach. We show that the embryonic stem cell
differentiation protocol is highly reproducible in producing endocrine precursor 
cells and generates cells that recapitulate many aspects of human embryonic
pancreas development, including maturation into functional endocrine cells when
transplanted into recipient animals. The availability of whole genome gene and
miRNA expression data from the early stages of human pancreatic development will 
be of great benefit to those in the fields of developmental biology and diabetes 
research. Our causal reasoning algorithm suggested the involvement of novel gene 
networks, such as NEUROG3/E2F1/KDM5B and SOCS3/STAT3/IL-6, in endocrine cell
development We experimentally investigated the role of the top-ranked prediction 
by showing that addition of exogenous IL-6 could affect the expression of the
endocrine progenitor genes NEUROG3 and NKX2.2.

PMCID: PMC3572136
PMID: 23418498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(2):e1003278. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003278. Epub 2013 Feb 
7.

Regulation of Neurod1 contributes to the lineage potential of Neurogenin3+
endocrine precursor cells in the pancreas.

Mastracci TL(1), Anderson KR, Papizan JB, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Russ Berrie Medical Pavilion, Columbia
University, New York, New York, USA.

During pancreatic development, transcription factor cascades gradually commit
precursor populations to the different endocrine cell fate pathways. Although
mutational analyses have defined the functions of many individual pancreatic
transcription factors, the integrative transcription factor networks required to 
regulate lineage specification, as well as their sites of action, are poorly
understood. In this study, we investigated where and how the transcription
factors Nkx2.2 and Neurod1 genetically interact to differentially regulate
endocrine cell specification. In an Nkx2.2 null background, we conditionally
deleted Neurod1 in the Pdx1+ pancreatic progenitor cells, the Neurog3+ endocrine 
progenitor cells, or the glucagon+ alpha cells. These studies determined that, in
the absence of Nkx2.2 activity, removal of Neurod1 from the Pdx1+ or Neurog3+
progenitor populations is sufficient to reestablish the specification of the PP
and epsilon cell lineages. Alternatively, in the absence of Nkx2.2, removal of
Neurod1 from the Pdx1+ pancreatic progenitor population, but not the Neurog3+
endocrine progenitor cells, restores alpha cell specification. Subsequent in
vitro reporter assays demonstrated that Nkx2.2 represses Neurod1 in alpha cells. 
Based on these findings, we conclude that, although Nkx2.2 and Neurod1 are both
necessary to promote beta cell differentiation, Nkx2.2 must repress Neurod1 in a 
Pdx1+ pancreatic progenitor population to appropriately commit a subset of
Neurog3+ endocrine progenitor cells to the alpha cell lineage. These results are 
consistent with the proposed idea that Neurog3+ endocrine progenitor cells
represent a heterogeneous population of unipotent cells, each restricted to a
particular endocrine lineage.

PMCID: PMC3567185
PMID: 23408910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Feb 7;12(2):252-64. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.12.002.

Human iPSC-derived oligodendrocyte progenitor cells can myelinate and rescue a
mouse model of congenital hypomyelination.

Wang S(1), Bates J, Li X, Schanz S, Chandler-Militello D, Levine C, Maherali N,
Studer L, Hochedlinger K, Windrem M, Goldman SA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Neuromedicine and Department of Neurology, University
of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY 14642, USA.

Neonatal engraftment by oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) permits the
myelination of the congenitally dysmyelinated brain. To establish a potential
autologous source of these cells, we developed a strategy by which to
differentiate human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) into OPCs. From three
hiPSC lines, as well as from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), we generated
highly enriched OLIG2(+)/PDGFRa(+)/NKX2.2(+)/SOX10(+) human OPCs, which could be 
further purified using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. hiPSC OPCs
efficiently differentiated into both myelinogenic oligodendrocytes and
astrocytes, in vitro and in vivo. Neonatally engrafted hiPSC OPCs robustly
myelinated the brains of myelin-deficient shiverer mice and substantially
increased their survival. The speed and efficiency of myelination by hiPSC OPCs
was higher than that previously observed using fetal-tissue-derived OPCs, and no 
tumors from these grafts were noted as long as 9 months after transplant. These
results suggest the potential utility of hiPSC-derived OPCs in treating disorders
of myelin loss.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3700553
PMID: 23395447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cell Biol Int. 2013 Jan;37(1):2-10. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10001. Epub 2012 Nov 22.

Pdx1 protein induces human embryonic stem cells into the pancreatic endocrine
lineage.

Liang QL(1), Mo Z, Li XF, Wang XX, Li RM.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Clinic Centre, Tai-He Hospital, Hubei University of
Medicine, 32 S Renmin Road, Shiyan, Hubei 442000, China. liangqingle@gmail.com

Success in generating insulin-producing cells (IPCs) from human embryonic stem
(hES) cells by genetic manipulation has recently revealed a new therapeutic
potential for diabetes. However, clinical application has been hampered by the
viral genome integration and the risk of insertion mutagenesis that are entailed.
Herein, we report the induction of hEC into IPCs by direct delivery of human Pdx1
proteins per se. Recombinant human Pdx1 proteins (hPdx1), which have an
Antennapedia-like protein transduction domain sequence in their structure, can be
efficiently translocated into hES cells and function as pancreatic transcription 
factor. hPdx1 protein activates a group of genes related to pancreatic beta-cell 
lineage development in hES cells, including NeuroD1, Nkx2.2, Pax4, Pax6, Nkx6.1
and Isl-1. hPdx1-treated hES cells synthesise and release insulin in response to 
glucose challenge. Therefore, this study constitutes a proof-of-concept
demonstration of protein-mediated pancreatic specific differentiation of the hES 
cells by exploiting specific intrinsic properties of the hPdx1 protein.

© 2012 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 23339089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;197(4):269-82. doi: 10.1159/000345816. Epub 2013 Jan
8.

Genetic modification of primate amniotic fluid-derived stem cells produces
pancreatic progenitor cells in vitro.

Zhou Y(1), Mack DL, Williams JK, Mirmalek-Sani SH, Moorefield E, Chun SY, Wang J,
Lorenzetti D, Furth M, Atala A, Soker S.

Author information: 
(1)Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Winston Salem, N.C. 27157,
USA.

Insulin therapy for type 1 diabetes does not prevent serious long-term
complications including vascular disease, neuropathy, retinopathy and renal
failure. Stem cells, including amniotic fluid-derived stem (AFS) cells - highly
expansive, multipotent and nontumorigenic cells - could serve as an appropriate
stem cell source for ß-cell differentiation. In the current study we tested
whether nonhuman primate (nhp)AFS cells ectopically expressing key pancreatic
transcription factors were capable of differentiating into a ß-cell-like cell
phenotype in vitro. nhpAFS cells were obtained from Cynomolgus monkey amniotic
fluid by immunomagnetic selection for a CD117 (c-kit)-positive population. RT-PCR
for endodermal and pancreatic lineage-specific markers was performed on AFS cells
after adenovirally transduced expression of PDX1, NGN3 and MAFA. Expression of
MAFA was sufficient to induce insulin mRNA expression in nhpAFS cell lines,
whereas a combination of MAFA, PDX1 and NGN3 further induced insulin expression, 
and also induced the expression of other important endocrine cell genes such as
glucagon, NEUROD1, NKX2.2, ISL1 and PCSK2. Higher induction of these and other
important pancreatic genes was achieved by growing the triply infected AFS cells 
in media supplemented with a combination of B27, betacellulin and nicotinamide,
as well as culturing the cells on extracellular matrix-coated plates. The
expression of pancreatic genes such as NEUROD1, glucagon and insulin
progressively decreased with the decline of adenovirally expressed PDX1, NGN3 and
MAFA. Together, these experiments suggest that forced expression of pancreatic
transcription factors in primate AFS cells induces them towards the pancreatic
lineage.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3725583
PMID: 23306211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51581. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051581. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Nkx2.2+ progenitors generate somatic motoneurons in the chick spinal cord.

Gotoh H(1), Ono K, Nomura T, Takebayashi H, Harada H, Nakamura H, Ikenaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.
hgotoh@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

Heterogeneous classes of neurons are present in the spinal cord and are essential
for its function. Expression patterns of transcription factors in neural
progenitor cells determine neuron subtypes during development. Nkx2.2 is
expressed in the progenitor cell pool located just ventrally to the
Olig2-positive pool and is indispensable for V3 interneuron generation in the
spinal cord and also for visceral motoneuron generation in the hindbrain.
However, whether Nkx2.2-positive progenitor cells generate diverse classes of
neuron is not fully understood. Using a chick lineage tracing method in a
genetically-defined manner, we found that Nkx2.2-expressing progenitor cells
differentiate into general visceral motoneurons as well as sim1-positive V3
interneurons. Surprisingly, we further observed that Nkx2.2-expressing
progenitors differentiate into somatic motoneuron. Our findings suggest that the 
different classes of motoneurons are derived from more complex sources than were 
previously expected in the chick spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC3524189
PMID: 23284718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):3795-803. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.434282. Epub 2012 
Dec 26.

Characterization of an apparently novel ß-cell line-enriched 80-88 kDa
transcriptional activator of the MafA and Pdx1 genes.

Hunter CS(1), Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

MafA and Pdx1 represent critical transcriptional regulators required for the
maintenance of pancreatic islet ß-cell function. The in vivo ß-cell-enriched
expression pattern of these genes is principally directed by islet transcription 
factors binding within conserved Region 3 (base pairs (bp) -8118/-7750) of MafA
and Area II (bp -2153/-1923) of the Pdx1 gene. Comprehensive mutational analysis 
of conserved MafA Region 3 revealed two new ß-cell line-specific cis-activation
elements, termed Site 4 (bp -7997 to -7988) and Site 12 (bp -7835 to -7826). Gel 
mobility and antibody super-shift analysis identified Pdx1 as the Site 4 binding 
factor, while an 80-88 kilodalton (kDa) ß-cell line-enriched protein complex
bound Site 12 and similar aligned nucleotides within Pdx1 Area II. The 80-88 kDa 
activator was also found in adult mouse islet extract. Strikingly, the molecular 
weight, DNA binding, and antibody recognition properties of this activator were
unique when compared with all other key islet transcription factors tested,
including Prox1 (83 kDa), Hnf1a (67 kDa), FoxA2 (48 kDa), MafA (46 kDa), Isl1 (44
kDa), Pdx1 (42 kDa), and Nkx2.2 (30 kDa). Collectively, these data define an
apparently novel MafA Region 3 and Pdx1 Area II activator contributing to
expression in ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC3567634
PMID: 23269676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Neurosci. 2012 Nov 28;32(48):17172-85. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0885-12.2012.

Opposing roles for Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 in hindbrain oligodendrocyte patterning.

Miguez A(1), Ducret S, Di Meglio T, Parras C, Hmidan H, Haton C, Sekizar S,
Mannioui A, Vidal M, Kerever A, Nyabi O, Haigh J, Zalc B, Rijli FM, Thomas JL.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre and Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut
du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, 75013 Paris, France.

Oligodendrocytes are the myelin-forming cells of the vertebrate CNS. Little is
known about the molecular control of region-specific oligodendrocyte development.
Here, we show that oligodendrogenesis in the mouse rostral hindbrain, which is
organized in a metameric series of rhombomere-derived (rd) territories, follows a
rhombomere-specific pattern, with extensive production of oligodendrocytes in the
pontine territory (r4d) and delayed and reduced oligodendrocyte production in the
prepontine region (r2d, r3d). We demonstrate that segmental organization of
oligodendrocytes is controlled by Hox genes, namely Hoxa2 and Hoxb2.
Specifically, Hoxa2 loss of function induced a dorsoventral enlargement of the
Olig2/Nkx2.2-expressing oligodendrocyte progenitor domain, whereas conditional
Hoxa2 overexpression in the Olig2(+) domain inhibited oligodendrogenesis
throughout the brain. In contrast, Hoxb2 deletion resulted in a reduction of the 
pontine oligodendrogenic domain. Compound Hoxa2(-/-)/Hoxb2(-/-) mutant mice
displayed the phenotype of Hoxb2(-/-) mutants in territories coexpressing Hoxa2
and Hoxb2 (rd3, rd4), indicating that Hoxb2 antagonizes Hoxa2 during rostral
hindbrain oligodendrogenesis. This study provides the first in vivo evidence that
Hox genes determine oligodendrocyte regional identity in the mammalian brain.

PMID: 23197710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48668. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048668. Epub 2012 Nov 6.

Towards optimising the production of and expression from polycistronic vectors in
embryonic stem cells.

Gao SY(1), Jack MM, O'Neill C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Developmental and Regenerative Medicine, Kolling Institute for
Medical Research, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW,
Australia.

Polycistronic vectors linked by self-processing 2A peptides have been
successfully used in cellular reprogramming. The expression of these vectors has 
yet to be well documented in embryonic stem cells. In the present study, we
generated expression cassettes containing combinatorial arrangements of 3
pancreatic transcriptions factors (Pdx1, Nkx2.2 and Ngn3) together with an eGFP
reporter, all linked by self-processing 2A peptides. The study tested the utility
of constructing complex expression cassettes by ligating multiple components,
each flanked by unique restriction sites. This approach allowed flexible and
efficient design and construction of a combinatorial array of polycistronic
constructs, which were expressed after transient transfection into embryonic stem
cells. The inclusion of EGFP provided for a convenient proxy measure of
expression and showed that expression was similar regardless of EGFP's position
within a 2A polycistronic construct. Expression of terminal EGFP was 51% and 24% 
more efficient when linked by T2A compared to F2A or E2A peptides, respectively. 
The highest level of expression was achieved when all genes in a construct were
linked exclusively by T2A peptides. This effect of T2A was independent of the
type of promoter used, as a similar increase in terminal EGFP expression was
observed when the polycistronic constructs were under the control of a CAG
promoter compared to the CMV promoter, even though the GAG promoter was more
efficient in this model than the CMV promoter. The study provides guidance on
design strategies and methods for the efficient generation and expression of 2A
polycistronic constructs in embryonic stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3490874
PMID: 23139810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Cell Transplant. 2013;22(6):1053-60. doi: 10.3727/096368912X657215. Epub 2012 Oct
1.

Differentiation of human adipose tissue-derived stem cells into aggregates of
insulin-producing cells through the overexpression of pancreatic and duodenal
homeobox gene-1.

Lee J(1), Kim SC, Kim SJ, Lee H, Jung EJ, Jung SH, Han DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology and Cell Therapy, Asan Institute for Life
Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

The pancreatic and duodenal homeobox gene 1 (Pdx-1) plays a key role in normal
pancreas development and is required for maintaining the normal function of
islets. In this study, we examined whether human adipose tissue-derived stem
cells (hASCs) could differentiate into insulin-producing cells by exogenously
expressed Pdx-1. hASCs were infected with recombinant adenovirus encoding the
mouse Pdx-1 gene and differentiated under high-glucose conditions. Insulin
transcript levels and the expression of key transcription factors required for
pancreatic development including FoxA2, Nkx2.2, and NeuroD were significantly
increased by exogenous Pdx-1 overexpression. The expression of Nkx6.1 was found
only in Pdx-1-induced hASCs. In addition to transcripts for transcription factors
involved in pancreatic development, transcripts for the GLP-1 receptor,
glucokinase, and glucose transporter, which are required for maintaining the
function of pancreatic ß-cells, were observed only in Pdx-1-induced hASCs.
Pdx-1-induced hASCs exhibited insulin secretion in response to glucose challenge 
in vitro. When Pdx-1-induced hASCs were transplanted into streptozotocin
(STZ)-induced diabetic mice, they reduced blood glucose levels, although they did
not restore normoglycemia. These results demonstrate that the expression of
exogenous Pdx-1 is sufficient to induce pancreatic differentiation in vitro but
does not induce the fully functional, mature insulin-producing cells that are
required for restoring normoglycemia in vivo.

PMID: 23031216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Neuroscience. 2012 Dec 13;226:40-50. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.09.032.
Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Progesterone down-regulates spinal cord inflammatory mediators and increases
myelination in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Garay LI(1), González Deniselle MC, Brocca ME, Lima A, Roig P, De Nicola AF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroendocrine Biochemistry, Instituto de Biologia y Medicina
Experimental-CONICET, Obligado 2490, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
laurainesgaray@gmaill.com

In mice with experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis (EAE) pretreatment with
progesterone improves clinical signs and decreases the loss of myelin basic
protein (MBP) and proteolipid protein (PLP) measured by immunohistochemistry and 
in situ hybridization. Presently, we analyzed if progesterone effects in the
spinal cord of EAE mice involved the decreased transcription of local
inflammatory mediators and the increased transcription of myelin proteins and
myelin transcription factors. C57Bl/6 female mice were divided into controls, EAE
and EAE receiving progesterone (100mg implant) 7 days before EAE induction.
Tissues were collected on day 17 post-immunization. Real time PCR technology
demonstrated that progesterone blocked the EAE-induced increase of the
proinflammatory mediators tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa) and its receptor
TNFR1, the microglial marker CD11b and toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) mRNAs, and
increased mRNA expression of PLP and MBP, the myelin transcription factors NKx2.2
and Olig1 and enhanced CC1+oligodendrocyte density respect of untreated EAE mice.
Immunocytochemistry demonstrated decreased Iba1+microglial cells. Confocal
microscopy demonstrated that TNFa colocalized with glial-fibrillary acidic
protein+astrocytes and OX-42+microglial cells. Therefore, progesterone treatment 
improved the clinical signs of EAE, decreased inflammatory glial reactivity and
increased myelination. Data suggest that progesterone neuroprotection involves
the modulation of transcriptional events in the spinal cord of EAE mice.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23000619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2012 Dec;16(12):1227-38. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2012.720975. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

The sonic hedgehog-GLI1 signaling pathway in brain tumor development.

Shahi MH(1), Rey JA, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Department of Pharmacology, Davis, CA, USA.

INTRODUCTION: The sonic hedgehog (Shh) pathway is a regulatory network involved
in development and cancer. Proteins like Ptch, SMO, and Gli are central to the
Shh pathway. Other proteins like HHIP, SUFU, Bmi-1, Cyclin D2, Plakoglobin, PAX6,
Nkx2.2, and SFRP1 are not so well understood in Shh regulation as Gli-1
downstream target genes.
AREAS COVERED: In this review we try to explain the Shh pathway components and
their role in development and cancer, mainly of the brain. A summary of each of
the proteins is presented together with an overview of their involvement in
cancer.
EXPERT OPINION: Genetic alterations of the Shh pathway have been detected in
cancer stem cells, a subgroup of tumor cells implicated in the origin and
maintenance of tumors, being responsible for cancer recurrence and chemotherapy
resistance. Cancer stem cells constitute a novel target for biomedical
researchers. Specifically, the Shh pathway is being explored as a new opportunity
for targeted therapies against tumors. Therefore, a better knowledge of every of 
the regulators of the Shh pathway is needed.

PMID: 22992192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Mar 1;521(4):725-59. doi: 10.1002/cne.23222.

Characterization of the hypothalamus of Xenopus laevis during development. I. The
alar regions.

Domínguez L(1), Morona R, González A, Moreno N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University Complutense of
Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

The patterns of expression of a set of conserved developmental regulatory
transcription factors and neuronal markers were analyzed in the alar hypothalamus
of Xenopus laevis throughout development. Combined immunohistochemical and in
situ hybridization techniques were used for the identification of subdivisions
and their boundaries. The alar hypothalamus was located rostral to the
diencephalon in the secondary prosencephalon and represents the rostral
continuation of the alar territories of the diencephalon and brainstem, according
to the prosomeric model. It is composed of the supraoptoparaventricular (dorsal) 
and the suprachiasmatic (ventral) regions, and limits dorsally with the preoptic 
region, caudally with the prethalamic eminence and the prethalamus, and ventrally
with the basal hypothalamus. The supraoptoparaventricular area is defined by the 
orthopedia (Otp) expression and is subdivided into rostral and caudal portions,
on the basis of the Nkx2.2 expression only in the rostral portion. This region is
the source of many neuroendocrine cells, primarily located in the rostral
subdivision. The suprachiasmatic region is characterized by Dll4/Isl1 expression,
and was also subdivided into rostral and caudal portions, based on the expression
of Nkx2.1/Nkx2.2 and Lhx1/7 exclusively in the rostral portion. Both alar regions
are mainly connected with subpallial areas strongly implicated in the limbic
system and show robust intrahypothalamic connections. Caudally, both regions
project to brainstem centers and spinal cord. All these data support that in
terms of topology, molecular specification, and connectivity the subdivisions of 
the anuran alar hypothalamus possess many features shared with their counterparts
in amniotes, likely controlling similar reflexes, responses, and behaviors.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22965483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Diabetes. 2012 Oct;61(10):2517-24. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

Nutrient excess stimulates ß-cell neogenesis in zebrafish.

Maddison LA(1), Chen W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Persistent nutrient excess results in a compensatory increase in the ß-cell
number in mammals. It is unknown whether this response occurs in nonmammalian
vertebrates, including zebrafish, a model for genetics and chemical genetics. We 
investigated the response of zebrafish ß-cells to nutrient excess and the
underlying mechanisms by culturing transgenic zebrafish larvae in solutions of
different nutrient composition. The number of ß-cells rapidly increases after
persistent, but not intermittent, exposure to glucose or a lipid-rich diet. The
response to glucose, but not the lipid-rich diet, required mammalian target of
rapamycin activity. In contrast, inhibition of insulin/IGF-1 signaling in ß-cells
blocked the response to the lipid-rich diet, but not to glucose. Lineage tracing 
and marker expression analyses indicated that the new ß-cells were not from
self-replication but arose through differentiation of postmitotic precursor
cells. On the basis of transgenic markers, we identified two groups of newly
formed ß-cells: one with nkx2.2 promoter activity and the other with mnx1
promoter activity. Thus, nutrient excess in zebrafish induces a rapid increase in
ß-cells though differentiation of two subpopulations of postmitotic precursor
cells. This occurs through different mechanisms depending on the nutrient type
and likely involves paracrine signaling between the differentiated ß-cells and
the precursor cells.

PMCID: PMC3447891
PMID: 22721970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Genesis. 2012 Aug;50(8):612-24. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22037. Epub 2012 May 19.

Generation of Nkx2.2:lacZ mice using recombination-mediated cassette exchange
technology.

Arnes L(1), Leclerc K, Friel JM, Hipkens SB, Magnuson MA, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York, USA.

Nkx2.2 encodes a homeodomain transcription factor required for the correct
specification and/or differentiation of cells in the pancreas, intestine, and
central nervous system (CNS). To follow the fate of cells deleted for Nkx2.2
within these tissues, we generated Nkx2.2:lacZ knockin mice using a
recombination-mediated cassette exchange (RMCE) approach. Expression analysis of 
lacZ and/or ß-galactosidase in Nkx2.2(lacZ/+) heterozygote embryos and adults
demonstrates that lacZ faithfully recapitulates endogenous Nkx2.2 expression.
Furthermore, the Nkx2.2(lacZ/lacZ) homozygous embryos display phenotypes
indistinguishable from the previously characterized Nkx2.2(-/-) strain. LacZ
expression analyses in the Nkx2.2(lacZ/lacZ) homozygous embryos indicate that
Nkx2.2-expressing progenitor cells within the pancreas are generated in their
normal numbers and are not mislocalized within the pancreatic ductal epithelium
or developing islets. In the CNS of Nkx2.2(lacZ/lacZ) embryos, LacZ-expressing
cells within the ventral P3 progenitor domain display different migration
properties depending on the developmental stage and their respective
differentiation potential.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3421046
PMID: 22539496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jul;36(7):993-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824ee43c.

NKX2.2 is a useful immunohistochemical marker for Ewing sarcoma.

Yoshida A(1), Sekine S, Tsuta K, Fukayama M, Furuta K, Tsuda H.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Clinical Laboratory Division, National Cancer Center Hospital,
Tokyo, Japan. akyoshid@ncc.go.jp

Ewing sarcoma is a high-grade round cell sarcoma that affects bones and soft
tissues in children and young adults. Its diagnosis can be challenging, and the
differential diagnoses include a wide variety of small round cell tumors. CD99
and FLI-1 are the currently accepted immunohistochemical markers for Ewing
sarcoma, but their accuracy has been controversial. NKX2.2 is a
homeodomain-containing transcription factor that plays a critical role in
neuroendocrine/glial differentiation. The NKX2.2 gene was recently identified as 
a target of EWS-FLI-1, the fusion protein specific to Ewing sarcoma, and was
shown to be differentially upregulated in Ewing sarcoma on the basis of
array-based gene expression analysis. However, the immunohistochemical diagnostic
potential of this marker has not been tested. We immunostained representative
sections of 30 genetically confirmed Ewing sarcomas and 130 non-Ewing small round
cell tumors by using an antibody to NKX2.2. Nuclear staining in at least 5% of
the cells was deemed positive. Twenty-eight (93%) of the 30 Ewing sarcomas were
positive for NKX2.2. The staining was diffuse (>50%) in all the positive cases
and was moderate or strong in intensity for most cases (25 of 28). NKX2.2 was
also positive in 14 non-Ewing tumors, including all the olfactory neuroblastomas 
and a minor subset of small cell carcinomas, synovial sarcomas, mesenchymal
chondrosarcomas, and malignant melanomas. All the other non-Ewing tumors tested
were negative for this marker. NKX2.2 is a valuable marker for Ewing sarcoma,
with a sensitivity of 93% and a specificity of 89%, and aids in the differential 
diagnosis of small round cell tumors.

PMID: 22446943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cell Cycle. 2012 Apr 15;11(8):1544-53. doi: 10.4161/cc.19928. Epub 2012 Apr 15.

Ectopic transgenic expression of NKX2.2 induces differentiation of adult
pancreatic progenitors and mediates islet regeneration.

Chen S(1), Shimoda M, Chen J, Matsumoto S, Grayburn PA.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Research Institute, Dallas, TX, USA.

To pursue islet regeneration in situ in adult pancreas with a diabetic animal
model, we used ultrasound targeted microbubble destruction (UTMD) to deliver
islet transcription factor genes to the pancreas of STZ-treated rats,
specifically using a piggyBac transposon gene delivery system for long-term
transgene expression of Nkx2.2 in STZ rat pancreas. Our results show that Nkx2.2 
gene induced robust proliferation and differentiation of adult pancreatic
progenitors. Our high-resolution confocal images precisely displayed how one
single pancreatic progenitor cell differentiated into islets-like clusters and,
further, into mature islets with normal morphology in situ in postnatal pancreas.
Nkx2.2 targeted to the pancreas by UTMD induces pancreatic progenitor cell
proliferation and differentiation with subsequent islet regeneration and cure of 
STZ-induced diabetes for three months.

PMID: 22433950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Neurochem. 2012 Jul;122(1):81-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2012.07724.x. Epub
2012 Apr 4.

A simplified method to generate serotonergic neurons from mouse embryonic stem
and induced pluripotent stem cells.

Shimada T(1), Takai Y, Shinohara K, Yamasaki A, Tominaga-Yoshino K, Ogura A, Toi 
A, Asano K, Shintani N, Hayata-Takano A, Baba A, Hashimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuropharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Comment in
    J Neurochem. 2012 Jul;122(1):1-3.

We have developed a new simple method to induce serotonergic neurons from
embryonic stem (ES) and induced pluripotent stem cells. When ES or induced
pluripotent stem cells were cultured on a thick gel layer of Matrigel, most
colonies extended TuJ1-positive neurites. We found that noggin, a known
antagonist of bone morphogenic protein, induces ES cells to express genes
involved in serotonergic differentiation, such as Nkx2.2, Pet-1, Sonic hedgehog, 
tryptophan hydroxylase 2, and serotonin transporter, as well as increases high
potassium-induced release of serotonin. To concentrate serotonergic neurons, ES
cells carrying Pet-1-enhancer-driven enhanced green fluorescent protein were
differentiated and sorted into about 80% pure cultures of serotonergic neurons.
Whole cell voltage-clamp recordings showed a voltage-dependent current in
dissociated neurons. This simplified method provides an alternative option for
serotonergic differentiation of pluripotent stem cells and will likely contribute
a deeper understanding regarding the nature of serotonergic neurons and open new 
therapeutic perspectives for the treatment of psychiatric disorders.

© 2012 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2012 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 22404309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Int J Cancer. 2012 Nov 1;131(9):2153-64. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27472. Epub 2012 Mar
29.

Small-molecule screen identifies modulators of EWS/FLI1 target gene expression
and cell survival in Ewing's sarcoma.

Boro A(1), Prêtre K, Rechfeld F, Thalhammer V, Oesch S, Wachtel M, Schäfer BW,
Niggli FK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology and Children's Research Center, University Children's
Hospital, Steinwiesstrasse 75, Zurich, Switzerland.

Ewing's sarcoma family of tumors (EFT) is characterized by the presence of
chromosomal translocations leading to the expression of oncogenic transcription
factors such as, in the majority of cases, EWS/FLI1. Because of its key role in
Ewing's sarcoma development and maintenance, EWS/FLI1 represents an attractive
therapeutic target. Here, we characterize PHLDA1 as a novel direct target gene
whose expression is repressed by EWS/FLI1. Using this gene and additional
specific well-characterized target genes such as NROB1, NKX2.2 and CAV1, all
activated by EWS/FLI1, as a read-out system, we screened a small-molecule
compound library enriched for FDA-approved drugs that modulated the expression of
EWS/FLI1 target genes. Among a hit-list of nine well-known drugs such as
camptothecin, fenretinide, etoposide and doxorubicin, we also identified the
kinase inhibitor midostaurin (PKC412). Subsequent experiments demonstrated that
midostaurin is able to induce apoptosis in a panel of six Ewing's sarcoma cell
lines in vitro and can significantly suppress xenograft tumor growth in vivo.
These results suggest that midostaurin might be a novel drug that is active
against Ewing's cells, which might act by modulating the expression of EWS/FLI1
target genes.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 22323082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28574. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028574. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Development of posterior hypothalamic neurons enlightens a switch in the
prosencephalic basic plan.

Croizier S(1), Amiot C, Chen X, Presse F, Nahon JL, Wu JY, Fellmann D, Risold PY.

Author information: 
(1)EA3922, Faculté de Médecine et de Pharmacie, Université de Franche-Comté,
Besançon, France.

In rats and mice, ascending and descending axons from neurons producing
melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) reach the cerebral cortex and spinal cord.
However, these ascending and descending projections originate from distinct
sub-populations expressing or not "Cocaine-and-Amphetamine-Regulated-Transcript" 
(CART) peptide. Using a BrdU approach, MCH cell bodies are among the very first
generated in the hypothalamus, within a longitudinal cell cord made of earliest
delaminating neuroblasts in the diencephalon and extending from the chiasmatic
region to the ventral midbrain. This region also specifically expresses the
regulatory genes Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and Nkx2.2. First MCH axons run through the
tractus postopticus (tpoc) which gathers pioneer axons from the cell cord and
courses parallel to the Shh/Nkx2.2 expression domain. Subsequently generated MCH 
neurons and ascending MCH axons differentiate while neurogenesis and mantle layer
differentiation are generalized in the prosencephalon, including telencephalon.
Ascending MCH axons follow dopaminergic axons of the mesotelencephalic tract,
both being an initial component of the medial forebrain bundle (mfb). Netrin1 and
Slit2 proteins that are involved in the establishment of the tpoc and mfb,
respectively attract or repulse MCH axons.We conclude that first generated MCH
neurons develop in a diencephalic segment of a longitudinal Shh/Nkx2.2 domain.
This region can be seen as a prosencephalic segment of a medial neurogenic column
extending from the chiasmatic region through the ventral neural tube. However, as
the telencephalon expends, it exerts a trophic action and the mfb expands,
inducing a switch in the longitudinal axial organization of the prosencephalon.

PMCID: PMC3241628
PMID: 22194855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cells Tissues Organs. 2012;195(6):507-23. doi: 10.1159/000329864. Epub 2011 Nov
25.

Induction and selection of Sox17-expressing endoderm cells generated from murine 
embryonic stem cells.

Schroeder IS(1), Sulzbacher S, Nolden T, Fuchs J, Czarnota J, Meisterfeld R,
Himmelbauer H, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research Gatersleben,
Germany.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells offer a valuable source for generating
insulin-producing cells. However, current differentiation protocols often result 
in heterogeneous cell populations of various developmental stages. Here we show
the activin A-induced differentiation of mouse ES cells carrying a homologous
dsRed-IRES-puromycin knock-in within the Sox17 locus into the endoderm lineage.
Sox17-expressing cells were selected by fluorescence-assisted cell sorting (FACS)
and characterized at the transcript and protein level. Treatment of ES cells with
high concentrations of activin A for 10 days resulted in up to 19% Sox17-positive
cells selected by FACS. Isolated Sox17-positive cells were characterized by
defini- tive endoderm-specific Sox17/Cxcr4/Foxa2 transcripts, but lacked
pluripotency-associated Oct4 mRNA and protein. The Sox17-expressing cells showed 
downregulation of extraembryonic endoderm (Sox7, Afp, Sdf1)-, mesoderm (Foxf1,
Meox1)- and ectoderm (Pax6, NeuroD6)-specific transcripts. The presence of Hnf4a,
Hes1 and Pdx1 mRNA demonstrated the expression of primitive gut/foregut
cell-specific markers. Ngn3, Nkx6.1 and Nkx2.2 transcripts in Sox17-positive
cells were determined as properties of pancreatic endocrine progenitors.
Immunocytochemistry of activin A-induced Sox17-positive embryoid bodies revealed 
coexpression of Cxcr4 and Foxa2. Moreover, the histochemical demonstration of
E-cadherin-, Cxcr4-, Sox9-, Hnf1ß- and Ngn3-positive epithelial-like structures
underlined the potential of Sox17-positive cells to further differentiate into
the pancreatic lineage. By reducing the heterogeneity of the ES cell progeny,
Sox17-expressing cells are a suitable model to evaluate the effects of growth and
differentiation factors and of culture conditions to delineate the
differentiation process for the generation of pancreatic cells in vitro.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22123608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Diabetologia. 2012 Mar;55(3):694-706. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2379-y. Epub 2011
Nov 26.

INS(GFP/w) human embryonic stem cells facilitate isolation of in vitro derived
insulin-producing cells.

Micallef SJ(1), Li X, Schiesser JV, Hirst CE, Yu QC, Lim SM, Nostro MC, Elliott
DA, Sarangi F, Harrison LC, Keller G, Elefanty AG, Stanley EG.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Level 3, Building 75, STRIP1,
West Ring Road, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2012 Mar;55(3):540-1.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We aimed to generate human embryonic stem cell (hESC) reporter
lines that would facilitate the characterisation of insulin-producing (INS<U+207A>)
cells derived in vitro.
METHODS: Homologous recombination was used to insert sequences encoding green
fluorescent protein (GFP) into the INS locus, to create reporter cell lines
enabling the prospective isolation of viable INS<U+207A> cells.
RESULTS: Differentiation of INS(GFP/w) hESCs using published protocols
demonstrated that all GFP<U+207A> cells co-produced insulin, confirming the fidelity of 
the reporter gene. INS-GFP<U+207A> cells often co-produced glucagon and somatostatin,
confirming conclusions from previous studies that early hESC-derived
insulin-producing cells were polyhormonal. INS(GFP/w) hESCs were used to develop 
a 96-well format spin embryoid body (EB) differentiation protocol that used the
recombinant protein-based, fully defined medium, APEL. Like INS-GFP<U+207A> cells
generated with other methods, those derived using the spin EB protocol expressed 
a suite of pancreatic-related transcription factor genes including ISL1, PAX6 and
NKX2.2. However, in contrast with previous methods, the spin EB protocol yielded 
INS-GFP<U+207A> cells that also co-expressed the beta cell transcription factor gene,
NKX6.1, and comprised a substantial proportion of monohormonal INS<U+207A> cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: INS(GFP/w) hESCs are a valuable tool for
investigating the nature of early INS<U+207A> progenitors in beta cell ontogeny and will
facilitate the development of novel protocols for generating INS<U+207A> cells from
differentiating hESCs.

PMCID: PMC3268987
PMID: 22120512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genesis. 2012 May;50(5):443-50. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20820. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

An embryonic stem cell-based system for rapid analysis of transcriptional
enhancers.

Tsanov KM(1), Nishi Y, Peterson KA, Liu J, Baetscher M, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA.

With the growing use of genome-wide screens for cis-regulatory elements, there is
a pressing need for platforms that enable fast and cost-effective experimental
validation of identified hits in relevant developmental and tissue contexts.
Here, we describe a murine embryonic stem cell (ESC)-based system that
facilitates rapid analysis of putative transcriptional enhancers. Candidate
enhancers are targeted with high efficiency to a defined genomic locus via
recombinase-mediated cassette exchange. Targeted ESCs are subsequently
differentiated in vitro into desired cell types, where enhancer activity is
monitored by reporter gene expression. As a proof of principle, we analyzed a
previously characterized, Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-dependent, V3 interneuron
progenitor (pV3)-specific enhancer for the Nkx2.2 gene, and observed highly
specific enhancer activity. Given the broad potential of ESCs to generate a
spectrum of cell types, this system can serve as an effective platform for the
characterization of gene regulatory networks controlling cell fate specification 
and cell function.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3334447
PMID: 22083581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Autophagy. 2011 Dec;7(12):1514-27.

Expression pattern and functions of autophagy-related gene atg5 in zebrafish
organogenesis.

Hu Z(1), Zhang J, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

The implications of autophagy-related genes in serious neural degenerative
diseases have been well documented. However, the functions and regulation of the 
family genes in embryonic development remain to be rigorously studied. Here, we
report on for the first time the important role of atg5 gene in zebrafish
neurogenesis and organogenesis as evidenced by the spatiotemporal expression
pattern and functional analysis. Using morpholino oligo knockdown and mRNA
overexpression, we demonstrated that zebrafish atg5 is required for normal
morphogenesis of brain regionalization and body plan as well as for expression
regulation of neural gene markers: gli1, huC, nkx2.2, pink1, ß-synuclein, xb51
and zic1. We further demonstrated that ATG5 protein is involved in autophagy by
LC3-II/LC3I ratio and rapamycin-induction experiments, and that ATG5 is capable
of regulating expression of itself gene in the manner of a feedback inhibition
loop. In addition, we found that expression of another autophagy-related gene,
atg12, is maintained at a higher constant level like a housekeeping gene. This
indicates that the formation of the ATG12ATG5 conjugate may be dependent on ATG5
protein generation and its splicing, rather than on ATG12 protein in zebrafish.
Importantly, in the present study, we provide a mechanistic insight into the
regulation and functional roles of atg5 in development of zebrafish nervous
system.

PMCID: PMC3288024
PMID: 22082871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Development. 2011 Dec;138(24):5321-31. doi: 10.1242/dev.067413. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

The extracellular matrix molecule tenascin C modulates expression levels and
territories of key patterning genes during spinal cord astrocyte specification.

Karus M(1), Denecke B, ffrench-Constant C, Wiese S, Faissner A.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Cell Morphology and Molecular Neurobiology, Ruhr-University
Bochum, Universitätsstrasse 150, Bochum, Germany.

The generation of astrocytes during the development of the mammalian spinal cord 
is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate for the first time that the
extracellular matrix glycoprotein tenascin C regulates the expression of key
patterning genes during late embryonic spinal cord development, leading to a
timely maturation of gliogenic neural precursor cells. We first show that
tenascin C is expressed by gliogenic neural precursor cells during late embryonic
development. The loss of tenascin C leads to a sustained generation and delayed
migration of Fgfr3-expressing immature astrocytes in vivo. Consistent with an
increased generation of astroglial cells, we documented an increased number of
GFAP-positive astrocytes at later stages. Mechanistically, we could demonstrate
an upregulation and domain shift of the patterning genes Nkx6.1 and Nkx2.2 in
vivo. In addition, sulfatase 1, a known downstream target of Nkx2.2 in the
ventral spinal cord, was also upregulated. Sulfatase 1 regulates growth factor
signalling by cleaving sulphate residues from heparan sulphate proteoglycans.
Consistent with this function, we observed changes in both FGF2 and EGF
responsiveness of spinal cord neural precursor cells. Taken together, our data
implicate Tnc in the regulation of proliferation and lineage progression of
astroglial progenitors in specific domains of the developing spinal cord.

PMID: 22071102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Genes Dev. 2011 Nov 1;25(21):2291-305. doi: 10.1101/gad.173039.111.

Nkx2.2 repressor complex regulates islet ß-cell specification and prevents
ß-to-a-cell reprogramming.

Papizan JB(1), Singer RA, Tschen SI, Dhawan S, Friel JM, Hipkens SB, Magnuson MA,
Bhushan A, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Institute of Human Nutrition, Columbia
University, New York 10032, USA.

Regulation of cell differentiation programs requires complex interactions between
transcriptional and epigenetic networks. Elucidating the principal molecular
events responsible for the establishment and maintenance of cell fate identities 
will provide important insights into how cell lineages are specified and
maintained and will improve our ability to recapitulate cell differentiation
events in vitro. In this study, we demonstrate that Nkx2.2 is part of a large
repression complex in pancreatic ß cells that includes DNMT3a, Grg3, and HDAC1.
Mutation of the endogenous Nkx2.2 tinman (TN) domain in mice abolishes the
interaction between Nkx2.2 and Grg3 and disrupts ß-cell specification.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that Nkx2.2 preferentially recruits Grg3 and HDAC1 to
the methylated Aristaless homeobox gene (Arx) promoter in ß cells. The Nkx2.2 TN 
mutation results in ectopic expression of Arx in ß cells, causing ß-to-a-cell
transdifferentiation. A corresponding ß-cell-specific deletion of DNMT3a is also 
sufficient to cause Arx-dependent ß-to-a-cell reprogramming. Notably, subsequent 
removal of Arx in the ß cells of Nkx2.2(TNmut/TNmut) mutant mice reverts the
ß-to-a-cell conversion, indicating that the repressor activities of Nkx2.2 on the
methylated Arx promoter in ß cells are the primary regulatory events required for
maintaining ß-cell identity.

PMCID: PMC3219233
PMID: 22056672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2011 Nov;138(22):4969-78. doi: 10.1242/dev.070862.

Targeted mutation of the talpid3 gene in zebrafish reveals its conserved
requirement for ciliogenesis and Hedgehog signalling across the vertebrates.

Ben J(1), Elworthy S, Ng AS, van Eeden F, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Biomedical Genetics Group, Institute of Molecular & Cell
Biology, Proteos, 61 Biopolis Drive, Singapore 138673, Republic of Singapore.

Using zinc-finger nuclease-mediated mutagenesis, we have generated mutant alleles
of the zebrafish orthologue of the chicken talpid3 (ta3) gene, which encodes a
centrosomal protein that is essential for ciliogenesis. Animals homozygous for
these mutant alleles complete embryogenesis normally, but manifest a cystic
kidney phenotype during the early larval stages and die within a month of
hatching. Elimination of maternally derived Ta3 activity by germline replacement 
resulted in embryonic lethality of ta3 homozygotes. The phenotype of such
maternal and zygotic (MZta3) mutant zebrafish showed strong similarities to that 
of chick ta3 mutants: absence of primary and motile cilia as well as aberrant
Hedgehog (Hh) signalling, the latter manifest by the expanded domains of
engrailed and ptc1 expression in the somites, reduction of nkx2.2 expression in
the neural tube, symmetric pectoral fins, cyclopic eyes and an ectopic lens.
GFP-tagged Gli2a localised to the basal bodies in the absence of the primary
cilia and western blot analysis showed that Gli2a protein is aberrantly processed
in MZta3 embryos. Zygotic expression of ta3 largely rescued the effects of
maternal depletion, but the motile cilia of Kupffer's vesicle remained aberrant, 
resulting in laterality defects. Our findings underline the importance of the
primary cilium for Hh signaling in zebrafish and reveal the conservation of Ta3
function during vertebrate evolution.

PMCID: PMC3201664
PMID: 22028029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Diabetes. 2011 Dec;60(12):3208-16. doi: 10.2337/db10-1192. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

Convergence of the insulin and serotonin programs in the pancreatic ß-cell.

Ohta Y(1), Kosaka Y, Kishimoto N, Wang J, Smith SB, Honig G, Kim H, Gasa RM,
Neubauer N, Liou A, Tecott LH, Deneris ES, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
California, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Despite their origins in different germ layers, pancreatic islet cells
share many common developmental features with neurons, especially
serotonin-producing neurons in the hindbrain. Therefore, we tested whether these 
developmental parallels have functional consequences.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We used transcriptional profiling,
immunohistochemistry, DNA-binding analyses, and mouse genetic models to assess
the expression and function of key serotonergic genes in the pancreas.
RESULTS: We found that islet cells expressed the genes encoding all of the
products necessary for synthesizing, packaging, and secreting serotonin,
including both isoforms of the serotonin synthetic enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase 
and the archetypal serotonergic transcription factor Pet1. As in serotonergic
neurons, Pet1 expression in islets required homeodomain transcription factor
Nkx2.2 but not Nkx6.1. In ß-cells, Pet1 bound to the serotonergic genes but also 
to a conserved insulin gene regulatory element. Mice lacking Pet1 displayed
reduced insulin production and secretion and impaired glucose tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies demonstrate that a common transcriptional cascade
drives the differentiation of ß-cells and serotonergic neurons and imparts the
shared ability to produce serotonin. The interrelated biology of these two cell
types has important implications for the pathology and treatment of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3219954
PMID: 22013016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;44(1):72-83. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2011.09.008.
Epub 2011 Sep 29.

SOX9 regulates endocrine cell differentiation during human fetal pancreas
development.

McDonald E(1), Li J, Krishnamurthy M, Fellows GF, Goodyer CG, Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London,
ON, Canada.

The transition of pancreatic progenitor cells to mature endocrine cells is
regulated by the sequential activation and interaction of several transcription
factors. In mice, the transcription factor Sox9 has been shown to support
endocrine cell differentiation. However, the functional role of SOX9 during
pancreas development in the human has yet to be determined. The present study was
to characterize SOX9 expression during human fetal pancreas development and
examine its functional role by transfection with SOX9 siRNA or SOX9 expression
vectors. Here we report that SOX9 was most frequently expressed in PDX1(+) cells 
(60-83%) and least in mature endocrine cells (<1-14%). The proliferation of
SOX9(+) cells was significantly higher at 8-10 weeks than at 14-21 weeks (p<0.05)
or 20-21 weeks (p<0.01). SOX9 frequently co-localized with FOXA2, NGN3 and
transcription factors linked to NGN3 (NKX2.2, NKX6.1, PAX6). siRNA knockdown of
SOX9 significantly decreased islet-epithelial cell proliferation, NGN3, NKX6.1,
PAX6 and INS mRNA levels and the number of NGN3(+) and insulin(+) cells (p<0.05) 
while increasing GCG mRNA and glucagon(+) cells (p<0.05). Examination of SOX9
associated signaling pathways revealed a decrease in phospho-Akt (p<0.01),
phospho-GSK3ß (p<0.01) and cyclin D1 (p<0.01) with a decrease in nuclear
ß-catenin(+) (p<0.05) cells following SOX9 siRNA knockdown. In contrast,
over-expression of SOX9 significantly increased the number of islet cells
proliferating, NGN3, NKX6.1, PAX6 and INS mRNA levels, the phospho-Akt/GSK3ß
cascade and the number of insulin(+) cells. Our results demonstrated that SOX9 is
important for the expression of NGN3 and molecular markers of endocrine cell
differentiation in the human fetal pancreas.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21983268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Comp Neurol. 2012 Feb 15;520(3):453-78. doi: 10.1002/cne.22762.

Subdivisions of the turtle Pseudemys scripta hypothalamus based on the expression
of regulatory genes and neuronal markers.

Moreno N(1), Domínguez L, Morona R, González A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, University Complutense of
Madrid, 28040, Madrid, Spain. nerea@bio.ucm.es

The patterns of distribution of a set of conserved brain developmental regulatory
transcription factors and neuronal markers were analyzed in the hypothalamus of
the juvenile turtle, Pseudemys scripta. Combined immunohistochemical techniques
were used for the identification of the main boundaries and subdivisions in the
optic, paraventricular, tuberal, and mammillary hypothalamic regions. The
combination of Tbr1 and Pax6 with Nkx2.1 allowed identification of the boundary
between the telencephalic preoptic area, rich in Nkx2.1 expression, and the
prethalamic eminence, rich in Tbr1 expression. In addition, at this level Nkx2.2 
expression defined the boundary between the telencephalon and the hypothalamus.
The dorsalmost hypothalamic domain was the supraoptoparaventricular region that
was defined by the expression of Otp/Pax6 and the lack of Nkx2.1/Isl1. It is
subdivided into rostral, rich in Otp and Nkx2.2, and caudal, only Otp-positive,
portions. Ventrally, the suprachiasmatic area was identified by its
catecholaminergic groups and the lack of Otp, and could be further divided into a
rostral portion, rich in Nkx2.1 and Nkx2.2, and a caudal portion, rich in Isl1
and devoid of Nkx2.1 expression. The expressions of Nkx2.1 and Isl1 defined the
tuberal hypothalamus, whereas only the rostral portion expressed Otp. Its caudal 
boundary was evident by the lack of Isl1 in the adjacent mammillary area, which
expressed Nkx2.1 and Otp. All these results provide an important set of data on
the interpretation of the hypothalamic organization in a reptile, and hence make 
a useful contribution to the understanding of hypothalamic evolution.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21935937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Aug 31;11:52. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-52.

Arx and Nkx2.2 compound deficiency redirects pancreatic alpha- and beta-cell
differentiation to a somatostatin/ghrelin co-expressing cell lineage.

Kordowich S(1), Collombat P, Mansouri A, Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max-Planck Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Am Fassberg, Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Nkx2.2 and Arx represent key transcription factors implicated in the 
specification of islet cell subtypes during pancreas development. Mice deficient 
for Arx do not develop any alpha-cells whereas beta- and delta-cells are found in
considerably higher numbers. In Nkx2.2 mutant animals, alpha- and beta-cell
development is severely impaired whereas a ghrelin-expressing cell population is 
found augmented.Notably, Arx transcription is clearly enhanced in
Nkx2.2-deficient pancreata. Hence in order to precise the functional link between
both factors we performed a comparative analysis of Nkx2.2/Arx single- and
double-mutants but also of Pax6-deficient animals.
RESULTS: We show that most of the ghrelin+ cells emerging in pancreata of Nkx2.2-
and Pax6-deficient mice, express the alpha-cell specifier Arx, but also
additional beta-cell related genes. In Nkx2.2-deficient mice, Arx directly
co-localizes with iAPP, PC1/3 and Pdx1 suggesting an Nkx2.2-dependent control of 
Arx in committed beta-cells. The combined loss of Nkx2.2 and Arx likewise results
in the formation of a hyperplastic ghrelin+ cell population at the expense of
mature alpha- and beta-cells. Surprisingly, such Nkx2.2-/-Arx- ghrelin+ cells
also express the somatostatin hormone.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that Nkx2.2 acts by reinforcing the
transcriptional networks initiated by Pax4 and Arx in early committed beta- and
alpha-cell, respectively. Our analysis also suggests that one of the coupled
functions of Nkx2.2 and Pax4 is to counteract Arx gene activity in early
committed beta-cells.

PMCID: PMC3179930
PMID: 21880149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Dev Biol. 2011 Nov 1;359(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.08.001. Epub 2011 Aug
11.

Nkx2.2 and Arx genetically interact to regulate pancreatic endocrine cell
development and endocrine hormone expression.

Mastracci TL(1), Wilcox CL, Arnes L, Panea C, Golden JA, May CL, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Russ Berrie Medical Pavilion, Columbia
University, 1150 St. Nicholas Ave., New York, NY 10032, USA.

Nkx2.2 and Arx are essential pancreatic transcription factors. Nkx2.2 is
necessary for the appropriate specification of the islet alpha, beta, PP and
epsilon cell lineages, whereas Arx is required to form the correct ratio of
alpha, beta, delta and PP cells. To begin to understand the cooperative functions
of Nkx2.2 and Arx in the development of endocrine cell lineages, we generated
progenitor cell-specific deletions of Arx on the Nkx2.2 null background. The
analysis of these mutants demonstrates that expansion of the ghrelin cell
population in the Nkx2.2 null pancreas is not dependent on Arx; however, Arx is
necessary for the upregulation of ghrelin mRNA levels in Nkx2.2 mutant epsilon
cells. Alternatively, in the absence of Arx, delta cell numbers are increased and
Nkx2.2 becomes essential for the repression of somatostatin gene expression.
Interestingly, the dysregulation of ghrelin and somatostatin expression in the
Nkx2.2/Arx compound mutant (Nkx2.2(null);Arx(<U+0394>panc)) results in the appearance of
ghrelin+/somatostatin+ co-expressing cells. These compound mutants also revealed 
a genetic interaction between Nkx2.2 and Arx in the regulation of the PP cell
lineage; the PP cell population is reduced when Nkx2.2 is deleted but is restored
back to wildtype numbers in the Nkx2.2(null);Arx(<U+0394>panc) mutant. Moreover,
conditional deletion of Arx in specific pancreatic cell populations established
that the functions of Arx are necessary in the Neurog3+ endocrine progenitors.
Together, these experiments identify novel genetic interactions between Nkx2.2
and Arx within the endocrine progenitor cells that ensure the correct
specification and regulation of endocrine hormone-producing cells.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3192309
PMID: 21856296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 14;286(41):36042-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.290825. Epub
2011 Aug 18.

Inhibitors of Src and focal adhesion kinase promote endocrine specification:
impact on the derivation of ß-cells from human pluripotent stem cells.

Afrikanova I(1), Yebra M, Simpkinson M, Xu Y, Hayek A, Montgomery A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California San Diego, San Diego,
California 92121, USA.

Stepwise approaches for the derivation of ß-cells from human embryonic stem cells
have been described. However, low levels of endocrine specification limit the
final yield of insulin-producing ß-cells. In this study, we show that the
pyrrolo-pyrimidine Src family kinase (SFK) inhibitor PP2 effectively promotes the
endocrine specification of human embryonic stem cell derivatives based on its
capacity to induce the expression of proendocrine transcription factors (NGN3,
NEUROD1, NKX2.2, and PAX4) and to significantly increase the final yield of
insulin-positive cells. We further demonstrate that PP2 inhibits the activation
of focal adhesion kinase (FAK), and selective inhibition of this kinase is also
sufficient to induce early endocrine commitment based on increased expression of 
NGN3, NEUROD1, and NKX2.2. Additional studies using dominant negative constructs 
and isolated human fetal pancreata suggest that c-Src is at least partially
responsible for inhibiting early endocrine specification. Mechanistically, we
propose that inhibition of SFK/FAK signaling can promote endocrine specification 
by limiting activation of the TGFßR/Smad2/3 pathway. Moreover, we show that
inhibition of SFK/FAK signaling suppresses cell growth, increases the expression 
of the ß-cell-associated cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p57kip2, and
simultaneously suppresses the expression of Id1 and Id2. This study has important
implications for the derivation of ß-cells for the cell-based therapy of diabetes
and sheds new light on the signaling events that regulate early endocrine
specification.

PMCID: PMC3195622
PMID: 21852242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;56(10):695-700. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.83. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Association of variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and
function with type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

Chavali S(1), Mahajan A, Tabassum R, Dwivedi OP, Chauhan G, Ghosh S, Tandon N,
Bharadwaj D.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, CSIR, Delhi, India.

Variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and function are
known to cause monogenic forms of type 2 diabetes and are also associated with
complex form. In this study, we studied the genetic association of polymorphisms 
in such important genes with type 2 diabetes in the high-risk Indians. We
genotyped 91 polymorphisms in 19 genes (ABCC8, HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF4A, INS, INSM1,
ISL1, KCNJ11, MAFA, MNX1, NEUROD1, NEUROG3, NKX2.2, NKX6.1, PAX4, PAX6, PDX1,
USF1 and WFS1) in 2025 unrelated North Indians of Indo-European ethnicity
comprising of 1019 diabetic and 1006 non-diabetic subjects. HNF4A promoter P2
polymorphisms rs1884613 and rs2144908, which are in high linkage disequilibrium, 
showed significant association with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio (OR)=1.37 (95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.19-1.57), P=9.4 × 10(-6) for rs1884613 and OR=1.37
(95%CI 1.20-1.57), P=6.0 × 10(-6) for rs2144908), as previously shown in other
populations. We observed body mass index-dependent association of these variants 
with type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects. Variants in USF1, ABCC8,
ISL1 and KCNJ11 showed nominal association, while haplotypes in these genes were 
significantly associated. rs3812704 upstream of NEUROG3 significantly increased
risk for type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects (OR=1.68 (95%CI
1.25-2.24), P=4.9 × 10(-4)). Thus, pancreatic ß-cell development and function
genes contribute to susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

PMID: 21814221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Development. 2011 Sep;138(17):3711-21. doi: 10.1242/dev.068270. Epub 2011 Jul 20.

Tcf/Lef repressors differentially regulate Shh-Gli target gene activation
thresholds to generate progenitor patterning in the developing CNS.

Wang H(1), Lei Q, Oosterveen T, Ericson J, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 675 Hoes Lane,
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

During neural tube development, Shh signaling through Gli transcription factors
is necessary to establish five distinct ventral progenitor domains that give rise
to unique classes of neurons and glia that arise in specific positions along the 
dorsoventral axis. These cells are generated from progenitors that display
distinct transcription factor gene expression profiles in specific domains in the
ventricular zone. However, the molecular genetic mechanisms that control the
differential spatiotemporal transcriptional responses of progenitor target genes 
to graded Shh-Gli signaling remain unclear. The current study demonstrates a role
for Tcf/Lef repressor activity in this process. We show that Tcf3 and Tcf7L2
(Tcf4) are required for proper ventral patterning and function by independently
regulating two Shh-Gli target genes, Nkx2.2 and Olig2, which are initially
induced in a common pool of progenitors that ultimately segregate into unique
territories giving rise to distinct progeny. Genetic and functional studies in
vivo show that Tcf transcriptional repressors selectively elevate the strength
and duration of Gli activity necessary to induce Nkx2.2, but have no effect on
Olig2, and thereby contribute to the establishment of their distinct expression
domains in cooperation with graded Shh signaling. Together, our data reveal a
Shh-Gli-independent transcriptional input that is required to shape the precise
spatial and temporal response to extracellular morphogen signaling information
during lineage segregation in the CNS.

PMCID: PMC3152926
PMID: 21775418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Development. 2011 Aug;138(15):3213-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.058693.

The L6 domain tetraspanin Tm4sf4 regulates endocrine pancreas differentiation and
directed cell migration.

Anderson KR(1), Singer RA, Balderes DA, Hernandez-Lagunas L, Johnson CW, Artinger
KB, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045,
USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor Nkx2.2 is essential for pancreatic
development and islet cell type differentiation. We have identified Tm4sf4, an L6
domain tetraspanin family member, as a transcriptional target of Nkx2.2 that is
greatly upregulated during pancreas development in Nkx2.2(-/-) mice. Tetraspanins
and L6 domain proteins recruit other membrane receptors to form active signaling 
centers that coordinate processes such as cell adhesion, migration and
differentiation. In this study, we determined that Tm4sf4 is localized to the
ductal epithelial compartment and is prominent in the Ngn3(+) islet progenitor
cells. We also established that pancreatic tm4sf4 expression and regulation by
Nkx2.2 is conserved during zebrafish development. Loss-of-function studies in
zebrafish revealed that tm4sf4 inhibits a and ß cell specification, but is
necessary for e cell fates. Thus, Tm4sf4 functional output opposes that of
Nkx2.2. Further investigation of how Tm4sf4 functions at the cellular level in
vitro showed that Tm4sf4 inhibits Rho-activated cell migration and actin
organization in a ROCK-independent fashion. We propose that the primary role of
Nkx2.2 is to inhibit Tm4sf4 in endocrine progenitor cells, allowing for
delamination, migration and/or appropriate cell fate decisions. Identification of
a role for Tm4sf4 during endocrine differentiation provides insight into islet
progenitor cell behaviors and potential targetable regenerative mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3133913
PMID: 21750032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Regen Med. 2011 Jul;6(4):449-60. doi: 10.2217/rme.11.36.

A xeno-free culturing protocol for pluripotent stem cell-derived oligodendrocyte 
precursor cell production.

Sundberg M(1), Hyysalo A, Skottman H, Shin S, Vemuri M, Suuronen R, Narkilahti S.

Author information: 
(1)Regea - Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Tampere & Tampere
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

AIM: To show that human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) can be efficiently
differentiated into oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) in a xeno-free medium 
with a specific medium supplement and specific human recombinant growth factors.
MATERIALS & METHODS: The xeno-free OPC-differentiation medium for pluripotent
stem cells was developed by using StemPro® neural stem cell xeno-free medium
supplement together with human recombinant growth factors SHH, PDGF-AA, IGF-1,
EGF, basic FGF and CNTF, in addition to RA, T3, human laminin and ascorbic acid. 
We analyzed the differentiated hESC-derived OPCs and oligodendrocytes with
quantitative real-time (RT)-PCR, RT-PCR, flow cytometry and immunocytochemistry, 
and we performed NG2-positive selection for OPC cultures with
fluorescence-activated cell sorting.
RESULTS: Based on quantitative RT-PCR analysis, OPCs after 9 weeks of
differentiation in xeno-free medium expressed OLIG2, SOX10 and NKX2.2 at elevated
levels compared with control conditions. According to the flow cytometric
analysis, the cells expressed A2B5 (>70%) and NG2 (40-60%) at 5 weeks time point 
whereas maturing oligodendrocytes expressed O4 (60-80%) at 11 weeks time point.
In addition, hESC-derived OPC populations were purified based on NG2-positive
selection using fluorescence-activated cell sorting. NG2-positive OPC populations
survived and differentiated further into O4 expressing oligodendrocytes in
xeno-free medium, and the sorted cell populations were free from pluripotent
Tra1-81 and Oct-4 -positive cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms that the xeno-free culturing method can support 
the differentiation and purification of hESC-derived OPC populations and provides
an initial step toward safe cell graft production for the future clinical
applications.

PMID: 21749203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Brain Tumor Pathol. 2011 Oct;28(4):311-6. doi: 10.1007/s10014-011-0047-z. Epub
2011 Jul 2.

Oligodendroglial ganglioglioma.

Yamashita S(1), Yokogami K, Niibo T, Takeishi G, Ikeda T, Miyata S, Uehara H,
Fukushima T, Nakazato Y, Takeshima H.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neurosurgery, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Miyazaki, 5200 Kihara Kiyotake, Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan.
shinjiy@fc.miyazaki-u.ac.jp

Gangliogliomas are rare tumors of the central nervous system, usually containing 
neoplastic ganglion cells and astrocytic components. Few cases of ganglioglioma
containing only oligodendrocytic tissue have been reported to date. We present a 
case of a 40-year-old woman with ganglioglioma consisting mostly of
oligodendroglial components. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a well-demarcated 
cystic lesion with slight perifocal edema in the right parietal lobe. The wall of
the cyst was not enhanced after administration of Gd-DTPA contrast media. The
mass was totally resected. Histological examination showed a mixture of two
distinct components: oligodendroglioma and dysplastic ganglions. The first
component was diffusely proliferated cells with round nuclei and perinuclear
halo; the second showed marked nucleoli and basophilic cytoplasm containing Nissl
bodies. Immunohistochemical study of the oligodendroglial component was positive 
for OLIG 2 and NKX2.2 but negative for synaptophysin. In addition, LOH of 1p/19q 
was detected by FISH. Although no adjuvant therapy was carried out, follow-up MRI
showed no recurrence of the tumor 41 months after the operation.

PMID: 21725645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Beijing Da Xue Xue Bao. 2011 Jun 18;43(3):421-6.

[Neurogenin 3 and Paired box gene 4 promote PDX1-induced differentiation of
mesenchymal stem cells into pancreatic secretory cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang XL(1), Xiao R, Wang YX, He M, Xie T, Zhang C, Liu SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory, Guangdong Provincid Hospital of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Guangzhou 510120, China. txl9121033@tom.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the role of neurogenin 3(NGN3) and paired box gene 4(PAX4) 
in the process of PDX1-driven mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to the pancreatic
ß-cell differentiation.
METHODS: PDX1 gene and NGN3 were constructed with PAX4 genes expression
adenovirus vectors, Adxsi-CMV-PDX1 adenovirus infection induced MSCs. One week
later, re-Adxsi-CMV-NGN3/CMV-PAX4 adenovirus infection induced MSCs; and detected
PDX1, PAX4, NGN3, NK transcription factor related, gene family 2, locus2(NKX2.2),
v-maf musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog B(MafB), insulin, glucagon
and other pancreatic secretory cell-associated molecule expression.
RESULTS: Adxsi-CMV-PDX1 and Adxsi-CMV-NGN3/CMV-PAX4 adenovirus vectors were
constructed successfully. Through immuocytochemistry and indirect fluorescence
detection, the expressions of PDX1 and NGN3 and PAX4 factors were detected stably
in MSCs cellular nuclei which were induced by Adxsi-CMV-PDX1 and
Adxsi-CMV-NGN3/CMV-PAX4. After transfection for 5 d, the cells formed round,
gathered into a mass and showed bright red with dithizone staining. RT-PCR
detection showed NruroD1 and NKX2.2 expression after being induced for 1 week and
insulin/proinsulin molecules after being induced for 2 week. The induced cells
could express some transcription factors such as NKX2.2 and MafB, and also
pancreatic-secreting related molecules such as insulin and glucagon, but not the 
expressions of MafA and C-peptide.
CONCLUSION: NGN3 and PAX4 have a favourable role in PDX1 inducing mesenchymal
stem cells into pancreatic secretory cells.

PMID: 21681275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Neurosci Res. 2011 Sep;89(9):1363-74. doi: 10.1002/jnr.22675. Epub 2011 Jun 14.

Pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide counteracts hedgehog-dependent
motor neuron production in mouse embryonic stem cell cultures.

Hirose M(1), Niewiadomski P, Tse G, Chi GC, Dong H, Lee A, Carpenter EM, Waschek 
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Semel Institute for Neuroscience and Human Behavior,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CA
90095-7332, USA.

Pituitary adenylyl cyclase-activating peptide (PACAP; ADCYAP1) is a neuropeptide 
that regulates a wide array of functions within the brain and periphery. We and
others have previously demonstrated that PACAP and its high-affinity receptor
PAC1 are expressed in the embryonic mouse neural tube, suggesting that PACAP
plays a role in early brain development. Moreover, we previously showed that
PACAP antagonizes the mitotic action of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in postnatal
cerebellar granule precursors. In the present study, we demonstrate that PACAP
completely blocked Shh-dependent motor neuron generation from embryonic stem cell
cultures and reduced mRNA levels of the Shh target gene Gli-1 and several ventral
spinal cord patterning genes. In vivo examination of motor neuron and other
patterning markers in embryonic day 12.5 spinal cords of wild-type and
PACAP-deficient mice by immunofluorescence, on the other hand, revealed no
obvious alterations in expressions of Islet1/2, MNR2, Lim1/2, Nkx2.2, or Shh,
although the Pax6-positive area was slightly expanded in PACAP-deficient spinal
cord. Caspase-3 staining revealed low, and similar, numbers of cells undergoing
apoptosis in embryonic wild-type vs. PACAP-deficient spinal cords, whereas a
slight but significant increase in number of mitotic cells was observed in
PACAP-deficient mice. Thus, although PACAP has a strong capacity to counteract
Shh signaling and motor neuron production in vitro, corresponding patterning
defects associated with PACAP loss may be obscured by compensatory mechanisms.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3131491
PMID: 21674568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Dec;3(6):351-9. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjr009. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Sirt2 is a novel in vivo downstream target of Nkx2.2 and enhances
oligodendroglial cell differentiation.

Ji S(1), Doucette JR, Nazarali AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, College of Pharmacy and Nutrition,
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK, S7N 5C9, Canada.

Although Sirt2 is primarily expressed in oligodendrocytes of the central nervous 
system, its role in oligodendroglial lineage differentiation is not fully
understood. Our findings demonstrate that the transcription factor Nkx2.2 binds
to the Sirt2 promoter via histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC-1), the binding site for
Nkx2.2 maps close to the start codon of the Sirt2 gene, and Nkx2.2 negatively
regulates Sirt2 expression in CG4 cells, an oligodendroglial precursor cell line.
HDAC-1 knock-down not only significantly attenuates the binding capacity of
Nkx2.2 to the Sirt2 promoter but also releases repression of Sirt2 expression by 
Nkx2.2. Nkx2.2 over-expression down-regulates Sirt2 expression and delays
differentiation of CG4 cells; in contrast, up-regulation of Sirt2 does not impact
Nkx2.2 expression level. Sirt2 knock-down via RNAi or inhibition of Sirt2 by
sirtinol, a Sirt2 activity inhibitor, blocks CG4 cell differentiation.
Over-expression of Sirt2 facilitates CG4 cell differentiation at both molecular
and cellular levels, enhancing expression of myelin basic protein and
facilitating the growth of cell processes. We have conclusively demonstrated that
Sirt2 enhances CG4 oligodendroglial differentiation and report a novel mechanism 
through which Nkx2.2 represses CG4 oligodendroglial differentiation via Sirt2.

PMID: 21669943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 15;71(14):4877-87. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0080. Epub 
2011 Jun 3.

Two novel determinants of etoposide resistance in small cell lung cancer.

Lawson MH(1), Cummings NM, Rassl DM, Russell R, Brenton JD, Rintoul RC, Murphy G.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Research Institute; Department of Oncology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, United Kingdom.

Patient survival in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is limited by acquired
chemoresistance. Here we report the use of a biologically relevant model to
identify novel candidate genes mediating in vivo acquired resistance to
etoposide. Candidate genes derived from a cDNA microarray analysis were cloned
and transiently overexpressed to evaluate their potential functional roles. We
identified two promising genes in the DNA repair enzyme DNA polymerase ß and in
the neuroendocrine transcription factor NKX2.2. Specific inhibition of DNA
polymerase ß reduced the numbers of cells surviving treatment with etoposide and 
increased the amount of DNA damage in cells. Conversely, stable overexpression of
NKX2.2 increased cell survival in response to etoposide in SCLC cell lines.
Consistent with these findings, we found that an absence of nuclear staining for 
NKX2.2 in SCLC primary tumors was an independent predictor of improved outcomes
in chemotherapy-treated patients. Taken together, our findings justify future
prospective studies to confirm the roles of these molecules in mediating
chemotherapy resistance in SCLC.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3145147
PMID: 21642373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Jun 3;8(6):663-75. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.04.001.

Transcription factor-induced lineage selection of stem-cell-derived neural
progenitor cells.

Panman L(1), Andersson E, Alekseenko Z, Hedlund E, Kee N, Mong J, Uhde CW, Deng
Q, Sandberg R, Stanton LW, Ericson J, Perlmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Box 240, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.

The generation of specific types of neurons from stem cells offers important
opportunities in regenerative medicine. However, future applications and proper
verification of cell identities will require stringent ways to generate
homogeneous neuronal cultures. Here we show that transcription factors like
Lmx1a, Phox2b, Nkx2.2, and Olig2 can induce desired neuronal lineages from most
expressing neural progenitor cells by a mechanism resembling developmental binary
cell-fate switching. Such efficient selection of cell fate resulted in remarkable
cellular enrichment that enabled global gene-expression validation of generated
neurons and identification of previously unrecognized features in the studied
cell lineages. Several sources of stem cells have a limited competence to
differentiate into specific neuronal cell types; e.g., dopamine neurons. However,
we show that the combination of factors that normally promote either regional or 
dedicated neuronal specification can overcome limitations in cellular competence 
and also promote efficient reprogramming in more remote neural contexts,
including human neural progenitor cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21624811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 May 1;21(7):1047-58. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0241. Epub 2011
Jul 6.

Glial commitment of mesencephalic neural precursor cells expanded as neurospheres
precludes their engagement in niche-dependent dopaminergic neurogenesis.

Baizabal JM(1), Cano-Martínez A, Valencia C, Santa-Olalla J, Young KM, Rietze RL,
Bartlett PF, Covarrubias L.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética del Desarrollo y Fisiología Molecular, Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, México.

Neural precursor cells (NPCs) with high proliferative potential are commonly
expanded in vitro as neurospheres. As a population, neurosphere cells show
long-term self-renewal capacity and multipotentiality in vitro. These features
have led to the assumption that neurosphere cells represent an expansion of the
endogenous NPCs residing within the embryonic and adult brain. If this is the
case, in principle, bona-fide expansion of endogenous NPCs should not
significantly affect their capacity to respond to their original niche of
differentiation. To address this issue, we generated primary neurospheres from
the dopaminergic niche of the ventral mesencephalon and then transplanted these
cells to their original niche within mesencephalic explant cultures. Primary
neurosphere cells showed poor capacity to generate dopaminergic neurons in the
mesencephalic niche of dopaminergic neurogenesis. Instead, most primary
neurosphere cells showed glial commitment as they differentiated into astrocytes 
in an exclusively neurogenic niche. Subculture of primary cells demonstrated that
the neurosphere assay does not amplify niche-responsive dopaminergic progenitors.
Further, neurospheres cells were largely unable to acquire the endogenous
positional identity within the Nkx6.1(+), Nkx2.2(+), and Pax7(+) domains of
mesencephalic explants. Finally, we demonstrate that our observations are not
specific for embryonic mesencephalic cells, as NPCs in the adult subventricular
zone also showed an intrinsic fate switch from neuronal to glial potential upon
neurosphere amplification. Our data suggest that neurosphere formation does not
expand the endogenous neurogenic NPCs but rather promotes amplification of
gliogenic precursors that do not respond to niche-derived signals of cellular
specification and differentiation.

PMID: 21615282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Neuroreport. 2011 Jun 11;22(8):370-3. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e3283469615.

Directed differentiation of motor neuron cell-like cells from human
adipose-derived stem cells in vitro.

Liqing Y(1), Jia G, Jiqing C, Ran G, Fei C, Jie K, Yanyun W, Cheng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, PR China.

The capacity of human adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs) to differentiate into
motor neurons and the identity of molecular factors that confer hADSCs with the
competence of motor neurons have yet to be elucidated. Here, retinoic acid and
sonic hedgehog were applied to examine whether hADSCs could be differentiated
into motor neurons. As early as 6 h after induction, hADSCs were changed toward
neuronal morphology. After induction, hADSCs showed positive immunocytochemical
staining for ß-III-tubulin, choline acetyltransferase, and neuron-specific
enolase. Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction characterization
indicated that cells differentiated from hADSCs were restricted to the ventral
spinal fate (Nkx2.2, Pax6, Hb9, and Olig2). Our results suggest that hADSCs may
be a potential candidate in cellular therapy for motor neuron disease.

PMID: 21532392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Development. 2011 May;138(10):1903-12. doi: 10.1242/dev.061481. Epub 2011 Apr 13.

The Cdk4-E2f1 pathway regulates early pancreas development by targeting Pdx1+
progenitors and Ngn3+ endocrine precursors.

Kim SY(1), Rane SG.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Biology Section, Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Obesity Branch,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Cell division and cell differentiation are intricately regulated processes vital 
to organ development. Cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks) are master regulators of
the cell cycle that orchestrate the cell division and differentiation programs.
Cdk1 is essential to drive cell division and is required for the first embryonic 
divisions, whereas Cdks 2, 4 and 6 are dispensable for organogenesis but vital
for tissue-specific cell development. Here, we illustrate an important role for
Cdk4 in regulating early pancreas development. Pancreatic development involves
extensive morphogenesis, proliferation and differentiation of the epithelium to
give rise to the distinct cell lineages of the adult pancreas. The cell cycle
molecules that specify lineage commitment within the early pancreas are unknown. 
We show that Cdk4 and its downstream transcription factor E2f1 regulate mouse
pancreas development prior to and during the secondary transition. Cdk4
deficiency reduces embryonic pancreas size owing to impaired mesenchyme
development and fewer Pdx1(+) pancreatic progenitor cells. Expression of
activated Cdk4(R24C) kinase leads to increased Nkx2.2(+) and Nkx6.1(+) cells and 
a rise in the number and proliferation of Ngn3(+) endocrine precursors, resulting
in expansion of the ß cell lineage. We show that E2f1 binds and activates the
Ngn3 promoter to modulate Ngn3 expression levels in the embryonic pancreas in a
Cdk4-dependent manner. These results suggest that Cdk4 promotes ß cell
development by directing E2f1-mediated activation of Ngn3 and increasing the pool
of endocrine precursors, and identify Cdk4 as an important regulator of early
pancreas development that modulates the proliferation potential of pancreatic
progenitors and endocrine precursors.

PMCID: PMC3082297
PMID: 21490060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cancer Cell. 2011 Apr 12;19(4):484-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.02.008.

Integrated transcript and genome analyses reveal NKX2-1 and MEF2C as potential
oncogenes in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Homminga I(1), Pieters R, Langerak AW, de Rooi JJ, Stubbs A, Verstegen M,
Vuerhard M, Buijs-Gladdines J, Kooi C, Klous P, van Vlierberghe P, Ferrando AA,
Cayuela JM, Verhaaf B, Beverloo HB, Horstmann M, de Haas V, Wiekmeijer AS,
Pike-Overzet K, Staal FJ, de Laat W, Soulier J, Sigaux F, Meijerink JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC/Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 Jun;11(6):390.

To identify oncogenic pathways in T cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), we
combined expression profiling of 117 pediatric patient samples and detailed
molecular-cytogenetic analyses including the Chromosome Conformation Capture on
Chip (4C) method. Two T-ALL subtypes were identified that lacked rearrangements
of known oncogenes. One subtype associated with cortical arrest, expression of
cell cycle genes, and ectopic NKX2-1 or NKX2-2 expression for which
rearrangements were identified. The second subtype associated with immature T
cell development and high expression of the MEF2C transcription factor as
consequence of rearrangements of MEF2C, transcription factors that target MEF2C, 
or MEF2C-associated cofactors. We propose NKX2-1, NKX2-2, and MEF2C as T-ALL
oncogenes that are activated by various rearrangements.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21481790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Med Rep. 2011 Mar-Apr;4(2):301-5. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.409. Epub 2011 Jan 3.

Differentially expressed genes in Men1 knockout and wild-type embryoid bodies for
pancreatic islet development.

Zhang HL(1), Li WY, Zhang CP, Zhu YX, Wu L, Long HM, Li G, Luo M.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Shanghai Clinical
Center for Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Department of Endocrinology, Ruijin 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 200025 Shanghai, P.R. 
China.

The Men1 gene has been identified as the gene responsible for MEN-1, a hereditary
syndrome transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. Disruption of the Men1 gene 
results in defects in the development of multiple organs, including pancreatic
islets. Homozygous disruption of Men1 in mice causes embryonic lethality, making 
it difficult to determine the genes involved in defects of pancreatic islets
during embryonic development. In this study, embryoid bodies formed from null
mutant (Men1-/-) and wild-type (Men1+/+) embryonic stem cells were used as a
model system to investigate the effects of the Men1 gene on pancreatic islet
development. Using RT-PCR, SOX17, FOXA2 and NKX2.2 were found to be
differentially expressed between the two embryoid bodies. Additionally, the gene 
expression profile of these Men1-/- embryoid bodies was characterized in detail
by DNA microarray techniques, and a series of putative menin-targeted genes was
identified. Our study suggests a critical role for Men1 in pancreatic islet
development, and indicates that genes such as SOX17, FOXA2, NKX2.2 and SOX4 are
potential targets of Men1.

PMID: 21468568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Glia. 2011 Jun;59(6):914-26. doi: 10.1002/glia.21163. Epub 2011 Mar 28.

Olig1 is expressed in human oligodendrocytes during maturation and regeneration.

Othman A(1), Frim DM, Polak P, Vujicic S, Arnason BG, Boullerne AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois, USA.

Myelin repair is inhibited in multiple sclerosis (MS), ultimately leading to
axonal damage and disability. We aimed to understand the transcriptional
mechanisms of regeneration in primary human oligodendrocyte cultures isolated
from white matter of medically intractable epilepsy patients. Cultures at
isolation contained 84% mature oligodendrocytes and 16% oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (OPC). The two populations showed a protracted regeneration of
membranes expressing myelin proteins after 2-3 weeks in culture, and were kept
long-term to study membranes maintenance. We profiled by quantitative PCR (qPCR) 
the sequential mRNA expression of transcription factors Olig1, Olig2, Nkx2.2,
Sox10, PPARd, PPAR<U+03B3>, cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase (CNP), myelin basic
protein (MBP), myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) and myelin oligodendrocyte
glycoprotein (MOG). In summary, Olig1 was not expressed in freshly isolated
oligodendrocytes, but was expressed from the beginning of process extension until
membranes maintenance. In contrast, Olig2 expression was restricted to isolation 
and during membranes production. We show for the first time PPARd expression and 
absence of PPAR<U+03B3> in human oligodendrocytes. Nkx2.2, Sox10, PPARd, CNP, MBP and
MOG messengers were expressed at any time, while MAG messenger was expressed at
mature stage only. Myelin proteins CNP, MBP, MAG, and MOG were confirmed by
immunocytochemistry. Our findings point to different roles of Olig1 and Olig2 in 
regeneration of cultured adult human oligodendrocytes. Noticeably, the
transcriptional profiles found in cultured neonatal rodent OPC are different.
More studies are necessary to elucidate myelin repair in the adult human brain.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21446039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Front Neuroanat. 2011 Mar 2;5:11. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2011.00011. eCollection
2011.

Ontogenetic distribution of the transcription factor nkx2.2 in the developing
forebrain of Xenopus laevis.

Domínguez L(1), González A, Moreno N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Biology, Department of Cell Biology, University Complutense of
Madrid Madrid, Spain.

The expression of the Nkx2.2 gene is involved in the organization of the
alar-basal boundary in the forebrain of vertebrates. Its expression in different 
diencephalic and telencephalic regions, helped to define distinct progenitor
domains in mouse and chick. Here we investigated the pattern of Nkx2.2 protein
distribution throughout the development of the forebrain of the anuran amphibian,
Xenopus laevis. We used immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization techniques 
for its detection in combination with other essential territorial markers in the 
forebrain. No expression was observed in the telencephalon. In the alar
hypothalamus, Nkx2.2 positive cells were scattered in the suprachiasmatic
territory, but also in the supraopto-paraventricular area, as defined by the
expression of the transcription factor Orthopedia (Otp) and the lack of xDll4. In
the basal hypothalamus Nkx2.2 expressing cells were localized in the tuberal
region, with the exception of the arcuate nucleus, rich in Otp expressing cells. 
In the diencephalon it was expressed in all three prosomeres (P1-P3) and not in
the zona limitans intrathalamica. The presence of Nkx2.2 expressing cells in P3
was restricted to the alar portion, as well as in prosomere P2, whereas in P1 the
Nkx2.2 expressing cells were located in the basal plate and identified the
alar/basal boundary. These results showed that Nkx2.2 and Sonic hedgehog are
expressed in parallel adjacent stripes along the anterior-posterior axis. The
results of this study showed a conserved distribution pattern of Nkx2.2 among
vertebrates, crucial to recognize subdivisions that are otherwise indistinct, and
supported the relevance of this transcription factor in the organization of the
forebrain, particularly in the delineation of the alar/basal boundary of the
forebrain.

PMCID: PMC3049246
PMID: 21415915  [PubMed]


131. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Feb 25;12:62. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-62.

Novel computational analysis of protein binding array data identifies direct
targets of Nkx2.2 in the pancreas.

Hill JT(1), Anderson KR, Mastracci TL, Kaestner KH, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: The creation of a complete genome-wide map of transcription factor
binding sites is essential for understanding gene regulatory networks in vivo.
However, current prediction methods generally rely on statistical models that
imperfectly model transcription factor binding. Generation of new prediction
methods that are based on protein binding data, but do not rely on these models
may improve prediction sensitivity and specificity.
RESULTS: We propose a method for predicting transcription factor binding sites in
the genome by directly mapping data generated from protein binding microarrays
(PBM) to the genome and calculating a moving average of several overlapping
octamers. Using this unique algorithm, we predicted binding sites for the
essential pancreatic islet transcription factor Nkx2.2 in the mouse genome and
confirmed >90% of the tested sites by EMSA and ChIP. Scores generated from this
method more accurately predicted relative binding affinity than PWM based
methods. We have also identified an alternative core sequence recognized by the
Nkx2.2 homeodomain. Furthermore, we have shown that this method correctly
identified binding sites in the promoters of two critical pancreatic islet ß-cell
genes, NeuroD1 and insulin2, that were not predicted by traditional methods.
Finally, we show evidence that the algorithm can also be applied to predict
binding sites for the nuclear receptor Hnf4a.
CONCLUSIONS: PBM-mapping is an accurate method for predicting Nkx2.2 binding
sites and may be widely applicable for the creation of genome-wide maps of
transcription factor binding sites.

PMCID: PMC3050729
PMID: 21352540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Diabetes. 2011 Feb;60(2):548-54. doi: 10.2337/db09-0035.

The expression and function of glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide in
the embryonic mouse pancreas.

Prasadan K(1), Koizumi M, Tulachan S, Shiota C, Lath N, Paredes J, Guo P,
El-Gohary Y, Malek M, Shah S, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric General and Thoracic Surgery, Children's Hospital,
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is a member of a
structurally related group of hormones that also includes glucagon, glucagon-like
peptides, and secretin. GIP is an incretin, known to modulate glucose-induced
insulin secretion. Recent studies have shown that glucagon is necessary for early
insulin-positive differentiation, and a similar role for incretins in regulating 
embryonic insulin-positive differentiation seems probable. Here we studied the
role of GIP signaling in insulin-positive differentiation in the embryonic mouse 
pancreas.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The ontogeny of the GIP ligand and GIP receptor in
the embryonic pancreas was investigated by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. GIP
signaling was inhibited in cultured embryonic pancreata using morpholine-ring
antisense against GIP ligand and receptor, or small interfering RNA (siRNA) for
GIP ligand and receptor. Markers of endocrine cells and their progenitors were
studied by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: GIP and GIP receptor mRNA were both detected in the embryonic pancreas
by embryonic day 9.5 and then persisted throughout gestation. GIP was generally
coexpressed with glucagon by immunostaining. The GIP receptor was typically
coexpressed with insulin. Morpholine-ring antisense or siRNA against either GIP
ligand or GIP receptor both inhibited the differentiation of insulin-positive
cells. Inhibition of GIP or its receptor also led to a decrease in the number of 
Pdx-1-positive and sox9-positive cells in the cultured embryonic pancreas. The
number of Pax6- and Nkx2.2-positive cells, representative of developing
pancreatic endocrine cells and ß-cells, respectively, was also decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: GIP signaling may play a role in early embryonic pancreas
differentiation to form insulin-positive cells or ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC3028354
PMID: 21270265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Apr;350(1-2):177-83. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0696-y. Epub 
2011 Jan 8.

Identification of Juxtanodin promoter and its transcriptional regulation during
the ATRA-induced differentiation of C6 cells.

Wang T(1), Jia L, Yang G, Ji S, Yao L, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Fourth Military Medical 
University, Xi'an, People's Republic of China.

Juxtanodin (JN) is a cytoskeleton-related oligodendrocyte-specific gene, and its 
underlying mechanism still needs detailed exploration. In this study, we tested
whether a 1.9 kb fragment from the 5'-flanking region of JN is sufficient to
specifically deliver the gene expression in oligodendrocytes. By reporter assay, 
we found that the 1.9 kb fragment specifically activated in C6 cells, which is
further upregulated by ATRA-induced oligodendrocyte lineage differentiation.
Bioinformatics study revealed that Nkx2.2 might be a transcription factor
involved in the process. qPCR results showed that ATRA upregulated endogenous
expression of Nkx2.2 in C6 cells. Further study revealed that Nkx2.2 could bind
JN promoter and its overexpression increase the promoter activity of JN. In
summary, our study here suggests that Nkx2.2 is one of the essential
transcription factors delivering the specificity of JN promoter in
oligodendrocytes.

PMID: 21221725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cancer Res. 2011 Feb 1;71(3):1135-45. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2304. Epub
2010 Dec 17.

NKX2.2 suppresses self-renewal of glioma-initiating cells.

Muraguchi T(1), Tanaka S, Yamada D, Tamase A, Nakada M, Nakamura H, Hoshii T,
Ooshio T, Tadokoro Y, Naka K, Ino Y, Todo T, Kuratsu J, Saya H, Hamada J, Hirao
A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Cancer and Stem Cell Research Program, Cancer 
Research Institute, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most aggressive and destructive form of brain cancer.
Animal models that can unravel the mechanisms underlying its progression are
needed to develop rational and effective molecular therapeutic approaches. In
this study, we report the development of mouse models for spontaneous gliomas
representing distinct progressive stages of disease that are governed by defined 
genetic alterations. Neural stem/progenitor cell (NPC)-specific constitutive Ras 
activation in vivo plus p53 deficiency led to development of primarily anaplastic
astrocytoma (grade III), whereas combined loss of p53 plus p16(Ink4a)/p19(Arf)
led to development of GBM (grade IV) at 100% penetrance within 6 weeks. These
glioma models showed enhanced stem cell properties (stemness) accompanied by
malignant progression. Notably, we determined that, in our models and in human
specimens, downregulation of the homeodomain transcription factor NKX2.2, which
is essential for oligodendroglial differentiation, was correlated with increased 
tumor malignancy. NKX2.2 overexpression by GBM-derived glioma-initiating cells
(GIC) induced oligodendroglial differentiation and suppressed self-renewal
capacity. By contrast, Nkx2.2 downregulation in mouse NPCs accelerated GBM
formation. Importantly, the inhibitory effects of NXK2.2 on GIC self-renewal were
conserved in human cells. Thus, our mouse models offer pathobiologically
significant advantages to investigate the nature of brain tumors, with improved
opportunities to develop novel mechanism-based therapeutic approaches.

PMID: 21169405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Oncol. 2011 Feb;5(1):77-92. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.002. Epub 2010 Dec 
2.

DNA methylation patterns in luminal breast cancers differ from non-luminal
subtypes and can identify relapse risk independent of other clinical variables.

Kamalakaran S(1), Varadan V, Giercksky Russnes HE, Levy D, Kendall J, Janevski A,
Riggs M, Banerjee N, Synnestvedt M, Schlichting E, Kåresen R, Shama Prasada K,
Rotti H, Rao R, Rao L, Eric Tang MH, Satyamoorthy K, Lucito R, Wigler M,
Dimitrova N, Naume B, Borresen-Dale AL, Hicks JB.

Author information: 
(1)Philips Research North America, Biomedical Informatics, Briarcliff Manor, NY
10510, United States. sitharthk@philips.com

The diversity of breast cancers reflects variations in underlying biology and
affects the clinical implications for patients. Gene expression studies have
identified five major subtypes- Luminal A, Luminal B, basal-like, ErbB2+ and
Normal-Like. We set out to determine the role of DNA methylation in subtypes by
performing genome-wide scans of CpG methylation in breast cancer samples with
known expression-based subtypes. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering using a set
of most varying loci clustered the tumors into a Luminal A majority (82%)
cluster, Basal-like/ErbB2+ majority (86%) cluster and a non-specific cluster with
samples that were also inconclusive in their expression-based subtype
correlations. Contributing methylation loci were both gene associated loci (30%) 
and non-gene associated (70%), suggesting subtype dependant genome-wide
alterations in the methylation landscape. The methylation patterns of significant
differentially methylated genes in luminal A tumors are similar to those
identified in CD24 + luminal epithelial cells and the patterns in basal-like
tumors similar to CD44 + breast progenitor cells. CpG islands in the HOXA cluster
and other homeobox (IRX2, DLX2, NKX2-2) genes were significantly more methylated 
in Luminal A tumors. A significant number of genes (2853, p < 0.05) exhibited
expression-methylation correlation, implying possible functional effects of
methylation on gene expression. Furthermore, analysis of these tumors by using
follow-up survival data identified differential methylation of islands proximal
to genes involved in Cell Cycle and Proliferation (Ki-67, UBE2C, KIF2C, HDAC4),
angiogenesis (VEGF, BTG1, KLF5), cell fate commitment (SPRY1, OLIG2, LHX2 and
LHX5) as having prognostic value independent of subtypes and other clinical
factors.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21169070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Islets. 2009 Nov-Dec;1(3):191-7. doi: 10.4161/isl.1.3.9557.

Acomys, the closest relatives to Gerbils, do express Pdx-1 protein and have
similar islet morphology to Gerbils.

Gustavsen CR(1), Kvicerova J, Dickinson H, Heller RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte,
Denmark.

Acomys, also called spiny mice, were once used as a diabetes model. We have
recently demonstrated that the closest relatives to the Acomys, members of the
family Gerbillinae, lack the transcription factor Pdx-1. Therefore, we sought to 
determine if members of this family also lack Pdx-1, and describe the pancreatic 
morphology in three different species of Acomys: Acomys cahirinus (Egyptian spiny
mouse), Acomys cilicicus (Asia Minor spiny mouse) and Acomys dimidiatus (eastern 
spiny mouse). We successfully cloned the Acomys Pdx-1 gene and we demonstrate by 
immunocytochemistry that the Pdx-1 protein is expressed in the pancreatic insulin
immunoreactive cells and in a subset of the somatostatin cells. The basic islet
structure is very similar to other rodents - with the insulin cells in the
center, and glucagon, somatostatin, PP and occasional PYY cells in the periphery.
No ghrelin or CART cells were identified. Nkx6.1 was localized specifically to
the insulin immunoreactive cells, while Nkx2.2 was found in all endocrine cells
except the somatostatin immunoreactive cells. Both MafA and MafB were expressed
in the islets; MafA being specific for the insulin cells, while MafB was
primarily in the glucagon cells but also found in some insulin cells. Isl-1 was
localized in all endocrine cell types. In conclusion, the closest relatives to
the Gerbils express a Pdx-1 protein that is 90% similar to other rodents but also
has a unique 3 amino acid insert compared to other species.  During the evolution
of the spiny mice and the gerbils, it appears that the Pdx-1 gene was lost.

PMID: 21099272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mech Dev. 2011 Jan-Feb;128(1-2):90-103. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.11.002. Epub 2010
Nov 17.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 positively and negatively regulate Shh signalling to specify
ventral midbrain progenitor identity.

Mavromatakis YE(1), Lin W, Metzakopian E, Ferri AL, Yan CH, Sasaki H, Whisett J, 
Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Foxa2, a member of the Foxa family of forkhead/winged helix family of
transcription factors, has previously been shown to be an upstream positive
regulator of Shh expression in many different tissues. Recent studies also
strongly suggest that Foxa2 specify cell fate by inhibiting the expression of
cell fate determinants such as Helt1 and Nkx2.2. In this paper, phenotypic
analyses of Wnt1cre; Foxa2flox/flox embryos in the midbrain have demonstrated a
novel role for Foxa2 and its related family member, Foxa1, to attenuate Shh
signalling by inhibiting the expression of its intracellular transducer, Gli2, at
the transcriptional level. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments indicate
that Foxa2 binds to genomic regions of Gli2 and likely regulates its expression
in a direct manner. Our studies, involving loss and gain of function studies in
mice, also provided further insights into the gene regulatory interactions among 
Foxa1, Foxa2 and Shh in ventral midbrain progenitors that contribute to midbrain 
patterning. Altogether, these data indicate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 contribute to
the specification of ventral midbrain progenitor identity by regulating Shh
signalling in a positive and negative manner.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21093585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2011 Jan;47(1):54-63. doi:
10.1007/s11626-010-9356-5. Epub 2010 Nov 17.

Differentiating of banked human umbilical cord blood-derived mesenchymal stem
cells into insulin-secreting cells.

Phuc PV(1), Nhung TH, Loan DT, Chung DC, Ngoc PK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Research and Application, University of Science,
Vietnam National University, Hanoi, Vietnam. pvphuc@hcmuns.edu.vn

Umbilical cord blood (UCB)-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent 
cells. They are able to differentiate into functional cells from not only
mesoderm but also endoderm. Many researches showed that cells derived from fresh 
human UCB could transdifferentiate into insulin-secreting cells. In this study,
transdifferentiating potential of cryopreserved human UCB-derived MSCs into
insulin-secreting cell was investigated. Fresh human UCB was enriched the
mononuclear cells by Ficoll-Paque centrifugation. The mononuclear cell population
was cryopreserved in cryo-medium containing Iscove's modified Dulbecco's media
(IMDM) with 10% DMSO at -196°C for 1 yr. After thawing, mononuclear cells were
cultured to isolate MSCs in medium IMDM with 20% FBS supplemented with growth
factors. At the fifth passages, MSCs were confirmed by flow cytometry about
expression of CD13, CD14, CD34, CD45, CD166, and HLA-DR markers; after that, they
were induced to differentiate into adipocytes and osteoblasts. After inducing
with specific medium for islet differentiation, there were many clusters of cell 
like islet at day 14-28. Using real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) to analyze the expression of functional genes, the result
showed that Nestin, Pdx-1, Ngn3, Ils-1, Pax6, Pax4, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Glut-2,
Insulin genes expressed. The results showed that MSCs derived from banked cord
blood can differentiate into functional pancreatic islet-like cells in vitro. If 
human MSCs, especially MSCs from banked cord blood of diabetes patients
themselves can be isolated, proliferated, differentiated into functional
pancreatic islet-like cells, and transplanted back into them (autologous
transplantation), their high-proliferation potency and rejection avoidance will
provide one promising therapy for diabetes.

PMID: 21082287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dev Biol. 2011 Jan 15;349(2):192-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.11.003. Epub 2010
Nov 9.

Telencephalic neural precursor cells show transient competence to interpret the
dopaminergic niche of the embryonic midbrain.

Baizabal JM(1), Valencia C, Guerrero-Flores G, Covarrubias L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics and Molecular Physiology, Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, AP 510-3, Cuernavaca,
Mor. 62250, Mexico.

Neural Precursor Cells (NPCs) generate complex stereotypic arrays of neuronal
subtypes in the brain. This process involves the integration of patterning cues
that progressively restrict the fate of specific NPCs. Yet the capacity of NPCs
to interpret foreign microenvironments during development remains poorly defined.
The aim of this work was to test the competence of mouse telencephalic NPCs to
respond to the dopaminergic niche of the mesencephalon. Telencephalic NPCs
isolated from midgestation mouse embryos (E10.5) and transplanted to age-matched 
mesencephalic explants efficiently differentiated into neurons but were largely
unable to produce midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons. Instead, E10.5
telencephalic NPCs behaved as restricted gabaergic progenitors that maintained
ectopic expression of Foxg1 and Pax6. In contrast, E8.5 telencephalic NPCs were
able to differentiate into Lmx1a(+)/Foxa2(+)/TH(+) neurons in the dopaminergic
niche of the mesencephalic explants. In addition, these early telencephalic NPCs 
showed region-dependent expression of Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2 and site-specific
differentiation into gabaergic neurons within the mesencephalic tissue.
Significant dopaminergic differentiation of E8.5 telencephalic NPCs was not
observed after transplantation to E12.5 mesencephalic explants, suggesting that
inductive signals in the dopaminergic niche rapidly decay after midgestation.
Moreover, we employed transplantation of embryonic stem cells-derived precursors 
to demonstrate that extinction of inductive signals within the telencephalon lags
behind the commitment of residing NPCs. Our data indicate that the plasticity to 
interpret multiple instructive niches is an early and ephemeral feature of the
telencephalic neural lineage.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21070763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Development. 2010 Dec;137(24):4249-60. doi: 10.1242/dev.053819. Epub 2010 Nov 10.

The transcription factors Nkx2.2 and Nkx2.9 play a novel role in floor plate
development and commissural axon guidance.

Holz A(1), Kollmus H, Ryge J, Niederkofler V, Dias J, Ericson J, Stoeckli ET,
Kiehn O, Arnold HH.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7,
38106 Braunschweig, Germany.

The transcription factors Nkx2.2 and Nkx2.9 have been proposed to execute
partially overlapping functions in neuronal patterning of the ventral spinal cord
in response to graded sonic hedgehog signaling. The present report shows that in 
mice lacking both Nkx2 proteins, the presumptive progenitor cells in the p3
domain of the neural tube convert to motor neurons (MN) and never acquire the
fate of V3 interneurons. This result supports the concept that Nkx2 transcription
factors are required to establish V3 progenitor cells by repressing the early MN 
lineage-specific program, including genes like Olig2. Nkx2.2 and Nkx2.9 proteins 
also perform an additional, hitherto unknown, function in the development of
non-neuronal floor plate cells. Here, we demonstrate that loss of both Nkx2 genes
results in an anatomically smaller and functionally impaired floor plate causing 
severe defects in axonal pathfinding of commissural neurons. Defective floor
plates were also seen in Nkx2.2(+/-);Nkx2.9(-/-) compound mutants and even in
single Nkx2.9(-/-) mutants, suggesting that floor plate development is sensitive 
to dose and/or timing of Nkx2 expression. Interestingly, adult
Nkx2.2(+/-);Nkx2.9(-/-) compound-mutant mice exhibit abnormal locomotion,
including a permanent or intermittent hopping gait. Drug-induced locomotor-like
activity in spinal cords of mutant neonates is also affected, demonstrating
increased variability of left-right and flexor-extensor coordination. Our data
argue that the Nkx2.2 and Nkx2.9 transcription factors contribute crucially to
the formation of neuronal networks that function as central pattern generators
for locomotor activity in the spinal cord. As both factors affect floor plate
development, control of commissural axon trajectories might be the underlying
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC2990212
PMID: 21068056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Rev Diabet Stud. 2010 Summer;7(2):158-67. doi: 10.1900/RDS.2010.7.158. Epub 2010 
Aug 10.

Turning human epidermis into pancreatic endoderm.

Santamaria P(1), Rodriguez-Piza I, Clemente-Casares X, Yamanouchi J, Mulero-Perez
L, Aasen T, Raya A, Izpisua Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003
Barcelona, Spain. psantama@ucalgary.ca

OBJECTIVE: Human embryonic stem (hES) cells can be differentiated into pancreatic
endoderm structures in vitro. The study was performed to determine whether
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells can be differentiated into similar
structures with comparable efficiency.
METHODS: We compared the ability of hES cells and iPS cells derived from human
epidermal keratinocytes to progressively differentiate into pancreatic endoderm. 
Human foreskin keratinocytes were reprogrammed to pluripotency by transduction
with retroviruses encoding Oct4, Sox2, and Klf4. The resulting
keratinocyte-derived iPS (KiPS) cell lines and a hES cell line were subjected to 
a modified pancreatic endoderm differentiation protocol. Cells and embryoid-body 
structures derived from both hES and KiPS cells were compared at different stages
of development for expression of stem cell and differentiation markers, including
Sox2, Oct4, Mixl1, Brachyury, Gsc, FoxA2, Sox17, Hnf4a, Hnf1ß, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1,
Hex, Isl1, Pdx1, and Slc2A, via Taqman real-time PCR, flow-cytometry, and/or
immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: hES cells and KiPS cells expressed similar levels of the stem cell
factors Sox2 and Oct4. Upon differentiation, both cell types underwent remarkably
similar changes in gene expression. They acquired the definitive endoderm markers
Sox17 and FoxA2. Most Sox17+ and FoxA2+ cells co-expressed Hnf4a and Hnf1ß, found
in the primitive gut tube, a pancreas precursor. Most FoxA2+ cells were also
Pdx1+, and many expressed Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, and Isl1.
CONCLUSIONS: Keratinocyte-derived iPS cells can be differentiated into pancreatic
endoderm, and the efficiency of this process is comparable to that seen for hES
cells. Thus keratinocytes have the potential to serve as a source of
patient-specific pancreatic endoderm for transplantation.

PMCID: PMC2989788
PMID: 21060974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. BMC Cancer. 2010 Nov 8;10:614. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-614.

Regulation of sonic hedgehog-GLI1 downstream target genes PTCH1, Cyclin D2,
Plakoglobin, PAX6 and NKX2.2 and their epigenetic status in medulloblastoma and
astrocytoma.

Shahi MH(1), Afzal M, Sinha S, Eberhart CG, Rey JA, Fan X, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Biology Unit-CIFA, University of Navarra School of Sciences,
Pamplona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is critical for cell
growth and differentiation. Impairment of this pathway can result in both birth
defects and cancer. Despite its importance in cancer development, the Shh pathway
has not been thoroughly investigated in tumorigenesis of brain tumors. In this
study, we sought to understand the regulatory roles of GLI1, the immediate
downstream activator of the Shh signaling pathway on its downstream target genes 
PTCH1, Cyclin D2, Plakoglobin, NKX2.2 and PAX6 in medulloblastoma and astrocytic 
tumors.
METHODS: We silenced GLI1 expression in medulloblastoma and astrocytic cell lines
by transfection of siRNA against GLI1. Subsequently, we performed RT-PCR and
quantitative real time RT-PCR (qRT-PCR) to assay the expression of downstream
target genes PTCH1, Cyclin D2, Plakoglobin, NKX2.2 and PAX6. We also attempted to
correlate the pattern of expression of GLI1 and its regulated genes in 14 cell
lines and 41 primary medulloblastoma and astrocytoma tumor samples. We also
assessed the methylation status of the Cyclin D2 and PTCH1 promoters in these 14 
cell lines and 58 primary tumor samples.
RESULTS: Silencing expression of GLI1 resulted up-regulation of all target genes 
in the medulloblastoma cell line, while only PTCH1 was up-regulated in
astrocytoma. We also observed methylation of the cyclin D2 promoter in a
significant number of astrocytoma cell lines (63%) and primary astrocytoma tumor 
samples (32%), but not at all in any medulloblastoma samples. PTCH1 promoter
methylation was less frequently observed than Cyclin D2 promoter methylation in
astrocytomas, and not at all in medulloblastomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate different regulatory mechanisms of Shh-GLI1 
signaling. These differences vary according to the downstream target gene
affected, the origin of the tissue, as well as epigenetic regulation of some of
these genes.

PMCID: PMC2989332
PMID: 21059263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Dev Biol. 2011 Jan 15;349(2):504-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.10.007. Epub 2010 
Oct 15.

Genetically-defined lineage tracing of Nkx2.2-expressing cells in chick spinal
cord.

Gotoh H(1), Ono K, Takebayashi H, Harada H, Nakamura H, Ikenaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics, National Institute for
Physiological Sciences, Okazaki, Aichi 444-8787, Japan.

In the spinal cord, generation of oligodendrocytes (OLs) is totally dependent on 
the presence of Olig2, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor. However, it
also requires Nkx2.2 for its generation, whose expression follows the expression 
of Olig2. Although it is believed that oligodendrocytes originate from the pMN
domain, Nkx2.2 is present in the p3 domain located ventral to the pMN domain.
According to recent reports, it is possible that oligodendrocytes are directly
derived from the p3 domain in addition to the pMN domain in the chick spinal
cord. We examined this hypothesis in this paper. To analyze OL development in the
spinal cord, chick embryos are widely used for genetic modification by
electroporation or for transplantation experiments, because it is relatively easy
to manipulate them compared with mouse embryos. However, genetic modification by 
electroporation is not appropriate for glial development analyses because glia
proliferate vigorously before maturation. In order to overcome these problems, we
established a novel method to permanently introduce exogenous gene into a
specific cell type. We introduced the CAT1 gene, a murine retroviral receptor, by
electroporation followed by injection of murine retrovirus. By using this method,
we successfully transduced murine retrovirus into the chick neural tube. We
analyzed cell lineage from the p3 domain by restricting CAT1 expression by
Nkx2.2-enhancer and found that most of the labeled cells became OLs when the
cells were labeled at cE4. Moreover, the labeled OLs were found throughout the
white matter in the spinal cord including the most dorsal spinal cord. Thus p3
domain directly generates spinal cord OLs in the chick spinal cord.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20951692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2010 Sep 27;5(9):e13023. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013023.

Epigenetic modifiers are necessary but not sufficient for reprogramming
non-myelinating cells into myelin gene-expressing cells.

Liu J(1), Sandoval J, Doh ST, Cai L, López-Rodas G, Casaccia P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New
York, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Modifications on specific histone residues and DNA methylation play
an essential role in lineage choice and cellular reprogramming. We have
previously shown that histone modifications or combinatorial codes of
transcription factors (TFs) are critical for the differentiation of
multipotential progenitors into myelinating oligodendrocytes. In this study we
asked whether combining global manipulation of DNA methylation and histone
acetylation together with the expression of oligodendrocyte-specific TFs, was
sufficient to switch the identity of fibroblasts into myelin gene-expressing
cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Transfection of six oligodendrocyte-specific TFs 
(Olig1, Olig2, Sox10, Mash1, E47 and Nkx2.2) into NIH3T3 fibroblasts was capable 
of inducing expression of myelin gene promoter-driven reporters, but did not
activate endogenous myelin gene expression. These results suggested the existence
of a transcriptionally incompetent chromatin conformation in NIH3T3 fibroblasts. 
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis, we compared the histone code
on the conserved regions of myelin genes (i.e. Mbp and Mag) in differentiating
oligodendrocyte progenitors and NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Chromatin at myelin gene loci
was characterized by the presence of repressive histone modifications (me3K9H3
and me3K27H3) in NIH3T3 fibroblasts and active histone marks (me3K4H3 and AcH3)
in oligodendrocyte lineage cells. To induce a transcriptionally competent
chromatin signature, NIH3T3 fibroblasts were treated with 5-azadeoxy-citidine
(5-AzaC) to decrease DNA methylation, and trichostatin A (TSA) or sirtinol, to
favor histone acetylation. Treatment with 5-AzaC/TSA but not sirtinol, resulted
in the detection of endogenous myelin gene transcripts in fibroblasts, although
not to the levels detected in myelinating cells. Transfection of
oligodendrocyte-specific TFs after 5-AzaC/TSA treatment did not further increase 
myelin gene expression, nor did it reprogram the transcriptional network of
NIH3T3 fibroblasts into that of oligodendrocytes.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results suggest that reprogramming of fibroblasts
into myelin gene-expressing cells not only requires transcriptional activation,
but also chromatin manipulations that go beyond histone acetylation and DNA
methylation.

PMCID: PMC2946387
PMID: 20885955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Blood. 2011 Jan 6;117(1):83-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-03-273128. Epub 2010 Sep
28.

Embryonic stem cell-derived hemangioblasts remain epigenetically plastic and
require PRC1 to prevent neural gene expression.

Mazzarella L(1), Jørgensen HF, Soza-Ried J, Terry AV, Pearson S, Lacaud G,
Kouskoff V, Merkenschlager M, Fisher AG.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Group, Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences
Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Many lineage-specific developmental regulator genes are transcriptionally primed 
in embryonic stem (ES) cells; RNA Pol(II) is bound at their promoters but is
prevented from productive elongation by the activity of polycomb repressive
complexes (PRC) 1 and 2. This epigenetically poised state is thought to enable ES
cells to rapidly execute multiple differentiation programs and is recognized by a
simultaneous enrichment for trimethylation of lysine 4 and trimethylation of
lysine 27 of histone H3 (bivalent chromatin) across promoter regions. Here we
show that the chromatin profile of this important cohort of genes is
progressively modified as ES cells differentiate toward blood-forming precursors.
Surprisingly however, neural specifying genes, such as Nkx2-2, Nkx2-9, and Sox1, 
remain bivalent and primed even in committed hemangioblasts, as conditional
deletion of PRC1 results in overt and inappropriate expression of neural genes in
hemangioblasts. These data reinforce the importance of PRC1 for normal
hematopoietic differentiation and reveal an unexpected epigenetic plasticity of
mesoderm-committed hemangioblasts.

PMID: 20876850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Dec;335(3):817-29. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.169284. Epub 
2010 Sep 20.

Induction of insulin-producing cells derived from endometrial mesenchymal
stem-like cells.

Li HY(1), Chen YJ, Chen SJ, Kao CL, Tseng LM, Lo WL, Chang CM, Yang DM, Ku HH,
Twu NF, Liao CY, Chiou SH, Chang YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Studies have demonstrated that mesenchymal stem-like cells can be isolated from
endometrium. However, the potential of endometrial-derived stem cells to
differentiate into insulin-positive cells and functionally secrete insulin
remains undetermined. We isolated endometrial mesenchymal stem-like cells (EMSCs)
from human endometrial tissue from six donors. The insulin-secreting function of 
EMSCs was further analyzed in vitro and in transplanted grafts in vivo. We
successfully isolated EMSCs from human endometrium, and our results showed that
EMSCs expressed high levels of stemness genes (Nanog, Oct-4, Nestin). Under
specific induction conditions for 2 weeks, EMSCs formed three-dimensional
spheroid bodies (SBs) and secreted C-peptide. The high insulin content of
SB-EMSCs was confirmed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, and glucose
responsiveness was demonstrated by measuring glucose-dependent insulin secretion.
Using cDNA microarrays, we found that the expression profiles of SB-EMSCs are
related to those of islet tissues. Insulin and C-peptide production in response
to glucose was significantly higher in SB-EMSCs than in undifferentiated EMSC
controls. Furthermore, upon differentiation, SB-EMSCs displayed increased mRNA
expression levels of NKx2.2, Glut2, insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin. Our
results also showed that SB-EMSCs were more resistant to oxidative damage and
oxidative damage-induced apoptosis than fibroblasts from the same patient. It is 
noteworthy that SB-EMSCs xenotransplanted into immunocompromised mice with
streptozotocin-induced diabetes restored blood insulin levels to control values
and greatly prolonged the survival of graft cells. These data suggest that EMSCs 
not only play a novel role in the differentiation of pancreatic progenitors, but 
also can functionally enhance insulin production to restore the regulation of
blood glucose levels in an in vivo transplantation model.

PMID: 20855446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Tumour Biol. 2011 Feb;32(1):113-27. doi: 10.1007/s13277-010-0105-x. Epub 2010 Sep
10.

Expression and epigenetic modulation of sonic hedgehog-GLI1 pathway genes in
neuroblastoma cell lines and tumors.

Shahi MH(1), Schiapparelli P, Afzal M, Sinha S, Rey JA, Castresana JS.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Tumor Biology Unit-CIFA, University of Navarra School of Sciences,
Pamplona, Spain.

It is well known that sonic hedgehog signaling pathway plays a vital role during 
early embryonic development. It is also responsible for stem cell renewal and
development of several cancers like colorectal and breast carcinoma and major
brain tumors as medulloblastoma and glioblastoma. The role of sonic hedgehog
signaling in the development of neuroblastoma has not been thoroughly
investigated. In this study, we attempted to determine the expression of Bmi-1
stem cell marker and of Shh pathway downstream target genes glioma-associated
oncogene homolog 1 (GLI1), protein patched homolog 1 (PTCH1), Cyclin D2,
plakoglobin (<U+03B3> catenin), NK2 homeobox 2 (NKX2.2), paired box gene 6 (PAX6),
secreted frizzled-related protein 1 (SFRP1), and hedgehog interacting protein
(HHIP) in 11 neuroblastoma cell lines and 41 neuroblastoma samples. Also,
inhibition of the pathway was performed genetically by GLI1 knockdown siRNA or
chemically by cyclopamine. After inhibition, low transcript expression was
detected in downstream target genes like PTCH1, in the cell lines. We further
preformed promoter methylation studies of Cyclin D2, PTCH1, HHIP, and SFRP1 genes
by melting curve analysis-based methylation assay (MCA-Meth) and
methylation-specific PCR (MSP). Results revealed no methylation in Cyclin D2 gene
promoter in neuroblastoma samples or in cell lines; one cell line (MHH-NB-11)
showed PTCH1 methylation; 3/11 (27%) cell lines and 9/41 (22%) neuroblastoma
samples showed HHIP methylation; and 3/11 (27%) cell lines and 11/41 (27%)
samples showed SFRP1 methylation. Taken together, our results suggest the
possibility of two levels of control of the sonic hedgehog signaling pathway:
transcriptional and epigenetic, which might offer new therapeutic possibilities
to modulate the pathway and try to suppress tumor growth.

PMID: 20830616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 2011 Apr;5(4):313-23. doi: 10.1002/term.317. Epub 2010
Aug 17.

Impact of co-culture on pancreatic differentiation of embryonic stem cells.

Banerjee I(1), Sharma N, Yarmush M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Engineering in Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. ipb1@pitt.edu

Promise of cellular therapy for type 1 diabetes has inspired the search for
transplantable cell sources, and embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have emerged as
strong candidates. We have developed a directed differentiation protocol to
obtain insulin-producing cells from ESCs. The ESCs are first induced towards a
homogeneous monolayer of definitive endoderm-like cells by co-culture with
primary hepatocytes. Pancreatic commitment is induced by plating the ESC-derived 
endoderms on Matrigel, along with Sonic hedgehog inhibition and retinoid
induction. More than 70% of differentiated cells positively upregulated Pdx-1,
along with pro-endocrine transcription factors Ngn3, ß2/neroD1, Nkx2.2 and
Nkx6.1. Final maturation to islet-specific cells is achieved by co-culturing the 
ESC-derived pancreatic endocrine cells with endothelial cells, which resulted in 
Insulin 1 upregulation in 60% of the cell population, along with high levels of
IAPP and Glut2. The differentiated cell population also secreted high levels of
insulin. Our findings illustrate the significant effect of co-culture in
different stages of differentiation and maturation of ESCs in vitro. Such a high 
yield of pancreatic islet cells has not yet been reported. Our findings establish
a robust protocol for islet differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 20717889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 11;5(8):e11996. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011996.

SUMOylation by Pias1 regulates the activity of the Hedgehog dependent Gli
transcription factors.

Cox B(1), Briscoe J, Ulloa F.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council-National Institute for
Medical Research, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, a vital signaling pathway for the
development and homeostasis of vertebrate tissues, is mediated by members of the 
Gli family of zinc finger transcription factors. Hh signaling increases the
transcriptional activity of Gli proteins, at least in part, by inhibiting their
proteolytic processing. Conversely, phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein
kinase (PKA) inhibits Gli transcriptional activity by promoting their
ubiquitination and proteolysis. Whether other post-translational modifications
contribute to the regulation of Gli protein activity has been unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we provide evidence that all three Gli
proteins are targets of small ubiquitin-related modifier (SUMO)-1 conjugation.
Expression of SUMO-1 or the SUMO E3 ligase, Pias1, increased Gli transcriptional 
activity in cultured cells. Moreover, PKA activity reduced Gli protein
SUMOylation. Strikingly, in the embryonic neural tube, the forced expression of
Pias1 increased Gli activity and induced the ectopic expression of the Gli
dependent gene Nkx2.2. Conversely, a point mutant of Pias1, that lacks ligase
activity, blocked the endogenous expression of Nkx2.2.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Together, these findings provide evidence that
Pias1-dependent SUMOylation influences Gli protein activity and thereby
identifies SUMOylation as a post-translational mechanism that regulates the
hedgehog signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2920307
PMID: 20711444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Front Neuroanat. 2010 Jul 21;4. pii: 28. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2010.00028.
eCollection 2010.

Ontogenetic expression of sonic hedgehog in the chicken subpallium.

Bardet SM(1), Ferran JL, Sanchez-Arrones L, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Animale-INRA UMR 1061, University of Limoges
Limoges, France.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is a secreted signaling factor that is implicated in the
molecular patterning of the central nervous system (CNS), somites, and limbs in
vertebrates. SHH has a crucial role in the generation of ventral cell types along
the entire rostrocaudal axis of the neural tube. It is secreted early in
development by the axial mesoderm (prechordal plate and notochord) and the
overlying ventral neural tube. Recent studies clarified the impact of SHH
signaling mechanisms on dorsoventral patterning of the spinal cord, but the
corresponding phenomena in the rostral forebrain are slightly different and more 
complex. This notably involves separate Shh expression in the preoptic part of
the forebrain alar plate, as well as in the hypothalamic floor and basal plates. 
The present work includes a detailed spatiotemporal description of the singular
alar Shh expression pattern in the rostral preoptic forebrain of chick embryos,
comparing it with FoxG1, Dlx5, Nkx2.1, and Nkx2.2 mRNA expression at diverse
stages of development. As a result of this mapping, we report a subdivision of
the preoptic region in dorsal and ventral zones; only the dorsal part shows Shh
expression. The positive area impinges as well upon a median septocommissural
preoptic domain. Our study strongly suggests tangential migration of Shh-positive
cells from the preoptic region into other subpallial domains, particularly into
the pallidal mantle and the intermediate septum.

PMCID: PMC2917215
PMID: 20700498  [PubMed]


151. Neuron. 2010 Jul 29;67(2):321-34. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.06.006.

Activity-dependent expression of Lmx1b regulates specification of serotonergic
neurons modulating swimming behavior.

Demarque M(1), Spitzer NC.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiology Section, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0357, USA. mdemarque@gmail.com

Genetic programs, environmental factors, and electrical activity interact to
drive the maturation of the brain. Although the cascade of transcription factors 
that leads to specification of the serotonergic phenotype has been well
characterized, its interactions with electrical activity are not known. Here we
show that spontaneous calcium spike activity in the hindbrain of developing
Xenopus laevis larvae modulates the specification of serotonergic neurons via
regulation of expression of the Lmx1b transcription factor. Activity acts
downstream of Nkx2.2 but upstream of Lmx1b, leading to regulation of the
serotonergic phenotype. Using global manipulation of activity and targeted
alteration of Lmx1b expression, we also demonstrate that changes in the number of
serotonergic neurons change larval swimming behavior. The results link
activity-dependent regulation of a transcription factor to transmitter
specification and altered behavior.

PMCID: PMC2913149
PMID: 20670838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Surg Res. 2010 Sep;163(1):47-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2010.04.018. Epub 2010 May 
6.

Lack of NKX2.2 expression in bronchopulmonary typical carcinoid tumors:
implications for patients with neuroendocrine tumor metastases and unknown
primary site.

Wang YC(1), Iezza G, Zuraek MB, Jablons DM, Theodore PR, Bergsland EK, Donner DB,
Warren RS, Nakakura EK.

Author information: 
(1)UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143-1932, USA.

BACKGROUND: Patients with neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) may have metastatic
disease and unknown primary site. NETs commonly arise from the bronchopulmonary
(BP) and gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The largest subgroups of
well-differentiated BP-NETs are typical carcinoids (TCs). The homeodomain
transcription factor NKX2.2 regulates development of gut serotonin cells and is a
marker of GI-NETs. Previous work on a limited number of samples suggested that
BP-TCs do not express NKX2.2. We hypothesized that lack of NKX2.2 expression in
BP-TCs might be useful to distinguish BP- from GI-NETs, and evaluated NKX2.2
expression in a larger number of BP-TCs.
METHODS: Archived formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissues were obtained from 13
previously undescribed patients with BP-TCs. Expression of NKX2.2, serotonin, and
the NE marker chromogranin A (CgA) were assessed by immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: CgA expression was robust in all 13 BP-TCs, confirming the NE phenotype.
Serotonin expression was less frequent (9/13; 69%). Two patients with BP-TCs in
which serotonin expression was absent exhibited Cushing's syndrome due to ectopic
ACTH production. NKX2.2 expression was not observed in any of the 13 tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Bronchopulmonary TCs uniformly express CgA but not NKX2.2. Because
most of these tumors express serotonin, our findings suggest that NKX2.2 may not 
be required for serotonin production by BP-TCs. We conclude that the presence or 
absence of NKX2.2 expression may assist in the determination of the primary tumor
site in patients with NET metastases of unknown origin. NET metastases that are
CgA-positive/NKX2.2-negative would suggest a BP primary, whereas those that are
CgA-positive/NKX2.2-positive would suggest a GI primary.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20599218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Jul 9;397(4):679-84. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.05.158. Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Generation of insulin-producing cells from gnotobiotic porcine skin-derived stem 
cells.

Yang JH(1), Lee SH, Heo YT, Uhm SJ, Lee HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Bio-Organ Research Center, Konkuk 
University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

A major problem in the treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus is the limited
availability of alternative sources of insulin-producing cells for islet
transplantation. In this study, we investigated the effect of bone morphogenetic 
protein 4 (BMP-4) treatments of gnotobiotic porcine skin-derived stem cells
(gSDSCs) on their reprogramming and subsequent differentiation into
insulin-producing cells (IPCs). We isolated SDSCs from the ear skin of a
gnotobiotic pig. During the proliferation period, the cells expressed stem-cell
markers Oct-4, Sox-2, and CD90; nestin expression also increased significantly.
The cells could differentiate into IPCs after treatments with activin-A,
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), and nicotinamide. After 15days in the
differentiation medium, controlled gSDSCs began expressing endocrine progenitor
genes and proteins (Ngn3, Neuro-D, PDX-1, NKX2.2, NKX6.1, and insulin). The IPCs 
showed increased insulin synthesis after glucose stimulation. The results
indicate that stem cells derived from the skin of gnotobiotic pigs can
differentiate into IPCs under the appropriate conditions in vitro. Our
three-stage induction protocol could be applied without genetic modification to
source IPCs from stem cells in the skin of patients with diabetes for autologous 
transplantation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20594970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 17;5(6):e10774. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010774.

Heterogeneity of glia in the retina and optic nerve of birds and mammals.

Fischer AJ(1), Zelinka C, Scott MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA. fischer.412@osu.edu

We have recently described a novel type of glial cell that is scattered across
the inner layers of the avian retina [1]. These cells are stimulated by
insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) to proliferate, migrate distally into the
retina, and up-regulate the nestin-related intermediate filament transition.
These changes in glial activity correspond with increased susceptibility of
neurons to excitotoxic damage. This novel cell-type has been termed the
Non-astrocytic Inner Retinal Glia-like (NIRG) cells. The purpose of the study was
to investigate whether the retinas of non-avian species contain cells that
resemble NIRG cells. We assayed for NIRG cells by probing for the expression of
Sox2, Sox9, Nkx2.2, vimentin and nestin. NIRG cells were distinguished from
astrocytes by a lack of expression for Glial Fibrilliary Acidic Protein (GFAP).
We examined the retinas of adult mice, guinea pigs, dogs and monkeys (Macaca
fasicularis). In the mouse retina and optic nerve head, we identified numerous
astrocytes that expressed GFAP, S100beta, Sox2 and Sox9; however, we found no
evidence for NIRG-like cells that were positive for Nkx2.2, nestin, and negative 
for GFAP. In the guinea pig retina, we did not find astrocytes or NIRG cells in
the retina, whereas we identified astrocytes in the optic nerve. In the eyes of
dogs and monkeys, we found astrocytes and NIRG-like cells scattered across inner 
layers of the retina and within the optic nerve. We conclude that NIRG-like cells
are present in the retinas of canines and non-human primates, whereas the retinas
of mice and guinea pigs do not contain NIRG cells.

PMCID: PMC2887354
PMID: 20567503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Brain Res. 2010 Aug 6;1347:19-32. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.06.007. Epub 2010 
Jun 9.

Sonic hedgehog expression during Xenopus laevis forebrain development.

Domínguez L(1), González A, Moreno N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Faculty of Biology, University Complutense of
Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

We have analyzed the developing expression pattern of x-Shh in the Xenopus
forebrain, interpreting the results within the framework of the neuromeric model 
to assess evolutionary trends and clues. To achieve this goal, we have
characterized phenotypically the developing x-Shh expressing forebrain
subdivisions and neurons by means of the combination of in situ hybridization for
x-Shh and immunohistochemistry for the detection of forebrain essential
regulators and markers, such as the homeodomain transcription factors Islet 1,
Orthopedia, NKX2.1 and NKX2.2 and tyrosine hydroxylase. Substantial evidence was 
found for x-Shh expression in the telencephalic commissural preoptic area and
this is strongly correlated with the presence of a pallidum and/or a basal
telencephalic cholinergic system. In the diencephalon, x-Shh was demonstrated in 
the zona limitans intrathalamica and the x-Shh expressing cells were extended
into the prethalamus. Throughout development and in the adult hypothalamic x-Shh 
expression was strong in basal regions but, in addition, in the alar
suprachiasmatic region. The findings obtained in the forebrain of Xenopus
revealed a largely conserved pattern of Shh expression among tetrapods. However, 
interesting differences were also noted that could be related to evolutive
changes in forebrain organization.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20540934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Stem Cell Res. 2010 Sep;5(2):91-103. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2010.04.005. Epub 2010
Jun 9.

Production and isolation of NG2+ oligodendrocyte precursors from human embryonic 
stem cells in defined serum-free medium.

Sundberg M(1), Skottman H, Suuronen R, Narkilahti S.

Author information: 
(1)Regea-Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of Tampere and Tampere
University Hospital, Tampere, Finland.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are a promising source of oligodendrocyte
precursor cells (OPCs) and oligodendrocytes. These cells can be used to repair
myelin in central nervous system deficits such as multiple sclerosis or traumas
such as spinal cord injury. Here, we introduce a novel differentiation method for
the production of OPCs from hESCs. OPCs were differentiated as spheres in defined
serum-free medium supplemented with recombinant human growth factors. A broad
gene expression analysis revealed that this OPC population expressed Olig1/2,
Sox10, PDGFR, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.2, oligodendrocyte-myelin glycoprotein, myelin basic
protein (MBP), and proteolipid protein (PLP). According to quantitative RT-PCR
analyses addition of ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) upregulated the Olig2
mRNA levels in the OPC population. According to the flow cytometry analyses the
OPC population was >90% NG2-positive, >80% PDGFR-positive, and >60%
CD44-positive, and further matured into O4- (45%) and GalC- (80%) positive
oligodendrocyte populations when cultured on top of human extracellular matrix
proteins, which were used instead of Matrigel. In addition, OPCs matured into
myelin-forming cells when cocultured with neuronal cells. The multilayered myelin
sheet formation around axons was detected with transmission electron microscopy
in cocultures. Further, the OPC populations could be purified with sorting of
NG2(+) cells. These NG2(+) cells reformed spheres that remained stable during
prolonged culturing (7weeks), and matured into GalC-positive oligodendrocytes.
Importantly, these NG2(+) spheres were free of pluripotent Tra1-81, Oct-4, and
CD326-positive hESCs. Thus, this method is suitable for the efficient production 
of OPCs and in the future for therapeutic graft production.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20538536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Differentiation. 2010 Sep-Oct;80(2-3):118-22. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2010.05.003.
Epub 2010 Jun 9.

Partial loss of pancreas endocrine and exocrine cells of human ARX-null mutation:
consideration of pancreas differentiation.

Itoh M(1), Takizawa Y, Hanai S, Okazaki S, Miyata R, Inoue T, Akashi T, Hayashi
M, Goto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National Institute
of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi,
Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan. itoh@ncnp.go.jp

Aristaless-related homeobox gene (ARX) mutation leads to several neurological
disorders including X-linked lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG), West
syndrome and Partington syndrome, with XLAG being the most severe form. Although 
some of the brain pathologies of XLAG have already been described, the crucial
extra-brain symptoms are severe growth retardation, transient hyperglycemia and
intractable diarrhea. Since ARX expresses in the islets of Langerhans during the 
embryonic stage, these visceral phenotypes may be related to a loss of ARX
function, which develops endocrine cells in the pancreas. We investigated the
abnormal pancreatic development of XLAG patients with ARX-null mutation. We
performed immunohistochemistry of XLAG pancreases, using the antibodies against
glucagon, insulin, somatostatin, pancreatic polypeptide, ghrelin, Brn4, Nkx2.2,
Mash1, amylase and pancreatic lipase. As the results, the glucagon- and
pancreatic polypeptide-producing cells were found to be completely deficient in
the islets of Langerhans. We also discovered marked interstitial fibrosis, small 
exocrine cells with loss of amylase-producing cells and an enlargement of the
central lumen of the glandular acini. These pathological findings indicate that
ARX contributes not only to endocrine development, but also to exocrine
development of the human pancreas, and its deficiency may lead to the severe
phenotypes of XLAG patients.

Copyright © 2010 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20538404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biol Chem. 2010 Sep;391(9):1019-29. doi: 10.1515/BC.2010.101.

Isolation of genes involved in pancreas regeneration by subtractive
hybridization.

Choi JH(1), Lee MY, Kim Y, Shim JY, Han SM, Lee KA, Choi YK, Jeon HM, Baek KH.

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, CHA University, CHA General Hospital, Seoul 135-081,
Korea.

The deterioration of ß cells in the pancreas is a crucial factor in the
progression of diabetes mellitus; therefore, the recovery of ß cells is of vital 
importance for effective diabetic therapeutic strategies. Partially
pancreatectomized rats have been used for the investigation of pancreatic
regeneration. Because it was determined that tissue extract from the
partially-dissected pancreas induces pancreatic differentiation in embryonic stem
cells, paracrine factors were thought to be involved in the regeneration. In this
study, we screened for genes that had higher mRNA levels 2 days after
60%-pancreatectomy. The genes were isolated using subtractive hybridization and
DNA sequencing. Twelve genes (adipsin, Aplp2, Clu, Col1a2, Glul, Krt8, Lgmn,
LOC299907, LOC502894, Pla2g1b, Reg3a and Xbp1) were identified, and RT-PCR and
real-time PCR analyses were performed to validate their expression levels. Among 
the genes identified, three genes (Glul, Lgmn and Reg3a) were selected for
further analyses. Assays revealed that Glul and Reg3a enhance cell growth. Glul, 
Lgmn and Reg3a change the expression level of islet marker genes, where NEUROD,
NKX2.2, PAX4 and PAX6 are up-regulated and somatostatin is down-regulated. Thus, 
we believe that Glul, Lgmn and Reg3a can serve as novel targets in diabetes
mellitus genetic therapy.

PMID: 20536387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Gene Ther. 2010 Nov;17(11):1411-20. doi: 10.1038/gt.2010.85. Epub 2010 May 27.

Regeneration of pancreatic islets in vivo by ultrasound-targeted gene therapy.

Chen S(1), Shimoda M, Wang MY, Ding J, Noguchi H, Matsumoto S, Grayburn PA.

Author information: 
(1)Baylor Research Institute, Baylor University Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75226,
USA.

This study uses a novel approach to gene therapy in which plasmid DNA is targeted
to the pancreas in vivo using ultrasound-targeted microbubble destruction (UTMD) 
to achieve islet regeneration. Intravenous microbubbles carrying plasmids are
destroyed within the pancreatic microcirculation by ultrasound, achieving local
gene expression that is further targeted to ß-cells by a modified rat insulin
promoter (RIP3.1). A series of genes implicated in endocrine development were
delivered to rats 2 days after streptozotocin-induced diabetes. The genes, PAX4, 
Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Ngn3 and Mafa, produced a-cell hyperplasia, but no significant
improvement in ß-cell mass or blood glucose level 30 days after UTMD. In
contrast, RIP3.1-NeuroD1 promoted islet regeneration from surviving ß-cells, with
normalization of glucose, insulin and C-peptide levels at 30 days. In a
longer-term experiment, four of six rats had a return of diabetes at 90 days,
accompanied by ß-cell apoptosis on Tunel staining. Pretreatment with the JNK
inhibitor SP600125 successfully blocked ß-cell apoptosis and resulted in
restoration of ß-cell mass and normalization of blood glucose level for up to 90 
days. This technique allows in vivo islet regeneration, restoration of ß-cell
mass and normalization of blood sugar, insulin and C-peptide in rats without
viruses.

PMCID: PMC2932866
PMID: 20508600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Jul 26;479(2):128-33. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.05.043. Epub
2010 May 21.

Electrical stimulation of the medullary pyramid promotes proliferation and
differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells in the corticospinal tract of
the adult rat.

Li Q(1), Brus-Ramer M, Martin JH, McDonald JW.

Author information: 
(1)International Center for Spinal Cord Injury, Hugo W. Moser Research Institute 
at Kennedy Krieger, Baltimore, MD 21205, United States.

Endogenous tri-potential neural stem cells (eNSCs) exist in the adult spinal cord
and differentiate primarily into oligodendrocytes (OLs) and astrocytes. Previous 
in vivo and in vitro studies have shown that during development proliferation and
differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) depend on activity in 
neighboring axons. However, this activity-dependent development of OPCs has not
been examined in the adult CNS. In the present study, we stimulated unilateral
corticospinal (CS) axons of the adult rat and investigated proliferation and
differentiation of OPCs in dorsal corticospinal tract (dCST). eNSCs were labeled 
with the mitotic indicator 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU). Phenotypes of
proliferating cells were identified by double-immunolabeling of BrdU with a panel
of antibodies to cell markers: NG2, Nkx2.2, APC, GFAP, and Glut-1. Electrical
stimulation of CS axons increased BrdU labeled eNSCs and promoted the
proliferation and differentiation of OPCs, but not astrocytes and endothelial
cells. Our findings demonstrate the importance of neural activity in regulating
OPC proliferation/differentiation in the mature CNS. Selective pathway electrical
stimulation could be used to promote remyelination and recovery of function in
CNS injury and disease.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2922017
PMID: 20493923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Jul;67(14):2439-49. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0347-1. Epub 
2010 Mar 30.

Transcription factor-based modulation of neural stem cell differentiation using
direct protein transduction.

Stock K(1), Nolden L, Edenhofer F, Quandel T, Brüstle O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reconstructive Neurobiology, LIFE and BRAIN Center, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

In contrast to conventional gene transfer strategies, the direct introduction of 
recombinant proteins into cells bypasses the risk of insertional mutagenesis and 
offers an alternative to genetic intervention. Here, we explore whether protein
transduction of the gliogenic transcription factor Nkx2.2 can be used to promote 
oligodendroglial differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC)-derived
neural stem cells (NSC). To that end, a recombinant cell-permeant form of Nkx2.2 
protein was generated. Exposure of ESC-derived NSC to the recombinant protein and
initiation of differentiation resulted in a two-fold increase in the number of
oligodendrocytes. Furthermore, Nkx2.2-transduced cells exhibited a more mature
oligodendroglial phenotype. Comparative viral gene transfer studies showed that
the biological effect of Nkx2.2 protein transduction is comparable to that
obtained by lentiviral transduction. The results of this proof-of-concept study
depict direct intracellular delivery of transcription factors as alternative
modality to control lineage differentiation in NSC cultures without genetic
modification.

PMCID: PMC2889284
PMID: 20352468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Transplant Proc. 2010 Mar;42(2):566-9. doi: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2010.01.031.

Expression of pancreatic endocrine markers by prolactin-treated rat bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells.

González P(1), Santos TM, Calil A, Corradi Perini C, Percegona LS, Silva IC,
Kuligovski C, Aguiar AM, Câmara NO, Aita CA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Ciências Biológicas e da Saúde, Pontifícia Universidade Católica do 
Paraná, Curitiba, Curitiba.

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are an attractive source for generation
of cells with beta-cell properties. Previous studies have demonstrated the
ability of prolactin to induce an increase in beta-cell mass and maturation,
which suggests beneficial effects of its use in MSC differentiation protocols.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the expression of endocrine differentiation markers in rat
MSCs treated in vitro with prolactin.
METHODS: Mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow of Wistar rats were isolated,
expanded, and characterized. Differentiation of MSCs was induced in medium
containing 23 mmol/L of glucose, and nicotinamide, 2-mercaptoethanol, and
exendin-4, in the presence or absence of 500 ng/mL of rat recombinant prolactin. 
Expression of endocrine markers and prolactin receptor genes was evaluated using 
real-time polymerase chain reaction, and compared between culture stages and
presence vs absence of prolactin in the culture medium. Expression of insulin,
somatostatin, glucagon, and pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 was also evaluated
at immunofluorescence microscopy.
RESULTS: Isolated cells were mostly MSCs, as confirmed at fluorescent-activated
cell sorting and cytochemistry. Pax6, Ngn-3, Isl1, NeuroD1, Nkx2.2, and Nkx6.1
exhibited varied expression during culture stages. The long form of the prolactin
receptor messenger RNA was induced in prolactin-treated cultures (P < .05). The
somatostatin gene was induced in early stages of differentiation (P < .05), and
its expression was induced by prolactin, as confirmed using immunofluorescence.
CONCLUSION: Culture of rat bone marrow MSCs in differentiation medium induces
expression of pancreatic endocrine-specific genes, and somatostatin and prolactin
receptor expression was also induced by prolactin.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20304194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Mar;15(3):612-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01034.x.

MafA promotes the reprogramming of placenta-derived multipotent stem cells into
pancreatic islets-like and insulin+ cells.

Chiou SH(1), Chen SJ, Chang YL, Chen YC, Li HY, Chen DT, Wang HH, Chang CM, Chen 
YJ, Ku HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department & Institute of Pharmacology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. shchiou@vghtpe.gov.tw

MafA is a pancreatic transcriptional factor that controls ß-cell-specific
transcription of the insulin gene. However, the role of MafA in the regulation of
pancreatic transdifferentiation and reprogramming in human stem cells is still
unclear. In this study, we investigate the role of MafA in placenta-derived
multipotent stem cells (PDMSCs) that constitutively expressed Oct-4 and Nanog.
PDMSCs were isolated and transfected with MafA using a lentivector. Our results
showed that overexpression of MafA in PDMSCs significantly up-regulated the
expression of pancreatic development-related genes (Sox17, Foxa2, Pdx1 and Ngn3).
Microarray analysis suggested that the gene expression profile of
MafA-overexpressing PDMSCs was similar to that of pancreas and islet tissues.
MafA increased the expression levels of the mRNAs of NKx2.2, Glut2, insulin,
glucagons and somatostatin, and further facilitated the differentiation of PDMSCs
into insulin(+) cells. The glucose-stimulated responses to insulin and c-peptide 
production in MafA-overexpressing PDMSCs were significantly higher than in PDMSCs
with vector control. Our results indicated that MafA-overexpressing PDMSCs were
more resistant to oxidative damage and oxidative damage-induced apoptosis than
PDMSCs carrying the vector control were. Importantly, the expression of MafA in
PDMSCs xenotransplanted into immunocompromised mice improved the restoration of
blood insulin levels to control values and greatly prolonged the survival of
graft cells in immunocompromised mice with STZ-induced diabetes. In summary,
these data suggest that MafA plays a novel role in the reprogramming of stem
cells into pancreatic ß-progenitors, promotes the islet-like characteristics of
PDMSCs, as well as functionally enhances insulin production to restore the
regulation of blood glucose levels in transplanted grafts.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3922383
PMID: 20158571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. JOP. 2010 Jan 8;11(1):14-7.

Sequencing of candidate genes selected by beta cell experts in monogenic diabetes
of unknown aetiology.

Edghill EL(1), Minton JA, Groves CJ, Flanagan SE, Patch AM, Rubio-Cabezas O,
Shepherd M, Lenzen S, McCarthy MI, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, United Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Approximately 39% of cases with permanent neonatal diabetes (PNDM) and
about 11% with maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) have an unknown
genetic aetiology. Many of the known genes causing MODY and PNDM were identified 
as being critical for beta cell function before their identification as a cause
of monogenic diabetes.
OBJECTIVE: We used nominations from the EU beta cell consortium EURODIA project
partners to guide gene candidacy.
SUBJECTS: Seventeen cases with permanent neonatal diabetes and 8 cases with
maturity onset diabetes of the young.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The beta cell experts within the EURODIA consortium were
asked to nominate 3 "gold", 3 "silver" and 4 "bronze" genes based on biological
or genetic grounds. We sequenced twelve candidate genes from the list based on
evidence for candidacy.
RESULTS: Sequencing ISL1, LMX1A, MAFA, NGN3, NKX2.2, NKX6.1, PAX4, PAX6, SOX2,
SREBF1, SYT9 and UCP2 did not identify any pathogenic mutations.
CONCLUSION: Further work is needed to identify novel causes of permanent neonatal
diabetes and maturity onset diabetes of the young utilising genetic approaches as
well as further candidate genes.

PMID: 20065546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2010 Feb 18;17(1):283-91. doi: 10.1677/ERC-09-0243. Print
2010 Mar.

The ETS oncogene family transcription factor FEV identifies serotonin-producing
cells in normal and neoplastic small intestine.

Wang YC(1), Zuraek MB, Kosaka Y, Ota Y, German MS, Deneris ES, Bergsland EK,
Donner DB, Warren RS, Nakakura EK.

Author information: 
(1)UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, 1600 Divisadero Street, A-724, San Francisco, California 94143-1932, 
USA.

Neuroendocrine (NE) or carcinoid tumors of the small intestine (SI) frequently
metastasize and produce the hormone serotonin, causing significant morbidity and 
mortality. A member of the ETS oncogene family of transcription factors, Fev,
acts with the homeodomain transcription factor Nkx2.2 in the development of
serotonin neurons in mice. In this study, we investigated the role of Fev in
normal and neoplastic SI. In NE tumors (NETs) of the SI, serotonin stimulates
tumor growth and causes debilitating symptoms, such as diarrhea, flushing,
wheezing, and right-sided valvular heart disease (i.e. carcinoid syndrome).
Compared with those in the matched normal human SI, FEV expression levels were
significantly elevated in primary NETs (20-fold, P<0.0001), lymph node metastases
(35-fold, P=0.004), and NET liver metastases (22-fold, P<0.0001) resected from
patients with serotonin excess. Fev is expressed in the wild type but not in
Nkx2.2 (-/-) mouse SI, in which cells producing serotonin are absent. Using
recombination-based cell lineage tracing, we found that FEV-positive cells give
rise to serotonin-producing cells in the SI. In Fev (-/-) mouse SI, we observed
no difference in the number of cells producing serotonin or other hormones. We
conclude that FEV expression identifies serotonin-producing cells in normal and
neoplastic SI and is a novel target for diagnosis of patients with NETs of the
SI.

PMID: 20048018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 17;4(12):e8344. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008344.

P21cip-overexpression in the mouse beta cells leads to the improved recovery from
streptozotocin-induced diabetes.

Yang J(1), Zhang W, Jiang W, Sun X, Han Y, Ding M, Shi Y, Deng H.

Author information: 
(1)The MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, College of
Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Under normal conditions, the regeneration of mouse beta cells is mainly dependent
on their own duplication. Although there is evidence that pancreatic progenitor
cells exist around duct, whether non-beta cells in the islet could also
potentially contribute to beta cell regeneration in vivo is still controversial. 
Here, we developed a novel transgenic mouse model to study the pancreatic beta
cell regeneration, which could specifically inhibit beta cell proliferation by
overexpressing p21(cip) in beta cells via regulation of the Tet-on system. We
discovered that p21 overexpression could inhibit beta-cell duplication in the
transgenic mice and these mice would gradually suffer from hyperglycemia.
Importantly, the recovery efficiency of the p21-overexpressing mice from
streptozotocin-induced diabetes was significantly higher than control mice, which
is embodied by better physiological quality and earlier emergence of insulin
expressing cells. Furthermore, in the islets of these streptozotocin-treated
transgenic mice, we found a large population of proliferating cells which
expressed pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1) but not markers of terminally
differentiated cells. Transcription factors characteristic of early pancreatic
development, such as Nkx2.2 and NeuroD1, and pancreatic progenitor markers, such 
as Ngn3 and c-Met, could also be detected in these islets. Thus, our work showed 
for the first time that when beta cell self-duplication is repressed by p21
overexpression, the markers for embryonic pancreatic progenitor cells could be
detected in islets, which might contribute to the recovery of these transgenic
mice from streptozotocin-induced diabetes. These discoveries could be important
for exploring new diabetes therapies that directly promote the regeneration of
pancreatic progenitors to differentiate into islet beta cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2792146
PMID: 20020058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. BMC Dev Biol. 2009 Dec 10;9:65. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-9-65.

Identification of known and novel pancreas genes expressed downstream of Nkx2.2
during development.

Anderson KR(1), White P, Kaestner KH, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Program in Molecular Biology, University of
Colorado Health Science Center, Denver, CO 80045, USA.

BACKGROUND: The homeodomain containing transcription factor Nkx2.2 is essential
for the differentiation of pancreatic endocrine cells. Deletion of Nkx2.2 in mice
leads to misspecification of islet cell types; insulin-expressing beta cells and 
glucagon-expressing alpha cells are replaced by ghrelin-expressing cells.
Additional studies have suggested that Nkx2.2 functions both as a transcriptional
repressor and activator to regulate islet cell formation and function. To
identify genes that are potentially regulated by Nkx2.2 during the major wave of 
endocrine and exocrine cell differentiation, we assessed gene expression changes 
that occur in the absence of Nkx2.2 at the onset of the secondary transition in
the developing pancreas.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis identified 80 genes that were differentially
expressed in e12.5 and/or e13.5 Nkx2.2-/- embryos. Some of these genes encode
transcription factors that have been previously identified in the pancreas,
clarifying the position of Nkx2.2 within the islet transcriptional regulatory
pathway. We also identified signaling factors and transmembrane proteins that
function downstream of Nkx2.2, including several that have not previously been
described in the pancreas. Interestingly, a number of known exocrine genes are
also misexpressed in the Nkx2.2-/- pancreas.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression profiling of Nkx2.2-/- mice during embryogenesis has
allowed us to identify known and novel pancreatic genes that function downstream 
of Nkx2.2 to regulate pancreas development. Several of the newly identified
signaling factors and transmembrane proteins may function to influence islet cell
fate decisions. These studies have also revealed a novel function for Nkx2.2 in
maintaining appropriate exocrine gene expression. Most importantly, Nkx2.2
appears to function within a complex regulatory loop with Ngn3 at a key endocrine
differentiation step.

PMCID: PMC2799404
PMID: 20003319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Feb;24(2):381-90. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0360. Epub 2009 Dec
4.

Nkx2.2 activates the ghrelin promoter in pancreatic islet cells.

Hill JT(1), Chao CS, Anderson KR, Kaufman F, Johnson CW, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

Nkx2.2 is an essential regulator of pancreatic endocrine differentiation.
Nkx2.2-null mice are completely devoid of beta-ells and have a large reduction of
alpha- and PP cells. In the place of these islet populations, there is a
corresponding increase in the ghrelin-positive epsilon-cells. Molecular studies
have indicated that Nkx2.2 functions as an activator and repressor to regulate
islet cell fate decisions. To determine whether Nkx2.2 is solely important for
islet cell fate decisions or also has the capability to control ghrelin at the
promoter level, we studied the transcriptional regulation of the ghrelin promoter
within the pancreas, in vitro and in vivo. These studies demonstrate that both of
the previously identified transcriptional start sites in the ghrelin promoter are
active within the embryonic pancreas; however, the long transcript is
preferentially up-regulated in the Nkx2.2-null pancreas. We also show that the
promoter region between -619 and -488 bp upstream of the translational start site
is necessary for repression of ghrelin in alphaTC1 and betaTC6 cells.
Surprisingly, we also show that Nkx2.2 is able to bind to and activate the
ghrelin promoter in several cell lines that do or do not express endogenous
ghrelin. Together, these results suggest that the up-regulation of ghrelin
expression in the Nkx2.2-null mice is not due to loss of repression of the
ghrelin promoter in the nonghrelin islet populations. Furthermore, Nkx2.2 may
contribute to the activation of ghrelin in mature islet epsilon-cells.

PMCID: PMC2817598
PMID: 19965928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Glia. 2010 Apr 15;58(6):633-49. doi: 10.1002/glia.20950.

A novel type of glial cell in the retina is stimulated by insulin-like growth
factor 1 and may exacerbate damage to neurons and Müller glia.

Fischer AJ(1), Scott MA, Zelinka C, Sherwood P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University, College of Medicine,
Columbus, OH 43210-1239, USA. fischer.412@osu.edu

Recent studies have demonstrated that insulin can have profound affects on the
survival of neurons within the retina. The purpose of this study was to determine
how insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) influences retinal cells; in particular, 
the glial cells. We identify a novel type of glial cell in the avian retina and
provide evidence that these cells can respond to acute damage and IGF1. In normal
retinas, we found a distinct cell-type, scattered across the ganglion cell and
inner plexiform layers that express Sox2, Sox9, Nkx2.2, vimentin, and transitin, 
the avian homologue of mammalian nestin. These glial cells have a unique
immunohistochemical profile, morphology, and distribution that are distinct among
other known types of retinal glia, including microglia, oligodendrocytes,
astrocytes, and Muller glia. We termed these cells nonastrocytic inner retinal
glia-like (NIRG) cells. We found that the NIRG cells may express the IGF1
receptor and respond to IGF1 by proliferating, migrating distally into the
retina, and upregulating transitin. In addition, IGF1 stimulated microglia to
become reactive and upregulate lysosomal membrane glycoprotein and CD45. With
microglia and NIRG cells stimulated by IGF1 there were elevated levels of cell
death and numerous focal detachments across the retina in response to excitotoxic
damage. Cell death was prominent within the areas of detachment coinciding with a
stark loss of Müller glia and accumulation of NIRG cells. We conclude that NIRG
cells are a novel type of retinal glia that is sensitive to IGF1 and whose
activity may impact the survival of neurons and Müller glia.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2830337
PMID: 19941335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Nat Protoc. 2009;4(11):1614-22. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2009.186. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

Differentiation of human oligodendrocytes from pluripotent stem cells.

Hu BY(1), Du ZW, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurology, School of Medicine and Public Health,
Waisman Center, WiCell Institute, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.

We have developed a four-part protocol to differentiate human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) to oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) according to
developmental principles. In the first 2 weeks, hESCs are induced to
differentiate into neuroepithelial cells, which form neural tube-like rosettes.
In the following 10 d, these neuroepithelial cells are specified to
OLIG2-expressing progenitors in the presence of retinoic acid (RA) and sonic
hedgehog (SHH). Upon treatment with fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) for another
10 d, these progenitors convert to OLIG2 and NKX2.2-expressing pre-OPCs. Finally,
the pre-OPCs take 8-9 weeks to differentiate into OPCs, which express additional 
markers of oligodendrocytes, such as SOX10, platelet-derived growth factor
receptor alpha (PDGFRalpha) and NG2. The unique aspects of the protocol are the
use of FGF2 to promote the differentiation of gliogenic pre-OPCs in the third
part and the removal of FGF2 during the transition of pre-OPCs to OPCs. This
3-month differentiation protocol consistently yields OPCs of high purity capable 
of producing myelin sheaths in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2789118
PMID: 19834476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Glia. 2010 Mar;58(4):458-68. doi: 10.1002/glia.20937.

Co-localization of Nkx6.2 and Nkx2.2 homeodomain proteins in differentiated
myelinating oligodendrocytes.

Cai J(1), Zhu Q, Zheng K, Li H, Qi Y, Cao Q, Qiu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville
School of Medicine, Kentucky, USA. j0cai002@louisville.edu

Recent studies have suggested that Nkx6.2/Gtx and Nkx2.2 homeodomain
transcription factors are involved in the regulation of oligodendrocyte
maturation and/or myelination which occur predominantly in postnatal stages.
However, their cellular specificity in postnatal central nervous system has not
been characterized and their dynamic expressional relationship during
oligodendrocyte lineage progression has not been determined. Here we report that 
both Nkx2.2 and Nkx6.2 are selectively expressed in Olig2+ cells of
oligodendrocyte lineage in postnatal spinal cords. Although Nkx6.2 is
specifically expressed in the APC+ mature oligodendrocytes, Nkx2.2 is initially
expressed in differentiating oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) but quickly
down-regulated as OPCs undergo terminal differentiation. Intriguingly, Nkx2.2
expression is up-regulated in mature myelinating oligodendrocytes at later
stages. The co-expression of Nkx2.2 and Nkx6.2 transcription factors in
myelinating oligodendrocytes suggests their functional interactions in the
regulation of myelin sheath formation and/or maintenance.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2807475
PMID: 19780200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. BMC Neurosci. 2009 Sep 22;10:117. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-10-117.

Transplantation of human neural stem cells transduced with Olig2 transcription
factor improves locomotor recovery and enhances myelination in the white matter
of rat spinal cord following contusive injury.

Hwang DH(1), Kim BG, Kim EJ, Lee SI, Joo IS, Suh-Kim H, Sohn S, Kim SU.

Author information: 
(1)Brain Disease Research Center, Institute for Medical Sciences, Ajou University
School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea. drhdh@ajou.ac.kr

BACKGROUND: Contusive spinal cord injury is complicated by a delayed loss of
oligodendrocytes, resulting in chronic progressive demyelination. Therefore,
transplantation strategies to provide oligodendrocyte lineage cells and to
enhance the extent of myelination appear to be justified for spinal cord repair. 
The present study investigated whether transplantation of human neural stem cells
(NSCs) genetically modified to express Olig2 transcription factor, an essential
regulator of oligodendrocyte development, can improve locomotor recovery and
enhance myelination in a rat contusive spinal cord injury model.
RESULTS: HB1.F3 (F3) immortalized human NSC line was transduced with a retroviral
vector encoding Olig2, an essential regulator of oligodendrocyte development.
Overexpression of Olig2 in human NSCs (F3.Olig2) induced activation of NKX2.2 and
directed differentiation of NSCs into oligodendrocyte lineage cells in vitro.
Introduction of Olig2 conferred higher proliferative activity, and a much larger 
number of F3.Olig2 NSCs were detected by 7 weeks after transplantation into
contused spinal cord than that of parental F3 NSCs. F3.Olig2 NSCs exhibited
frequent migration towards the white matter, whereas F3 NSCs were mostly confined
to the gray matter or around the lesion cavities. Most of F3.Olig2 NSCs occupying
the spared white matter differentiated into mature oligodendrocytes.
Transplantation of F3.Olig2 NSCs increased the volume of spared white matter and 
reduced the cavity volume. Moreover, F3.Olig2 grafts significantly increased the 
thickness of myelin sheath around the axons in the spared white matter. Finally, 
animals with F3.Olig2 grafts showed an improvement in the quality of hindlimbs
locomotion.
CONCLUSION: Transplantation of NSCs genetically modified to differentiate into an
oligodendrocytic lineage may be an effective strategy to improve functional
outcomes following spinal cord trauma. The present study suggests that molecular 
factors governing cell fate decisions can be manipulated to enhance reparative
potential of the cell-based therapy.

PMCID: PMC2758886
PMID: 19772605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Biol Chem. 2009 Nov 6;284(45):31236-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.048694. Epub 2009
Sep 15.

Cooperative transcriptional regulation of the essential pancreatic islet gene
NeuroD1 (beta2) by Nkx2.2 and neurogenin 3.

Anderson KR(1), Torres CA, Solomon K, Becker TC, Newgard CB, Wright CV, Hagman J,
Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Colorado Health Science Center,
Denver, Colorado 80045, USA.

Nkx2.2 and NeuroD1 are two critical regulators of pancreatic beta cell
development. Nkx2.2 is a homeodomain transcription factor that is essential for
islet cell type specification and mature beta cell function. NeuroD1 is a basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor that is critical for islet beta cell
maturation and maintenance. Although both proteins influence beta cell
development directly downstream of the endocrine progenitor factor, neurogenin3
(Ngn3), a connection between the two proteins in the regulation of beta cell fate
and function has yet to be established. In this study, we demonstrate that Nkx2.2
transcriptional activity is required to facilitate the activation of NeuroD1 by
Ngn3. Furthermore, Nkx2.2 is necessary to maintain high levels of NeuroD1
expression in developing mouse and zebrafish islets and in mature beta cells.
Interestingly, Nkx2.2 regulates NeuroD1 through two independent promoter
elements, one that is bound and activated directly by Nkx2.2 and one that appears
to be regulated by Nkx2.2 through an indirect mechanism. Together, these findings
suggest that Nkx2.2 coordinately activates NeuroD1 with Ngn3 within the endocrine
progenitor cell and also plays a role in the maintenance of NeuroD1 expression to
regulate beta cell function in the mature islet. Collectively, these findings
further define the conserved regulatory networks involved in islet beta cell
formation and function.

PMCID: PMC2781522
PMID: 19759004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Reprod Immunol. 2009 Oct;82(1):32-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2009.07.003. Epub 2009 
Sep 6.

CD52 expression is induced in the mouse uterus at the time of embryo
implantation.

Kumamoto K(1), Yang XZ, Hasegawa A, Komori S, Koyama K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Medical Sciences, Hyogo College of Medicine,
Nishinomiya, Japan. k_kumamoto1@yahoo.co.jp

CD52 is a GPI anchor protein present in lymphocytes, the epithelial cells of the 
epididymis and sperm. It has been reported that male reproductive tract CD52
induces antibodies interfering with sperm function and causes infertility. CD52
is also expressed in ovulated cumulus cells in female reproductive tissues. In
the present study, we examined the distribution and the mechanism of regulation
of CD52 in the uterus. CD52 expression was evaluated in uterine tissue recovered 
at 0.5, 4.5, 8.5 and 12.5dpc (days post-coitum). Immunohistochemistry, RT-PCR,
Western blotting and gel shift analysis were performed to determine localization 
and transcriptional regulation of CD52. Cd52 mRNA and CD52 protein were found to 
increase simultaneously from 0.5 to 4.5dpc. Gel shift analysis revealed that
NKX2.2, a transcriptional factor, binds to the promoter region of the Cd52 gene. 
CD52 and NKX2.2 were co-localized in the endometrium of the uterus. Pathway
analysis using Ingenuity pathway analysis predicted that Cd52 is associated with 
genes involved in the formation of uterosomes which are necessary for embryo
attachment. These findings suggest that CD52 synthesis is regulated by NKX2.2 at 
a transcriptional level, and that Cd52 may be a member of the network of genes
regulating uterine receptivity for embryo implantation.

PMID: 19735946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Dec 25;390(4):1114-20. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.08.154. Epub 2009 Aug 31.

SOX1 links the function of neural patterning and Notch signalling in the ventral 
spinal cord during the neuron-glial fate switch.

Genethliou N(1), Panayiotou E, Panayi H, Orford M, Mean R, Lapathitis G, Gill H, 
Raoof S, De Gasperi R, Elder G, Kessaris N, Richardson WD, Malas S.

Author information: 
(1)The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Airport Avenue, No. 6, Agios
Dometios, 2370 Nicosia, Cyprus.

During neural development the transition from neurogenesis to gliogenesis, known 
as the neuron-glial (Nu/G) fate switch, requires the coordinated function of
patterning factors, pro-glial factors and Notch signalling. How this process is
coordinated in the embryonic spinal cord is poorly understood. Here, we
demonstrate that during the N/G fate switch in the ventral spinal cord (vSC) SOX1
links the function of neural patterning and Notch signalling. We show that, SOX1 
expression in the vSC is regulated by PAX6, NKX2.2 and Notch signalling in a
domain-specific manner. We further show that SOX1 regulates the expression of
Hes1 and that loss of Sox1 leads to enhanced production of oligodendrocyte
precursors from the pMN. Finally, we show that Notch signalling functions
upstream of SOX1 during this fate switch and is independently required for the
acquisition of the glial fate perse by regulating Nuclear Factor I A expression
in a PAX6/SOX1/HES1/HES5-independent manner. These data integrate functional
roles of neural patterning factors, Notch signalling and SOX1 during gliogenesis.

PMID: 19723505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Brain Nerve. 2009 Jul;61(7):765-72.

[Analysis of S100beta-v-erbB transgenic rats prone to brain tumors].

[Article in Japanese]

Yokoo H(1), Tanaka Y, Nobusawa S, Nakazato Y, Ohgaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
3-39-22 Showa, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan.

We established a line of transgenic rats expressing v-erbB, the viral form of
EGFR, under the transcriptional regulation of the S100beta promoter. This is the 
first transgenic rat model that spontaneously develops brain tumors. The rats
maintained under conventional housing conditions until the occurrence of severe
neurological symptoms or death. Of the 54 rats analyzed, 52 (96%) developed brain
tumors. Histopathologically, they were classified into four subtypes:
glioblastoma-like malignant glioma, anaplastic oligodendroglioma, low-grade
oligodendroglioma, and low-grade astrocytoma. Eleven transgenic rats developed
two different histological types of brain tumor, which were considered to be of
multiclonal origin, because of the lack of mutual histological transitions.
Almost all brain tumors contained neoplastic cells immunoreactive for S100 and
GFAP. Diffuse immunoreactivity for Olig2 and Nkx2.2 was observed in neoplastic
cells in all oligodendroglial tumors, but not in the malignant gliomas. Electron 
microscopy revealed the presence of intermediate filament bundles devoid of side 
arms, indicating glial differentiation. There was no evidence of cilia,
microvilli, cell junction, neurosecretory granules, synaptic structures, or
neurofilaments, excluding the possibility of ependymal or neuronal tumors.
Reproducible development of particular histologic types of brain tumors in unique
localizations might be useful for further study on the histogenesis and molecular
mechanisms of development of glial tumors due to disruption of the EGFR pathway.

PMID: 19618853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Brain Nerve. 2009 Jul;61(7):741-51.

[Common mechanism underlying oligodendrocyte development and
oligodendrogliomagenesis].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)RIKKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Laboratory for Cell Lineage
Modulation, 2-2-3 Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

A number of extrinsic factors and intracellular mechanisms have been revealed to 
be involved in oligodendrocyte development. For instance, sonic hedgehog induces 
the expression of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors, Olig1 and 
Olig2, and a homeobox transcription factor Nkx2.2, both of which induce neural
stem cells (NSCs) to differentiate into oligodendrocyte precursor cells when the 
factors work together. In contrast, Notch and bone morphogenic proteins (BMP)
block oligodendrocyte differentiation by inducing the expression of the
transcription inhibitors Hes5 and Id4, respectively. Moreover, it was shown that 
other extrinsic and intrinsic factors, including platelet derived growth factor, 
thyroid hormone (TH), TH receptors, p53, and Wnt, are also involved in the
development, positively or negatively. It has been thought that
oligodendroglioma, one of brain tumors, is generated from oligodendrocyte lineage
cells as the tumor cells share characteristics of oligodendrocyte, such as the
honeycomb structure, and the expression of oligodendrocyte-related factors,
including Olig2 and NG2 proteoglycan. However, recent progress in the field
revealed that oligodendroglioma might be generated from NSCs and astrocytes as
well as oligodendrocyte lineage cells. Therefore, it is crucial to investigate
the cell-of-origin of oligodendroglioma and to identify target genes and markers 
for the therapy. In this review, I summarize the mechanism of oligodendrocyte
development and present how the oligodendrocyte research can help to understand
and to investigate the mechanism of oligodendroglioma development.

PMID: 19618851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;203(1):19-31. doi: 10.1677/JOE-09-0072. Epub 2009 Jul 16.

One process for pancreatic beta-cell coalescence into islets involves an
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Cole L(1), Anderson M, Antin PB, Limesand SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Agricultural Research Complex, University of
Arizona, 1650 East Limberlost Drive, Tucson, Arizona 85719, USA.

Islet replacement is a promising therapy for treating diabetes mellitus, but the 
supply of donor tissue for transplantation is limited. To overcome this
limitation, endocrine tissue can be expanded, but this requires an understanding 
of normal developmental processes that regulate islet formation. In this study,
we compare pancreas development in sheep and human, and provide evidence that an 
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is involved in beta-cell differentiation 
and islet formation. Transcription factors know to regulate pancreas formation,
pancreatic duodenal homeobox factor 1, neurogenin 3, NKX2-2, and NKX6-1, which
were expressed in the appropriate spatial and temporal pattern to coordinate
pancreatic bud outgrowth and direct endocrine cell specification in sheep.
Immunofluorescence staining of the developing pancreas was used to co-localize
insulin and epithelial proteins (cytokeratin, E-cadherin, and beta-catenin) or
insulin and a mesenchymal protein (vimentin). In sheep, individual beta-cells
become insulin-positive in the progenitor epithelium, then lose epithelial
characteristics, and migrate out of the epithelial layer to form islets. As
beta-cells exit the epithelial progenitor cell layer, they acquire mesenchymal
characteristics, shown by their acquisition of vimentin. In situ hybridization
expression analysis of the SNAIL family members of transcriptional repressors
(SNAIL1, -2, and -3; listed as SNAI1, -2, -3 in the HUGO Database) showed that
each of the SNAIL genes was expressed in the ductal epithelium during
development, and SNAIL-1 and -2 were co-expressed with insulin. Our findings
provide strong evidence that the movement of beta-cells from the pancreatic
ductal epithelium involves an EMT.

PMCID: PMC3071757
PMID: 19608613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 15;333(2):386-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.07.006. Epub 2009 
Jul 14.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 function both upstream of and cooperatively with Lmx1a and Lmx1b 
in a feedforward loop promoting mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neuron development.

Lin W(1), Metzakopian E, Mavromatakis YE, Gao N, Balaskas N, Sasaki H, Briscoe J,
Whitsett JA, Goulding M, Kaestner KH, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

Mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neurons control voluntary movement and reward based
behaviours. Their dysfunction can lead to neurological disorders, including
Parkinson's disease. These neurons are thought to arise from progenitors in the
floor plate of the caudal diencephalon and midbrain. Members of the Foxa family
of forkhead/winged helix transcription factor, Foxa1 and Foxa2, have previously
been shown to regulate neuronal specification and differentiation of
mesodiencephalic progenitors. However, Foxa1 and Foxa2 are also expressed earlier
during regional specification of the rostral brain. In this paper, we have
examined the early function of Foxa1 and Foxa2 using conditional mutant mice. Our
studies show that Foxa1 and Foxa2 positively regulate Lmx1a and Lmx1b expression 
and inhibit Nkx2.2 expression in mesodiencephalic dopaminergic progenitors.
Subsequently, Foxa1 and Foxa2 function cooperatively with Lmx1a and Lmx1b to
regulate differentiation of mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neurons. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments indicate that Nkx2.2 and TH genes are likely
direct targets of Foxa1 and Foxa2 in mesodiencephalic dopaminergic cells in vivo.
Foxa1 and Foxa2 also inhibit GABAergic neuron differentiation by repressing the
Helt gene in the ventral midbrain. Our data therefore provide new insights into
the specification and differentiation of mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neurons
and identifies Foxa1 and Foxa2 as essential regulators in these processes.

PMID: 19607821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(4):569-78. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.092856mm.

Mouse ES cells over-expressing the transcription factor NeuroD1 show increased
differentiation towards endocrine lineages and insulin-expressing cells.

Marchand M(1), Schroeder IS, Markossian S, Skoudy A, Nègre D, Cosset FL, Real P, 
Kaiser C, Wobus AM, Savatier P.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U846, 2Stem Cell and Brain Research Institute, Bron 69500, France.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells which constitutively express the Pdx-1, Ngn-3, NeuroD1,
Nkx2.2, and Nkx6.1 transcription factors were engineered by means of lentiviral
vectors, following a multi-step infection procedure to successively generate ES
cell lines expressing one, two, and three factors, respectively. Each ES cell
line was allowed to differentiate into nestin+/Isl-1+ endocrine precursors, then 
into more mature pancreatic cells, and subsequently analysed for expression of
Glc, Ins, and Sst, markers of alpha, beta and delta cells, respectively. Each ES 
cell line generated displayed a unique pattern of gene expression. The ES cell
line expressing NeuroD1 displayed vastly elevated levels of Glc, Ins-1, Ins-2 and
Sst, and showed an increase in Pdx-1, Pax-4, Nkx6.1, Isl-1, Glut-2 and GK
transcript levels. Furthermore, immunofluorescence analysis revealed that
differentiation of NeuroD1-expressing ES cells in nestin+/Isl-1+ multilineage
progenitors, followed by the formation of C-peptide+/insulin+ clusters, was
accelerated. Together, these results indicate that stable expression of NeuroD1
in ES cells facilitates differentiation into endocrine and insulin-producing
cells.

PMID: 19378248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Development. 2009 May;136(9):1443-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.029447.

Human oligodendrocytes from embryonic stem cells: conserved SHH signaling
networks and divergent FGF effects.

Hu BY(1), Du ZW, Li XJ, Ayala M, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison,
WI 53705, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) offer a platform to bridge what we have
learned from animal studies to human biology. Using oligodendrocyte
differentiation as a model system, we show that sonic hedgehog (SHH)-dependent
sequential activation of the transcription factors OLIG2, NKX2.2 and SOX10 is
required for sequential specification of ventral spinal OLIG2-expressing
progenitors, pre-oligodendrocyte precursor cells (pre-OPCs) and OPCs from
hESC-derived neuroepithelia, indicating that a conserved transcriptional network 
underlies OPC specification in human as in other vertebrates. However, the
transition from pre-OPCs to OPCs is protracted. FGF2, which promotes mouse OPC
generation, inhibits the transition of pre-OPCs to OPCs by repressing
SHH-dependent co-expression of OLIG2 and NKX2.2. Thus, despite the conservation
of a similar transcriptional network across vertebrates, human stem/progenitor
cells may respond differently to those of other vertebrates to certain extrinsic 
factors.

PMCID: PMC2674255
PMID: 19363151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Am J Pathol. 2009 May;174(5):1880-90. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080947. Epub 2009 
Apr 6.

Statin therapy inhibits remyelination in the central nervous system.

Miron VE(1), Zehntner SP, Kuhlmann T, Ludwin SK, Owens T, Kennedy TE, Bedell BJ, 
Antel JP.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroimmunology Unit, the Centre for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological 
Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Remyelination of lesions in the central nervous system contributes to neural
repair following clinical relapses in multiple sclerosis. Remyelination is
initiated by recruitment and differentiation of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells 
(OPCs) into myelinating oligodendrocytes. Simvastatin, a blood-brain
barrier-permeable statin in multiple sclerosis clinical trials, has been shown to
impact the in vitro processes that have been implicated in remyelination. Animals
were fed a cuprizone-supplemented diet for 6 weeks to induce localized
demyelination in the corpus callosum; subsequent return to normal diet for 3
weeks stimulated remyelination. Simvastatin was injected intraperitoneally during
the period of coincident demyelination and OPC maturation (weeks 4 to 6),
throughout the entire period of OPC responses (weeks 4 to 9), or during the
remyelination-only phase (weeks 7 to 9). Simvastatin treatment (weeks 4 to 6)
caused a decrease in myelin load and both Olig2(strong) and Nkx2.2(strong) OPC
numbers. Simvastatin treatment (weeks 4 to 9 and 7 to 9) caused a decrease in
myelin load, which was correlated with a reduction in Nkx2.2(strong) OPCs and an 
increase in Olig2(strong) cells, suggesting that OPCs were maintained in an
immature state (Olig2(strong)/Nkx2.2(weak)). NogoA+ oligodendrocyte numbers were 
decreased during all simvastatin treatment regimens. Our findings suggest that
simvastatin inhibits central nervous system remyelination by blocking progenitor 
differentiation, indicating the need to monitor effects of systemic
immunotherapies that can access the central nervous system on brain tissue-repair
processes.

PMCID: PMC2671276
PMID: 19349355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Regul Pept. 2009 Oct 9;157(1-3):51-6. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2009.02.013. Epub
2009 Mar 5.

Ghrelin is dispensable for embryonic pancreatic islet development and
differentiation.

Hill JT(1), Mastracci TL, Vinton C, Doyle ML, Anderson KR, Loomis ZL, Schrunk JM,
Minic AD, Prabakar KR, Pugliese A, Sun Y, Smith RG, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, United States.

Ghrelin is a peptide hormone that has been implicated in the regulation of food
intake and energy homeostasis. Ghrelin is predominantly produced in the stomach, 
but is also expressed in many other tissues where its functions are not well
characterized. In the rodent and human pancreas, ghrelin levels peak at late
gestation and gradually decline postnatally. Several studies have suggested that 
ghrelin regulates beta cell function during embryonic development and in the
adult. In addition, in a number of mouse models, ghrelin cells appear to replace 
insulin- and glucagon-producing cells in the islet. In this analysis, we
investigated whether the absence or overexpression of ghrelin influenced the
development and differentiation of the pancreatic islet during embryonic
development. These studies revealed that ghrelin is dispensable for normal
pancreas development during gestation. Conversely, we demonstrated that elevated 
ghrelin in the Nkx2.2 null islets is not responsible for the absence of insulin- 
and glucagon-producing cells. Finally, we have also determined that in the
absence of insulin, ghrelin cells form in their normal numbers and ghrelin is
expressed at wild type levels.

PMCID: PMC2828774
PMID: 19268691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Apr 24;382(1):69-73. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.134. Epub 2009 Mar 1.

Spatially distinct functions of PAX6 and NKX2.2 during gliogenesis in the ventral
spinal cord.

Genethliou N(1), Panayiotou E, Panayi H, Orford M, Mean R, Lapathitis G, Malas S.

Author information: 
(1)The Cyprus Institute of Neurology and Genetics, Airport Avenue, No. 6, Agios
Dometios 2370, Nicosia, Cyprus.

During ventral spinal cord (vSC) development, the p3 and pMN progenitor domain
boundary is thought to be maintained by cross-repressive interactions between
NKX2.2 and PAX6. Using loss-of-function analysis during the neuron-glial fate
switch we show that the identity of the p3 domain is not maintained by the
repressive function of NKX2.2 on Pax6 expression, even in the absence of NKX2.9. 
We further show that NKX2.2 is necessary to induce the expression of Slit1 and
Sulfatase 1 (Sulf1) in the vSC in a PAX6-independent manner. Conversely, we show 
that PAX6 regulates Sulf1/Slit1 expression in the vSC in an
NKX2.2/NKX6.1-independent manner. Consequently, deregulation of Sulf1 expression 
in Pax6-mutant embryos has stage-specific implications on neural patterning,
associated with enhancement of Sonic Hedgehog activity. On the other hand,
deregulation of Slit1 expression in gliogenic neural progenitors leads to changes
in Astrocyte subtype identity. These data provide important insights into
specific functions of PAX6 and NKX2.2 during glial cell specification that have
so far remained largely unexplored.

PMID: 19258013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Neurotrauma. 2009 Jul;26(7):979-93. doi: 10.1089/neu.2008-0762.

Rapid induction of genes associated with tissue protection and neural development
in contused adult spinal cord after radial glial cell transplantation.

Chang YW(1), Goff LA, Li H, Kane-Goldsmith N, Tzatzalos E, Hart RP, Young W,
Grumet M.

Author information: 
(1)W.M. Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience, Department of Cell Biology
and Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-8082, USA.

Cell-based therapy has been widely evaluated in spinal cord injury (SCI) animal
models and shown to improve functional recovery. However, host response to cell
transplants at gene expression level is rarely discussed. We reported previously 
that acute transplantation of radial glial cells RG3.6 following SCI promoted
early locomotion improvement within 1 week post-injury. To identify rapid
molecular changes induced by RG3.6 transplantation in the host tissue, distal
spinal cord segments were subjected to microarray analysis. Although RG3.6
transplantation, reduced activity of macrophages as early as 1-2 weeks
post-injury, the expression levels of inflammatory genes (e.g., IL-6, MIP-2,
MCP-1) were not decreased by RG3.6 treatment as compared to medium or other cell 
controls at 6-12 h post-injury. However, genes associated with tissue protection 
(Hsp70 and Hsp32) and neural cell development (Foxg1, Top2a, Sox11, Nkx2.2,
Vimentin) were found to be significantly up-regulated by RG3.6 transplants. Foxg1
was the most highly induced gene in the RG3.6-treated spinal cords, and its
expression by immunocytochemistry was confirmed in the host tissue. Moreover,
RG3.6 treatment boosted the number of Nkx2.2 cells in the spinal cord, and these 
cells frequently co-expressed NG2, which marks progenitor cells. Taken together, 
these results demonstrate that radial glial transplants induced rapid and
specific gene expression in the injured host tissue, and suggest that these early
responses are associated with mechanisms of tissue protection and activation of
endogenous neural progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2848950
PMID: 19257808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Neurosci Methods. 2009 Jan 30;176(2):192-9. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2008.07.022.

An efficient method for derivation and propagation of glioblastoma cell lines
that conserves the molecular profile of their original tumours.

Fael Al-Mayhani TM(1), Ball SL, Zhao JW, Fawcett J, Ichimura K, Collins PV, Watts
C.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0PY, United Kingdom. mtf31@cam.ac.uk

A growing body of evidence suggests that glioma stem-like cells are more
representative of their parent tumours when cultured under defined serum-free
conditions with the mitogens epidermal growth factor (EGF) and fibroblast growth 
factor (FGF). However, culturing these cells as free-floating spheroids can
result in difficulty in efficiently deriving and propagating cell lines. We have 
combined neurosphere and monolayer culture techniques to improve the efficiency
with which cells can be derived from clinical tumour samples under defined
serum-free conditions. We have applied our protocol to consecutive samples of
glioblastoma to show that they can form experimental tumours that recapitulate
many of the histological features of the parent tumour. We go on to show that the
tumour initiating cells also retain the cytogenetic abnormalities of the parent
tumour. Finally we examined the cell lines for expression of markers associated
with neural stem cells. Our results confirm the expression of transcription
factors associated with neural patterning and specification including Sox2,
Olig2, Pax6 and Nkx2.2. We went on to establish that these factors were also
expressed in the parent tumour indicating that their expression was not a
function of our culture conditions. The Cambridge Protocol is an efficient method
of deriving stem-like tumour initiating cells from glioblastoma. Improving the
efficiency of derivation will facilitate the improvement of in vitro and in vivo 
model systems to study disease mechanisms, screen drugs and develop novel
therapeutic approaches in the future.

PMID: 19215724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Dev Neurosci. 2009;31(3):169-80. doi: 10.1159/000193393. Epub 2009 Jan 15.

Partial inhibition of the proteasome enhances the activity of the myelin basic
protein promoter.

Calatayud CA(1), García CI, Paez PM, Pasquini JM, Soto EF, Pasquini LA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Química Biológica, Instituto de Química y Fisicoquímica
Biológica, Universidad de Buenos Aires-CONICET, Argentina.

We have previously shown that low concentrations of a specific proteasome
inhibitor accelerate exit from the cell cycle and enhance oligodendroglial cell
(OLGc) differentiation. To elucidate the mechanisms involved in this process,
OLGcs of the N20.1 cell line, transfected with a reporter gene driven by the MBP 
promoter, were treated with proteasome inhibitors and/or inhibitors of different 
signaling pathways. Partial proteasome inhibition resulted in enhanced activation
of the MBP promoter which involved the tyrosine kinase, PI3-Akt and PKC pathways,
accompanied by an increase in the levels of p21(Cip1), p27(Kip1) and Sp1 and by a
decrease in Nkx2.2. Binding of Sp1 to DNA was also increased. These results were 
not observed when the Sp1 binding site was mutated. We conclude that the enhanced
activation of the MBP promoter induced by partial inhibition of the proteasome
could be due, at least in part, to the stabilization of p27(Kip1) and Sp1.

2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19145069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. BMC Res Notes. 2009 Jan 9;2:3. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-2-3.

Pdx-1 or Pdx-1-VP16 protein transduction induces beta-cell gene expression in
liver-stem WB cells.

Delisle JC(1), Martignat L, Dubreil L, Saï P, Bach JM, Louzier V, Bösch S.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 707 IECM ENVN, F-44307 Nantes, France. cuvelier@vet-nantes.fr

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1 (Pdx-1) or Pdx-1-VP16 gene transfer
has been shown to induce in vitro rat liver-stem WB cell conversion into
pancreatic endocrine precursor cells. High glucose conditions were necessary for 
further differentiation into functional insulin-producing cells. Pdx-1 has the
ability to permeate different cell types due to an inherent protein transduction 
domain (PTD). In this study, we evaluated liver-to-pancreas conversion of WB
cells following Pdx-1 or Pdx-1-VP16 protein transduction.
FINDINGS: WB cells were grown in high glucose medium containing Pdx-1 or
Pdx-1-VP16 recombinant proteins for two weeks. beta-like cell commitment was
analysed by RT-PCR of pancreatic endocrine genes. We found that WB cells in high 
glucose culture spontaneously express pancreatic endocrine genes (Pdx-1, Ngn3,
Nkx2.2, Kir6.2). Their further differentiation into beta-like cells expressing
genes related to endocrine pancreas development (Ngn3, NeuroD, Pax4, Nkx2.2,
Nkx6.1, Pdx-1) and beta-cell function (Glut-2, Kir6.2, insulin) was achieved only
in the presence of Pdx-1(-VP16) protein.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrate that Pdx-1(-VP16) protein transduction is
instrumental for in vitro liver-to-pancreas conversion and is an alternative to
gene therapy for beta-cell engineering for diabetes cell therapy.

PMCID: PMC2637887
PMID: 19134185  [PubMed]


189. Endocrinology. 2009 Apr;150(4):1627-35. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1224. Epub 2008 Dec 
18.

Maturation of adult beta-cells revealed using a Pdx1/insulin dual-reporter
lentivirus.

Szabat M(1), Luciani DS, Piret JM, Johnson JD.

Author information: 
(1)Michael Smith Laboratories, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The enigmatic process of beta-cell maturation has significant implications for
diabetes pathogenesis, and potential diabetes therapies. This study examined the 
dynamics and heterogeneity of insulin and pancreatic duodenal homeobox (Pdx)-1
gene expression in adult beta-cells. Insulin and Pdx1 expression were monitored
in human and mouse islet cells and MIN6 cells using a Pdx1-monomeric red
fluorescent protein/insulin-enhanced green fluorescent protein dual-reporter
lentivirus. The majority of fluorescent cells were highly positive for both Pdx1 
and insulin. Cells expressing Pdx1 but little or no insulin (Pdx1(+)/Ins(low))
comprised 15-25% of the total population. Time-lapse imaging demonstrated that
Pdx1(+)/Ins(low) primary beta-cells and MIN6 cells could convert to
Pdx1(+)/Ins(+) cells without cell division. Genes involved in the mature
beta-cell phenotype (Glut2, MafA) were expressed at higher levels in
Pdx1(+)/Ins(+) cells relative to Pdx1(+)/Ins(low) cells. Conversely, genes
implicated in early beta-cell development (MafB, Nkx2.2) were enriched in
Pdx1(+)/Ins(low) cells. Sorted Pdx1(+)/Ins(low) MIN6 cells had a higher
replication rate and secreted less insulin relative to double-positive cells.
Long-term phenotype tracking of Pdx1(+)/Ins(low) cells showed two groups, one
that matured into Pdx1(+)/Ins(+) cells and one that remained immature. These
results demonstrate that adult beta-cells pass through distinct maturation
states, which is consistent with previously observed heterogeneity in insulin and
Pdx1 expression in adult beta-cells. At a given time, a proportion of adult
beta-cells share similar characteristics to functionally immature embryonic
beta-cell progenitors. The maturation of adult beta-cells recapitulates
development in that Pdx1 expression precedes the robust expression of insulin and
other mature beta-cell genes. These results have implications for harnessing the 
maturation process for therapeutic purposes.

PMID: 19095744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Glia. 2009 Jun;57(8):884-97. doi: 10.1002/glia.20814.

Effects of progesterone on oligodendrocyte progenitors, oligodendrocyte
transcription factors, and myelin proteins following spinal cord injury.

Labombarda F(1), González SL, Lima A, Roig P, Guennoun R, Schumacher M, de Nicola
AF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuroendocrine Biochemistry, Instituto de Biologia y Medicina
Experimental, CONICET, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Progesterone is emerging as a myelinizing factor for central nervous system
injury. Successful remyelination requires proliferation and differentiation of
oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC) into myelinating oligodendrocytes, but this
process is incomplete following injury. To study progesterone actions on
remyelination, we administered progesterone (16 mg/kg/day) to rats with complete 
spinal cord injury. Rats were euthanized 3 or 21 days after steroid treatment.
Short progesterone treatment (a) increased the number of OPC without effect on
the injury-induced reduction of mature oligodendrocytes, (b) increased mRNA and
protein expression for the myelin basic protein (MBP) without effects on
proteolipid protein (PLP) or myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG), and (c)
increased the mRNA for Olig2 and Nkx2.2 transcription factors involved in
specification and differentiation of the oligodendrocyte lineage. Furthermore,
long progesterone treatment (a) reduced OPC with a concomitant increase of
oligodendrocytes; (b) promoted differentiation of cells that incorporated
bromodeoxyuridine, early after injury, into mature oligodendrocytes; (c)
increased mRNA and protein expression of PLP without effects on MBP or MOG; and
(d) increased mRNA for the Olig1 transcription factor involved in myelin repair. 
These results suggest that early progesterone treatment enhanced the density of
OPC and induced their differentiation into mature oligodendrocytes by increasing 
the expression of Olig2 and Nkx2.2. Twenty-one days after injury, progesterone
favors remyelination by increasing Olig1 (involved in repair of demyelinated
lesions), PLP expression, and enhancing oligodendrocytes maturation. Thus,
progesterone effects on oligodendrogenesis and myelin proteins may constitute
fundamental steps for repairing traumatic injury inflicted to the spinal cord.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19053058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 16;284(3):1484-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803997200. Epub 2008
Nov 14.

Integrin alpha6beta4 controls the expression of genes associated with cell
motility, invasion, and metastasis, including S100A4/metastasin.

Chen M(1), Sinha M, Luxon BA, Bresnick AR, O'Connor KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston, Texas
77555, USA.

The integrin alpha6beta4 is associated with carcinoma progression by contributing
to apoptosis resistance, invasion, and metastasis, due in part to the activation 
of select transcription factors. To identify genes regulated by the alpha6beta4
integrin, we compared gene expression profiles of MDA-MB-435 cells that stably
express integrin alpha6beta4 (MDA/beta4) and vector-only-transfected cells
(MDA/mock) using Affymetrix GeneChip analysis. Our results show that integrin
alpha6beta4 altered the expression of 538 genes (p < 0.01). Of these genes, 36
are associated with pathways implicated in cell motility and metastasis,
including S100A4/metastasin. S100A4 expression correlated well with integrin
alpha6beta4 expression in established cell lines. Suppression of S100A4 by small 
interference RNA resulted in a reduced capacity of alpha6beta4-expressing cells
to invade a reconstituted basement membrane in response to lysophosphatidic acid.
Using small interference RNA, promoter analysis, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we demonstrate that S100A4 is regulated by NFAT5, thus
identifying the first target of NFAT5 in cancer. In addition, several genes that 
are known to be regulated by DNA methylation were up-regulated dramatically by
integrin alpha6beta4 expression, including S100A4, FST, PDLIM4, CAPG, and Nkx2.2.
Notably, inhibition of DNA methyltransferases stimulated expression of these
genes in cells lacking the alpha6beta4 integrin, whereas demethylase inhibitors
suppressed expression in alpha6beta4 integrin-expressing cells. Alterations in
DNA methylation were confirmed by bisulfate sequencing, thus suggesting that
integrin alpha6beta4 signaling can lead to the demethylation of select promoters.
In summary, our data suggest that integrin alpha6beta4 confers a motile and
invasive phenotype to breast carcinoma cells by regulating proinvasive and
prometastatic gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2615501
PMID: 19011242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2009 Mar;16(1):267-79. doi: 10.1677/ERC-08-0127. Epub 2008
Nov 5.

Homeodomain transcription factor NKX2.2 functions in immature cells to control
enteroendocrine differentiation and is expressed in gastrointestinal
neuroendocrine tumors.

Wang YC(1), Gallego-Arteche E, Iezza G, Yuan X, Matli MR, Choo SP, Zuraek MB,
Gogia R, Lynn FC, German MS, Bergsland EK, Donner DB, Warren RS, Nakakura EK.

Author information: 
(1)UCSF Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor NKX2.2 is necessary for neuroendocrine (NE) 
differentiation in the central nervous system and pancreas. NE tumors derived
from the gut are defined by their NE phenotype, which is used for diagnosis and
contributes to tumorigenicity. We hypothesized that NKX2.2 is important for NE
differentiation in normal and neoplastic gut. NKX2.2 and NE marker expression was
investigated in the small intestine of embryonic and adult mice using
immunofluorescence (IF). To determine the role of NKX2.2 in NE differentiation of
the intestine, the phenotype of Nkx2.2 (-/-) mice was examined by IF and
real-time (RT)-PCR. NKX2.2 and NE marker expression in human NE tumors of the gut
and normal tissues were evaluated by immunohistochemistry and qRT-PCR. NKX2.2
expression was detected in the intervillus/crypt regions of embryonic and adult
mouse intestine. Co-expression of Nkx2.2 with neurogenin3 (NEUROG3) and hormones 
was observed in the adult intestinal crypt compartment, suggesting NKX2.2
functions in NEUROG3-positive endocrine progenitors and newly differentiated
endocrine cells. In the intestine of Nkx2.2 (-/-) mice, we found a dramatic
reduction in the number of cells producing numerous hormones, such as serotonin, 
gastrin, cholecystokinin, somatostatin, glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), and
secretin, but an increase in cells producing ghrelin. NKX2.2 was expressed in
most (24 of 29) human NE tumors derived from diverse primary sites. We conclude
NKX2.2 functions in immature endocrine cells to control NE differentiation in
normal intestine and is expressed in most NE tumors of the gut, and is therefore 
a novel target of diagnosis for patients with gastrointestinal NE tumors.

PMID: 18987169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 1;325(1):49-59. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.09.024. Epub 2008
Oct 2.

The embryonic midbrain directs neuronal specification of embryonic stem cells at 
early stages of differentiation.

Baizabal JM(1), Covarrubias L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics and Molecular Physiology, Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Cuernavaca, Mor., Mexico.

Specific neuronal differentiation of Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs) depends on their
capacity to interpret environmental cues. At present, it is not clear at which
stage of differentiation ESCs become competent to produce multiple neuronal
lineages in response to the niche of the embryonic brain. To unfold the
developmental potential of ESC-derived precursors, we transplanted these cells
into the embryonic midbrain explants, where neurogenesis occurs as in normal
midbrain development. Using this experimental design, we show that the transition
from ESCs to Embryoid Body (EB) precursors is necessary to differentiate into
Lmx1a(+)/Ptx3(+)/TH(+) dopaminergic neurons around the ventral midline of the
midbrain. In addition, EB cells placed at other dorsal-ventral levels of the
midbrain give rise to Nkx6.1(+) red nucleus (RN) neurons, Nkx2.2(+) ventral
interneurons and Pax7(+) dorsal neurons at the correct positions. Notably,
differentiation of ESCs into Neural Precursor Cells (NPCs) prior to
transplantation markedly reduces specification at the Lmx1a, Nkx6.1 and Pax7
expression domains, without affecting neuronal differentiation. Finally, exposure
to Fgf8 and Shh in vitro promotes commitment of some ESC-derived NPCs to
differentiate into putative Lmx1a(+) dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain. Our
data demonstrate intrinsic developmental potential differences among ESC-derived 
precursor populations.

PMID: 18929554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. FEBS J. 2008 Oct;275(20):5062-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06639.x. Epub
2008 Sep 15.

The Drosophila homeodomain transcription factor, Vnd, associates with a variety
of co-factors, is extensively phosphorylated and forms multiple complexes in
embryos.

Zhang H(1), Syu LJ, Modica V, Yu Z, Von Ohlen T, Mellerick DM.

Author information: 
(1)MSRBIII, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Vnd is a dual transcriptional regulator that is essential for Drosophila
dorsal-ventral patterning. Yet, our understanding of the biochemical basis for
its regulatory activity is limited. Consistent with Vnd's ability to repress
target expression in embryos, endogenously expressed Vnd physically associates
with the co-repressor, Groucho, in Drosophila Kc167 cells. Vnd exists as a single
complex in Kc167 cells, in contrast with embryonic Vnd, which forms multiple
high-molecular-weight complexes. Unlike its vertebrate homolog, Nkx2.2,
full-length Vnd can bind its target in electrophoretic mobility shift assay,
suggesting that co-factor availability may influence Vnd's weak regulatory
activity in transient transfections. We identify the high mobility group 1-type
protein, D1, and the novel helix-loop-helix protein, Olig, as novel
Vnd-interacting proteins using co-immunoprecipitation assays. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that both D1 and Olig are co-expressed with Vnd during Drosophila
embryogenesis, consistent with a biological basis for this interaction. We also
suggest that the phosphorylation state of Vnd influences its ability to interact 
with co-factors, because Vnd is extensively phosphorylated in embryos and can be 
phosphorylated by activated mitogen-activated protein kinase in vitro. These
results highlight the complexities of Vnd-mediated regulation.

PMCID: PMC4055028
PMID: 18795949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 8;8:81. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-81.

Expression of Groucho/TLE proteins during pancreas development.

Hoffman BG(1), Zavaglia B, Beach M, Helgason CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Endocrinology, BC Cancer Research Center, 675 West 10th
Avenue, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, Canada. bhoffman@bccrc.ca

BACKGROUND: The full-length mammalian homologs of groucho, Tle1, 2, 3, and 4, act
as transcriptional corepressors and are recruited by transcription factors
containing an eh1 or WRPW/Y domain. Many transcription factors critical to
pancreas development contain a Gro/TLE interaction domain and several have been
shown to require Gro/TLE interactions for proper function during neuronal
development. However, a detailed analysis of the expression patterns of the
Gro/TLE proteins in pancreas development has not been performed. Moreover, little
is known about the ability of Gro/TLE proteins to interact with transcription
factors in the pancreas.
RESULTS: We describe the expression of Gro/TLE family members, and of 34
different transcription factors that contain a Gro/TLE interaction motif, in the 
pancreas utilizing nine SAGE libraries created from the developing and adult
pancreas, as well as the GenePaint database. Next, we show the dynamic expression
of Tle1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 during pancreas development by qRT-PCR. To further
define the cell-type specificity of the expression of these proteins we use
immunofluorescence to co-localize them with Pdx1 at embryonic day 12.5 (E12.5),
Ngn3 at E14.5, Pdx1, Nkx2-2, Insulin, Glucagon, Pancreatic polypeptide and
Somatostatin at E18.5, as well as Insulin and Glucagon in the adult. We then show
that Tle2 can interact with Nkx2-2, Hes1, Arx, and Nkx6-1 which are all critical 
factors in pancreas development. Finally, we demonstrate that Tle2 modulates the 
repressive abilities of Arx in a beta-cell line.
CONCLUSION: Although Tle1, 2, 3, and 4 show overlapping expression in pancreatic 
progenitors and in the adult islet, the expression of these factors is restricted
to different cell types during endocrine cell maturation. Of note, Tle2 and Tle3 
are co-expressed with Gro/TLE interaction domain containing transcription factors
that are essential for endocrine pancreas development. We further demonstrate
that Tle2 can interact with several of these factors and that Tle2 modulate Arx's
repressive activity. Taken together our studies suggest that Gro/TLE proteins
play a role in the repression of target genes during endocrine cell
specification.

PMCID: PMC2551604
PMID: 18778483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Nov 6;294(1-2):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.07.006.
Epub 2008 Jul 22.

Pancreatic transcription factors and their role in the birth, life and survival
of the pancreatic beta cell.

Bernardo AS(1), Hay CW, Docherty K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen 
AB25 2ZD, UK.

In recent years major progress has been made in understanding the role of
transcription factors in the development of the endocrine pancreas in the mouse. 
Here we describe how a number of these transcription factors play a role in
maintaining the differentiated phenotype of the beta cell, and in the mechanisms 
that allow the beta cell to adapt to changing metabolic demands that occur
throughout life. Amongst these factors, Pdx1 plays a critical role in defining
the region of the primitive gut that will form the pancreas, Ngn3 expression
drives cells towards an endocrine lineage, and a number of additional proteins
including Pdx1, in a second wave of expression, Pax4, NeuroD1/beta2, and MafA act
as beta cell differentiation factors. In the mature beta cell Pdx1, MafA, beta2, 
and Nkx2.2 play important roles in regulating expression of insulin and to some
extent other genes responsible for maintaining beta cell function. We emphasise
here that data from gene expression studies in rodents seldom map on to the known
structure of the corresponding human promoters. In the adult the beta cell is
particularly susceptible to autoimmune-mediated attack and to the toxic metabolic
milieu associated with over-eating, and utilises a number of these transcription 
factors in its defence. Pdx1 has anti-apoptotic and proliferative activities that
help facilitate the maintenance of beta cell mass, while Ngn3 may be involved in 
the recruitment of progenitor cells, and Pax4 (and possibly HNF1alpha and
Hnf4alpha) in the proliferation of beta cells in the adult pancreas. Other
transcription factors with a more widespread pattern of expression that play a
role in beta cell survival or proliferation include Foxo1, CREB family members,
NFAT, FoxM1, Snail and Asc-2.

PMID: 18687378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2008;15(4):403-9. doi: 10.1007/s00534-007-1318-2. 
Epub 2008 Aug 1.

Efficient transformation of small hepatocytes into insulin-expressing cells by
forced expression of Pdx1.

Kawasaki H(1), Mizuguchi T, Oshima H, Nobuoka T, Shibata T, Kaji S, Kokai Y,
Katsuramaki T, Mitaka T, Hirata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery I, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, S-1,
W-16, Chuo-Ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8543, Japan.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: The expression of ectopic pancreatic and duodenal homeobox
factor 1 (Pdx1) can transform hepatocytes into pancreatic endocrine cells. Small 
hepatocytes (SHs) have a high possibility to be a cellular source for islet cell 
transplantation. However, the efficacy of the transformation of SHs into
pancreatic endocrine cells is not fully understood. The focus of our study was to
compare the efficacy of the transformation into pancreatic endocrine cells of SHs
and mature hepatocytes (MHs).
METHODS: MHs and SHs were cultured for 3 and 10 days, respectively, before
Adeno-Pdx1 gene transduction. Western blot analysis was performed for pancreatic 
transcription factors, and reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was performed for the gene expression of pancreatic hormones. Confocal
laser microscanning analysis was used to observe insulin and glucagon expression.
RESULTS: Although the pancreatic transcription factors Pdx1, Ngn3, NeuroD, and
Pax6 were induced in both SHs and MHs after Adeno-Pdx1 gene expression, the
pancreatic transcription factors Nkx2.2 and Nkx6.1 were induced in SHs more than 
in MHs. Glucagon mRNA expression was seen in both SHs and MHs, whereas insulin
mRNA expression was higher in SHs than in MHs. Confocal laser microscanning
analysis showed that SHs expressed both insulin and glucagon, whereas MHs
predominantly expressed glucagon.
CONCLUSIONS: SHs were transformed into both insulin-and glucagon-expressing
cells, and the efficacy of the transformation into insulin-expressing cells of
SHs was higher than that for MHs. Thus, SHs could be a more suitable source of
future cell therapy than MHs.

PMID: 18670842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Pancreas. 2008 Jul;37(1):75-84. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31815fcb1e.

Mesenchymal stem cells derived from human exocrine pancreas express transcription
factors implicated in beta-cell development.

Baertschiger RM(1), Bosco D, Morel P, Serre-Beinier V, Berney T, Buhler LH,
Gonelle-Gispert C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Surgical Research Unit, University Hospital Geneva,
Geneva, Switzerland.

OBJECTIVES: Transplantation of in vitro generated islets or insulin-producing
cells represents an attractive option to overcome organ shortage. The aim of this
study was to isolate, expand, and characterize cells from human exocrine pancreas
and analyze their potential to differentiate into beta cells.
METHODS: Fibroblast-like cells growing out of human exocrine tissue were
characterized by flow cytometry and by their capacity to differentiate into
mesenchymal cell lineages. During cell expansion and after differentiation toward
beta cells, expression of transcription factors of endocrine pancreatic
progenitors was analyzed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: Cells emerged from 14/18 human pancreatic exocrine fractions and were
expanded up to 40 population doublings. These cells displayed surface antigens
similar to mesenchymal stem cells from bone marrow. A culture of these cells in
adipogenic and chondrogenic differentiation media allowed differentiation into
adipocyte- and chondrocyte-like cells. During expansion, cells expressed
transcription factors implicated in islet development such as Isl1, Nkx2.2,
Nkx6.1, nestin, Ngn3, Pdx1, and NeuroD. Activin A and hepatocyte growth factor
induced an expression of insulin, glucagon, and glucokinase.
CONCLUSIONS: Proliferating cells with characteristics of mesenchymal stem cells
and endocrine progenitors were isolated from exocrine tissue. Under specific
conditions, these cells expressed little insulin. Human pancreatic exocrine
tissue might thus be a source of endocrine cell progenitors.

PMID: 18580448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Neural Dev. 2008 Jun 19;3:14. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-3-14.

Identification of Phox2b-regulated genes by expression profiling of cranial
motoneuron precursors.

Pla P(1), Hirsch MR, Le Crom S, Reiprich S, Harley VR, Goridis C.

Author information: 
(1)Ecole normale supérieure, Département de Biologie, 75005 Paris, France.
Patrick.Pla@curie.u-psud.fr

BACKGROUND: Branchiomotor neurons comprise an important class of cranial motor
neurons that innervate the branchial-arch-derived muscles of the face, jaw and
neck. They arise in the ventralmost progenitor domain of the rhombencephalon
characterized by expression of the homeodomain transcription factors Nkx2.2 and
Phox2b. Phox2b in particular plays a key role in the specification of
branchiomotor neurons. In its absence, generic neuronal differentiation is
defective in the progenitor domain and no branchiomotor neurons are produced.
Conversely, ectopic expression of Phox2b in spinal regions of the neural tube
promotes cell cycle exit and neuronal differentiation and, at the same time,
induces genes and an axonal phenotype characteristic for branchiomotor neurons.
How Phox2b exerts its pleiotropic functions, both as a proneural gene and a
neuronal subtype determinant, has remained unknown.
RESULTS: To gain further insights into the genetic program downstream of Phox2b, 
we searched for novel Phox2b-regulated genes by cDNA microarray analysis of
facial branchiomotor neuron precursors from heterozygous and homozygous Phox2b
mutant embryos. We selected for functional studies the genes encoding the axonal 
growth promoter Gap43, the Wnt antagonist Sfrp1 and the transcriptional regulator
Sox13, which were not previously suspected to play roles downstream of Phox2b and
whose expression was affected by Phox2b misexpression in the spinal cord. While
Gap43 did not produce an obvious phenotype when overexpressed in the neural tube,
Sfrp1 induced the interneuron marker Lhx1,5 and Sox13 inhibited neuronal
differentiation. We then tested whether Sfrp1 and Sox13, which are down-regulated
by Phox2b in the facial neuron precursors, would antagonize some aspects of
Phox2b activity. Co-expression of Sfrp1 prevented Phox2b from repressing Lhx1,5
and alleviated the commissural axonal phenotype. When expressed together with
Sox13, Phox2b was still able to promote cell cycle exit and neuronal
differentiation, but the cells failed to relocate to the mantle layer and to
extinguish the neural stem cell marker Sox2.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest novel roles for Sfrp1 and Sox13 in neuronal
subtype specification and generic neuronal differentiation, respectively, and
indicate that down-regulation of Sfrp1 and Sox13 are essential aspects of the
genetic program controlled by Phox2b in cranial motoneurons.

PMCID: PMC2441621
PMID: 18565209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Aug 8;372(4):691-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.05.127. Epub 2008 Jun 4.

Nkx2.2 antisense RNA overexpression enhanced oligodendrocytic differentiation.

Tochitani S(1), Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)LSA Technology Development Unit, Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama
Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.
shiro-tochitani@nifty.com

Nkx2.2AS is an endogenous antisense transcript to Nkx2.2 gene, subcellularly
located in the cytoplasm. We tested if Nkx2.2AS transcripts have any biological
function by regulating transcription level of Nkx2.2 coding gene in the
differentiation of neural stem cells. Forced expression of Nkx2.2AS in neural
stem cells enhanced induction of differentiation along lineage of
oligodendrocytes. Further analyses showed that overexpression of Nkx2.2AS induced
modest increase in Nkx2.2 mRNA level, suggesting that the upregulation of Nkx2.2 
mRNA level can be a minor cause of enhanced induction of oligodendrocytic
differentiation by Nkx2.2AS overexpression. These results together imply that
Nkx2.2AS has a certain biological function which is likely to be not only based
on the affect on transcription level of Nkx2.2 coding gene in cis, but also on
the other mechanisms.

PMID: 18538132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Surg. 2008;15(3):310-7. doi: 10.1007/s00534-007-1252-3. 
Epub 2008 Jun 6.

In vitro transformation of adult rat hepatic progenitor cells into pancreatic
endocrine hormone-producing cells.

Kawasaki H(1), Mizuguchi T, Kikkawa Y, Oshima H, Sasaki Y, Tokino T, Kokai Y,
Miyazaki J, Katsuramaki T, Mitaka T, Hirata K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Surgery, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
S-1, W-16, Chuo-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-8543, Japan.

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Pancreatic and duodenal homeobox factor 1 (Pdx-1) plays an
important role in initiating differentiation toward pancreatic endocrine cells.
The transdifferentiation or transformation of hepatocytes into pancreatic
endocrine cells could be feasible, due to their similar cellular origins. Our
goal in this study was to see if small hepatocytes (SHs) could give rise to
pancreatic endocrine cells via exogenous Pdx-1 gene expression.
METHODS: SHs were cultured for 10 days before adenovirus (Adt)-mediated Pdx-1
gene transfection. We performed western blot analysis for pancreatic
transcription factors in the nuclei and reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) for the gene expression of pancreatic endocrine hormones.
Confocal laser microscanning analysis was used to observe the transformation of
SHs.
RESULTS: Pancreatic transcription factors such as Pdx-1, Ngn3, NeuroD, Nkx2.2,
and Pax6 were induced after Adt-Pdx-1 gene transfection. The mRNA expression of
pancreatic endocrine hormones (insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin) was induced
after the gene transfection. Pdx-1 was expressed in the nucleus, where the cells 
were positive for one or more of the hormones and cytokeratin (CK) 8. Some cells 
were positive for multiple hormones. The insulin level increased while the
glucagon level decreased after the glucose loading test, depending on the glucose
concentration.
CONCLUSIONS: SHs are transformed into functional pancreatic endocrine cells after
Pdx-1 gene transfection.

PMID: 18535770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Brain. 2008 Jul;131(Pt 7):1749-58. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn096. Epub 2008 May 30.

Differentiation block of oligodendroglial progenitor cells as a cause for
remyelination failure in chronic multiple sclerosis.

Kuhlmann T(1), Miron V, Cui Q, Wegner C, Antel J, Brück W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Münster, Münster, Domagkstr. 
19, 48149 Münster, Germany.

Erratum in
    Brain. 2009 Apr;132(Pt 4):1118. Cuo, Q [corrected to Cui, Q].

Impaired function/differentiation of progenitor cells might provide an
explanation for the limited remyelination observed in the majority of chronic
multiple sclerosis lesions. Here, we establish that in the normal adult human
CNS, the transcription factors Nkx2.2 and Olig2 are strongly expressed in
progenitor cells while mature oligodendrocytes are characterized by low levels of
Olig2 or Nkx2.2. In vitro studies confirmed the expression of Olig2 in
oligodendroglial progenitor cells and mature oligodendrocytes while astrocytes,
microglial cells and neurons were negative for Olig2. In early multiple sclerosis
lesions, we found Olig2-positive progenitor cells throughout all lesion stages
and in periplaque white matter (PPWM). The number of progenitors in PPWM was
significantly increased compared with the white matter from controls. In chronic 
multiple sclerosis lesions progenitor cells were still present, however, in
significantly lower numbers than in early multiple sclerosis lesions. A
subpopulation of progenitor cells in early multiple sclerosis lesions and PPWM
but not in control cases co-expressed NogoA, a marker of mature oligodendrocytes.
The co-expression of these two markers suggested that these cells were maturing
oligodendrocytes recently recruited from the progenitor pool. In contrast, in
chronic multiple sclerosis lesions maturing progenitors were only rarely present.
In summary, we provide evidence that a differentiation block of oligodendroglial 
progenitors is a major determinant of remyelination failure in chronic multiple
sclerosis lesions.

PMID: 18515322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Endocr J. 2008 Aug;55(4):691-8. Epub 2008 May 28.

Combined expression of transcription factors induces AR42J-B13 cells to
differentiate into insulin-producing cells.

Ogihara T(1), Fujitani Y, Uchida T, Kanno R, Choi JB, Hirose T, Kawamori R,
Watada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Neurogenin 3 (Ngn3) is a transcription factor that regulates an initial step of
differentiation from uncommitted pancreatic progenitors into endocrine cells.
Additional transcription factors are required for complete differentiation into
mature pancreatic beta cells. In this study, we established an in vitro model
system of beta-cell differentiation by adenovirus-mediated expression of several 
transcription factors in AR42J-B13 cells, a pancreatic progenitor-like cell line 
derived from exocrine pancreas. Exogenous expression of Ngn3 in AR42J-B13 cells
induced expression of Nkx2.2, Pax4, and Pax6, which are all essential for
beta-cell differentiation in mouse embryos. However, Ngn3 did not induce more
downstream regulators of beta-cell differentiation, Nkx6.1 and Maf A.
Coexpression of Nkx6.1 and Ngn3 induced endogenous expression of the insulin 2
gene, while coexpression of Maf A and Ngn3 induced both insulin 1 and 2 genes in 
AR42J-B13 cells. Our data demonstrated that Ngn3 expressed together with Nkx6.1
or MafA induces AR42J-B13 cells to differentiate into insulin-producing cells,
supporting the use of these cells as a model system for studying beta-cell
differentiation in vitro.

PMID: 18506085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Development. 2008 Jun;135(12):2151-60. doi: 10.1242/dev.015859.

Signals from the neural crest regulate beta-cell mass in the pancreas.

Nekrep N(1), Wang J, Miyatsuka T, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Hormone Research Institute, University of California at San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Pancreatic islet cells and neurons share common functions and similar ontogenies,
but originate in different germ layers. To determine whether ectoderm-derived
cells contribute instructive signals to the developing endoderm-derived pancreas,
we defined the chronology of migration and differentiation of neural crest cells 
in the pancreas, and tested their role in the development of the islets. The
homeodomain transcription factor Phox2b marks the neural precursors from the
neural crest that colonize the gut to form the enteric nervous system. In the
embryonic mouse pancreas, we found Phox2b expressed briefly together with Sox10
along the epithelial-mesenchymal border at E12.5 in cells derived from the neural
crest. Downregulation of Phox2b shortly thereafter was dependent upon Nkx2.2
expressed in the adjacent pancreatic epithelium. In Phox2b(-/-) embryos, neurons 
and glia did not develop in the pancreas, and Nkx2.2 expression was markedly
upregulated in the epithelium. In addition, the number and replication rate of
insulin-expressing beta-cells increased in the Phox2b(-/-) mice. We conclude
that, during pancreatic development, Phox2b and Nkx2.2 form a non-cell-autonomous
feedback loop that links the neural crest with the pancreatic epithelium,
regulates the size of the beta-cell population, and thereby impacts
insulin-secretory capacity and energy homeostasis.

PMID: 18506029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Neuropathology. 2008 Dec;28(6):591-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2008.00923.x. Epub
2008 May 21.

Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural characterization of brain tumors in
S100beta-v-erbB transgenic rats.

Yokoo H(1), Tanaka Y, Nobusawa S, Nakazato Y, Ohgaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine,
Maebashi, Japan.

Transgenic rats expressing v-erbB (viral form of the EGF receptor) under
transcriptional regulation by the S100beta promoter develop brain tumors (Ohgaki 
et al. J Neuropathol Experimental Neurol 65: 1111-1117, 2006). In the present
study, we carried out detailed immunohistochemical and ultrastructural
characterization of the brain tumors that developed in these rats. Of 49
homozygous transgenic rats between 16 and 94 weeks of age (mean, 59 weeks), 31
rats were autopsied because they showed severe neurological symptoms and/or
became moribund. Among these, 30 rats had brain tumors, which were classified
histologically as malignant glioma, anaplastic oligodendroglioma, and low-grade
oligodendroglioma. Six transgenic rats developed two different histologic types
of brain tumor, which were considered to be of multiclonal origin, because of the
lack of histological transitions. All brain tumors contained neoplastic cells
immunoreactive for S100 and GFAP. Diffuse immunoreactivity for Olig2 and Nkx2.2
was observed in neoplastic cells in all seven anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and
in all three low-grade oligodendrogliomas analyzed, but in none of 26 malignant
gliomas. Electron microscopy, carried out on four malignant gliomas and four
anaplastic oligodendrogliomas, revealed the presence of intermediate filament
bundles devoid of side arms, indicating glial differentiation. There was no
evidence of cilia, microvilli, neurosecretory granules, synaptic structures or
neurofilaments, excluding the possibility of ependymal or neuronal tumors. The
present study thus provides additional evidence that the brain tumors developing 
in S100beta-v-erbB transgenic rats are of glial origin, with or without
oligodendroglial differentiation. Reproducible development of three distinct
histologic types of brain tumor in unique localizations may be explained by
activation of the v-erbB transgene driven by the S100beta promoter in specific
precursor cells during development of the brain. Thus, S100beta-v-erbB transgenic
rats may be useful to study the histogenesis and molecular mechanisms of
development of glial tumors due to disruption of the EGFR pathway.

PMID: 18498286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Diabetologia. 2008 Jul;51(7):1169-80. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1006-z. Epub 2008
May 20.

Transcription factor expression in the developing human fetal endocrine pancreas.

Lyttle BM(1), Li J, Krishnamurthy M, Fellows F, Wheeler MB, Goodyer CG, Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London,
ON, Canada.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Morphological changes that occur during pancreatic endocrine
cell differentiation have been shown in rodent systems to be dependent on
sequential alterations in transcription factor expression. However, similar data 
for humans have been limited. The aim of the present study was to provide a
connection between pancreatic morphology, transcription factor gene expression
and protein localisation during human fetal development.
METHODS: Human fetal pancreases were examined at early (8-12 weeks of fetal age),
middle (14-16 weeks) and late (19-21 weeks) stages, using immunohistological,
microarray and qRT-PCR analyses.
RESULTS: We observed a significant decrease in pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1
(PDX-1)(+)/cytokeratin 19(+) cells (p < 0.001), with a simultaneous increase in
PDX-1(+)/insulin(+) cells from 8 to 21 weeks (p < 0.05). Increased PDX-1/insulin 
co-localisation within islet clusters was noted, while no co-expression of PDX-1 
with glucagon was found, suggesting that loss of PDX-1 is essential for alpha
cell formation. Given that neurogenin 3 (NGN3) expression is critical for
establishing the endocrine cell programme in the rodent pancreas, we examined its
expression pattern and co-localisation in PDX-1(+), insulin(+) and glucagon(+)
cells. Co-localisation of NGN3 with PDX-1, insulin and glucagon was noted during 
early development, with significant decreases in middle and late stages (p <
0.001). Our microarray and co-localisation analyses of transcription factors
linked to NGN3 demonstrated that ISL1 transcription factor (ISL1), neurogenic
differentiation 1 (NEUROD1), NK2 related transcription factor related, locus 2
(NKX2-2) and paired box gene 6 (PAX6) were upregulated during development and
present in all four endocrine cell types, while NK6 related transcription factor 
related, locus 1 (NKX6-1) was expressed exclusively in beta cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study is an important step towards identifying
key molecular factors involved in development of the human fetal endocrine
pancreas.

PMID: 18491072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Neuron Glia Biol. 2008 May;4(2):71-81. doi: 10.1017/S1740925X09990123.

nkx2.2a promotes specification and differentiation of a myelinating subset of
oligodendrocyte lineage cells in zebrafish.

Kucenas S(1), Snell H, Appel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37235,
USA.

During development, multipotent neural precursors give rise to oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (OPCs), which migrate and divide to produce additional OPCs.
Near the end of embryogenesis and during postnatal stages, many OPCs stop
dividing and differentiate as myelinating oligodendrocytes, whereas others
persist as nonmyelinating cells. Investigations of oligodendrocyte development in
mice indicated that the Nkx2.2 transcription factor both limits the number of
OPCs that are formed and subsequently promotes their differentiation, raising the
possibility that Nkx2.2 plays a key role in determining myelinating versus
nonmyelinating fate. We used in vivo time-lapse imaging and loss-of-function
experiments in zebrafish to further explore formation and differentiation of
oligodendrocyte lineage cells. Our data show that newly specified OPCs are
heterogeneous with respect to gene expression and fate. Whereas some OPCs express
the nkx2.2a gene and differentiate as oligodendrocytes, others that do not
express nkx2.2a mostly remain as nonmyelinating OPCs. Similarly to mouse, loss of
nkx2.2a function results in excess OPCs and delayed oligodendrocyte
differentiation. Notably, excess OPCs are formed as a consequence of prolonged
OPC production from neural precursor cells. We conclude that Nkx2.2 promotes
timely specification and differentiation of myelinating oligodendrocyte lineage
cells from species representing different vertebrate taxa.

PMCID: PMC2821284
PMID: 19737431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jun 20;371(1):132-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.04.033. Epub 2008 Apr 15.

Transplantation of bone marrow derived cells promotes pancreatic islet repair in 
diabetic mice.

Gao X(1), Song L, Shen K, Wang H, Niu W, Qin X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Center Laboratory of Surgery, Zhongshan
Hospital, Shanghai Medical School, Fudan University, 180, Fenglin Road, Shanghai 
200032, People's Republic of China.

The transplantation of bone marrow (BM) derived cells to initiate pancreatic
regeneration is an attractive but as-yet unrealized strategy. Presently, BM
derived cells from green fluorescent protein transgenic mice were transplanted
into diabetic mice. Repair of diabetic islets was evidenced by reduction of
hyperglycemia, increase in number of islets, and altered pancreatic histology.
Cells in the pancreata of recipient mice co-expressed BrdU and insulin. Double
staining revealed beta cells were in the process of proliferation. BrdU(+)
insulin(-) PDX-1(+) cells, Ngn3(+) cells and insulin(+) glucagon(+) cells, which 
showed stem cells, were also found during beta-cell regeneration. The majority of
transplanted cells were mobilized to the islet and ductal regions. In recipient
pancreas, transplanted cells simultaneously expressed CD34 but did not express
insulin, PDX-1, Ngn3, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Pax4, Pax6, and CD45. It is concluded that 
BM derived cells especially CD34(+) cells can promote repair of pancreatic
islets. Moreover, both proliferation of beta cells and differentiation of
pancreatic stem cells contribute to the regeneration of beta cells.

PMID: 18420028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2008 Apr 16;3(4):e1965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001965.

EWS/FLI mediates transcriptional repression via NKX2.2 during oncogenic
transformation in Ewing's sarcoma.

Owen LA(1), Kowalewski AA, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, 
United States of America.

EWS/FLI is a master regulator of Ewing's sarcoma formation. Gene expression
studies in A673 Ewing's sarcoma cells have demonstrated that EWS/FLI
downregulates more genes than it upregulates, suggesting that EWS/FLI, and/or its
targets, function as transcriptional repressors. One critical EWS/FLI target,
NKX2.2, is a transcription factor that contains both transcriptional activation
and transcriptional repression domains, raising the possibility that it mediates 
portions of the EWS/FLI transcriptional signature. We now report that microarray 
analysis demonstrated that the transcriptional profile of NKX2.2 consists solely 
of downregulated genes, and overlaps with the EWS/FLI downregulated signature,
suggesting that NKX2.2 mediates oncogenic transformation via transcriptional
repression. Structure-function analysis revealed that the DNA binding and
repressor domains in NKX2.2 are required for oncogenesis in Ewing's sarcoma
cells, while the transcriptional activation domain is completely dispensable.
Furthermore, blockade of TLE or HDAC function, two protein families thought to
mediate the repressive function of NKX2.2, inhibited the transformed phenotype
and reversed the NKX2.2 transcriptional profile in Ewing's sarcoma cells. Whole
genome localization studies (ChIP-chip) revealed that a significant portion of
the NKX2.2-repressed gene expression signature was directly mediated by NKX2.2
binding. These data demonstrate that the transcriptional repressive function of
NKX2.2 is necessary, and sufficient, for the oncogenic phenotype of Ewing's
sarcoma, and suggest a therapeutic approach to this disease.

PMCID: PMC2291578
PMID: 18414662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Neurosurg Focus. 2008;24(3-4):E5. doi: 10.3171/FOC/2008/24/3-4/E4.

Inhibition of oligodendrocyte precursor cell differentiation by myelin-associated
proteins.

Syed YA(1), Baer AS, Lubec G, Hoeger H, Widhalm G, Kotter MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.

OBJECT: Promoting repair of central nervous system (CNS) white matter represents 
an important approach to easing the course of a number of tragic neurological
diseases. For this purpose, strategies are currently being evaluated for
transplanting cells capable of generating new oligodendrocytes into areas of
demyelination and/or enhancing the potential of endogenous stem/precursor cells
to give rise to new oligodendrocytes. Emerging evidence, however, indicates that 
increasing the presence of cells capable of forming new myelin sheaths is not
sufficient to promote repair because of unknown inhibitors that accumulate in
lesions as a consequence of myelin degeneration and impair the generation of new 
oligodendrocytes. The aim of the present study was to characterize the nature of 
the inhibitory molecules present in myelin.
METHODS: Differentiation of primary rat oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) in
the presence of CNS and peripheral nervous system myelin was assessed by
immunocytochemical methods. The authors further characterized the nature of the
inhibitors by submitting myelin membrane preparations to biochemical
precipitation and digestion. Finally, OPCs were grown on purified Nogo-A,
oligodendrocyte myelin glycoprotein, and myelin-associated glycoprotein, the most
prominent inhibitors of axon regeneration.
RESULTS: Myelin membrane preparations induced a differentiation block in OPCs
that was associated with down-regulation of expression of the transcription
factor Nkx2.2. The inhibitory activity in myelin was restricted to the CNS and
was predominantly associated with white matter. Furthermore, the results
demonstrate that myelin proteins that are distinct from the most prominent
inhibitors of axon outgrowth are specific inhibitors of OPC differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: The inhibitory effect of unknown myelin-associated proteins should
be considered in future treatment strategies aimed at enhancing CNS repair.

PMID: 18341408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Development. 2008 Apr;135(7):1271-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.015370. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Ascl1 is required for oligodendrocyte development in the spinal cord.

Sugimori M(1), Nagao M, Parras CM, Nakatani H, Lebel M, Guillemot F, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, and Department of Pediatrics, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Development of oligodendrocytes, myelin-forming glia in the central nervous
system (CNS), proceeds on a protracted schedule. Specification of oligodendrocyte
progenitors (OLPs) begins early in development, whereas their terminal
differentiation occurs at late embryonic and postnatal periods. How these
distinct steps are controlled remains unclear. Our previous study demonstrated an
important role of the helix-loop-helix (HLH) transcription factor Ascl1 in early 
generation of OLPs in the developing spinal cord. Here, we show that Ascl1 is
also involved in terminal differentiation of oligodendrocytes late in
development. Ascl1-/- mutant mice showed a deficiency in differentiation of
myelin-expressing oligodendrocytes at birth. In vitro culture studies demonstrate
that the induction and maintenance of co-expression of Olig2 and Nkx2-2 in OLPs, 
and thyroid hormone-responsive induction of myelin proteins are impaired in
Ascl1-/- mutants. Gain-of-function studies further showed that Ascl1 collaborates
with Olig2 and Nkx2-2 in promoting differentiation of OLPs into oligodendrocytes 
in vitro. Overexpression of Ascl1, Olig2 and Nkx2-2 alone stimulated the
specification of OLPs, but the combinatorial action of Ascl1 and Olig2 or Nkx2-2 
was required for further promoting their differentiation into oligodendrocytes.
Thus, Ascl1 regulates multiple aspects of oligodendrocyte development in the
spinal cord.

PMID: 18287202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Stem Cells. 2008 Apr;26(4):886-93. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2007-0620. Epub 2008
Jan 31.

Directed differentiation of ventral spinal progenitors and motor neurons from
human embryonic stem cells by small molecules.

Li XJ(1), Hu BY, Jones SA, Zhang YS, Lavaute T, Du ZW, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and the Stem Cell Research Program, Madison, Wisconsin
53705, USA.

Specification of distinct cell types from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) is
key to the potential application of these naïve pluripotent cells in regenerative
medicine. Determination of the nontarget differentiated populations, which is
lacking in the field, is also crucial. Here, we show an efficient differentiation
of motor neurons ( approximately 50%) by a simple sequential application of
retinoid acid and sonic hedgehog (SHH) in a chemically defined suspension
culture. We also discovered that purmorphamine, a small molecule that activates
the SHH pathway, could replace SHH for the generation of motor neurons.
Immunocytochemical characterization indicated that cells differentiated from
hESCs were nearly completely restricted to the ventral spinal progenitor fate
(NKX2.2+, Irx3+, and Pax7-), with the exception of motor neurons (HB9+) and their
progenitors (Olig2+). Thus, the directed neural differentiation system with small
molecules, even without further purification, will facilitate basic and
translational studies using human motoneurons at a minimal cost.

PMCID: PMC2707816
PMID: 18238853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2008 Sep;10(10):939-49. doi:
10.1111/j.1463-1326.2007.00836.x. Epub 2008 Jan 14.

Isosteviol increases insulin sensitivity and changes gene expression of key
insulin regulatory genes and transcription factors in islets of the diabetic KKAy
mouse.

Nordentoft I(1), Jeppesen PB, Hong J, Abudula R, Hermansen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism C, Aarhus Sygehus THG, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus C, Denmark. iver.nordentoft@ki.au.dk

AIMS: Isosteviol (ISV), a diterpene molecule, is an isomer of the backbone
structure of a group of substances with recently proven antidiabetic capabilities
in both man and rodents. The aim of this study was to investigate if ISV
possesses beneficial effects on the metabolism in the diabetic KKAy mouse and to 
establish the long-term in vivo effects of ISV on the gene expression profile of 
key insulin regulatory genes in islets.
METHODS: Twenty KKAy mice, aged 5 weeks, were divided into two groups and treated
for 9 weeks with either (i) standard chow diet (control) or (ii) chow + 20 mg/kg 
body weight of ISV. Blood samples were collected before and after intervention
and were subsequently analysed. As a non-diabetic control group, 10 normal C57BL 
mice were fed with standard chow diet. Gene expression was determined in islets
by quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Affymetrix microarray.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that long-term treatment with ISV improves glucose
homeostasis, increases insulin sensitivity, lowers plasma triglycerides and
lowers weight in the diabetic KKAy mice. Furthermore, ISV markedly changes the
gene expression profile of key insulin regulatory genes GLUT2, Ins1, Ins2,
Pdx1/Ipf1, Beta2/Neurod1, Pax6 and 11-beta-HSD-1 and beta-cell transcription
factors Nkx2-2, Nkx6-1, C/EBPalpha and FoxA2 in isolated islets of the KKAy mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that ISV improves glucose and insulin
sensitivity as well as improving the lipid profile and upregulates the gene
expression of key beta-cell genes, including insulin regulatory transcription
factors.

PMID: 18201205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PLoS One. 2008 Jan 16;3(1):e1451. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001451.

Islet-like clusters derived from mesenchymal stem cells in Wharton's Jelly of the
human umbilical cord for transplantation to control type 1 diabetes.

Chao KC(1), Chao KF, Fu YS, Liu SH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: There is a widespread interest in developing renewable sources of
islet-replacement tissue for type I diabetes mellitus. Human mesenchymal cells
isolated from the Wharton's jelly of the umbilical cord (HUMSCs), which can be
easily obtained and processed compared with embryonic and bone marrow stem cells,
possess stem cell properties. HUMSCs may be a valuable source for the generation 
of islets.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: HUMSCs were induced to transform into
islet-like cell clusters in vitro through stepwise culturing in
neuron-conditioned medium. To assess the functional stability of the islet-like
cell clusters in vivo, these cell clusters were transplanted into the liver of
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats via laparotomy. Glucose tolerance was
measured on week 12 after transplantation accompanied with immunohistochemistry
and electron microscopy analysis. These islet-like cell clusters were shown to
contain human C-peptide and release human insulin in response to physiological
glucose levels. Real-time RT-PCR detected the expressions of insulin and other
pancreatic beta-cell-related genes (Pdx1, Hlxb9, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, and Glut-2) in
these islet-like cell clusters. The hyperglycemia and glucose intolerance in
streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats was significantly alleviated after
xenotransplantation of islet-like cell clusters, without the use of
immunosuppressants. In addition to the existence of islet-like cell clusters in
the liver, some special fused liver cells were also found, which characterized by
human insulin and nuclei-positive staining and possessing secretory granules.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: In this study, we successfully differentiate HUMSCs
into mature islet-like cell clusters, and these islet-like cell clusters possess 
insulin-producing ability in vitro and in vivo. HUMSCs in Wharton's Jelly of the 
umbilical cord seem to be the preferential source of stem cells to convert into
insulin-producing cells, because of the large potential donor pool, its rapid
availability, no risk of discomfort for the donor, and low risk of rejection.

PMCID: PMC2180192
PMID: 18197261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Pancreas. 2008 Jan;36(1):1-9. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013r318148c8e6.

The Reg family member INGAP is a marker of endocrine patterning in the embryonic 
pancreas.

Hamblet NS(1), Shi W, Vinik AI, Taylor-Fishwick DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The Strelitz Diabetes Institutes, Eastern
Virginia Medical School, Norfolk, VA 23510, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Adult islet neogenesis is believed to recapitulate elements of
pancreatic endocrine development. Identifying factors that regulate islet
neogenesis-associated protein (INGAP) gene activity could provide links to
pancreas development.
METHODS: Predicted transcriptional regulators of INGAP were screened in an
INGAP-promoter-reporter assay. Based upon their temporal expression, the
occurrence of INGAP-positive cells during pancreas embryonic development were
studied.
RESULTS: Pancreatic transcription factors, PDX-1, Ngn3, NeuroD, and Isl-1,
activated the INGAP promoter, but PAX4, PAX6, and Nkx2.2 did not. The
INGAP-positive cells were present in the developing pancreatic bud of the mouse
embryo. Emerging clusters of unorganized endocrine cells were INGAP positive.
These cells coexpressed insulin or somatostatin, but glucagon-expressing cells
remained distinct. The INGAP-positive cells were also detected in the maturing
neonatal endocrine cells organized into islets. In direct contrast to the embryo,
glucagon localized with most INGAP-positive cells in the postnatal endocrine
cells. The INGAP-positive cells juxtaposed pancreatic duct cells. A subset of
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine-positive/INGAP-positive cells was detected in the
neonatal pancreas.
CONCLUSIONS: These data implicate INGAP and/or Reg family proteins in endocrine
cell patterning during embryonic development and suggest that INGAP
immunoreactivity is a key marker associated with early endocrine cells.

PMID: 18192873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Neurosci. 2007 Dec 12;27(50):13624-34.

The neonatal ventromedial hypothalamus transcriptome reveals novel markers with
spatially distinct patterning.

Kurrasch DM(1), Cheung CC, Lee FY, Tran PV, Hata K, Ingraham HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

The ventromedial hypothalamus (VMH) is a distinct morphological nucleus involved 
in feeding, fear, thermoregulation, and sexual activity. It is essentially
unknown how VMH circuits underlying these innate responses develop, in part
because the VMH remains poorly defined at a cellular and molecular level.
Specifically, there is a paucity of cell-type-specific genetic markers with which
to identify neuronal subgroups and manipulate development and signaling in vivo. 
Using gene profiling, we now identify approximately 200 genes highly enriched in 
neonatal (postnatal day 0) mouse VMH tissue. Analyses of these VMH markers by
real or virtual (Allen Brain Atlas; http://www.brain-map.org) experiments
revealed distinct regional patterning within the newly formed VMH. Top neonatal
markers include transcriptional regulators such as Vgll2, SF-1, Sox14, Satb2,
Fezf1, Dax1, Nkx2-2, and COUP-TFII, but interestingly, the highest expressed VMH 
transcript, the transcriptional coregulator Vgll2, is completely absent in older 
animals. Collective results from zebrafish knockdown experiments and from
cellular studies suggest that a subset of these VMH markers will be important for
hypothalamic development and will be downstream of SF-1, a critical factor for
normal VMH differentiation. We show that at least one VMH marker, the AT-rich
binding protein Satb2, was responsive to the loss of leptin signaling
(Lep(ob/ob)) at postnatal day 0 but not in the adult, suggesting that some VMH
transcriptional programs might be influenced by fetal or early postnatal
environments. Our study describing this comprehensive "VMH transcriptome"
provides a novel molecular toolkit to probe further the genetic basis of innate
neuroendocrine behavioral responses.

PMID: 18077674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Dec 1;13(23):6978-83.

Novel markers of subclinical disease for Ewing family tumors from gene expression
profiling.

Cheung IY(1), Feng Y, Danis K, Shukla N, Meyers P, Ladanyi M, Cheung NK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York 10021, USA. cheungi@mskcc.org

PURPOSE: Targeting subclinical disease in the bone marrow is particularly
relevant in metastatic Ewing family tumors (EFT) where cure is difficult.
Genome-wide expression arrays can uncover novel genes differentially expressed in
tumors over normal marrow/blood, which may have potentials as markers of
subclinical disease.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression array data were obtained on 28 EFT tumors
using the Affymetrix U133 gene chip and compared with 10 normal blood samples.
Ten genes with high tumor to blood ratios were identified. Quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR was done to study (a) the dynamic range of detection of rare
tumor cells, (b) the gene expression in normal blood/marrow samples, (c) the gene
expression among EFT tumors, and (d) the detection and prognostic impact of
marker positivity in histology-negative diagnostic marrows of EFT patients.
RESULTS: Five of 10 genes (i.e., six-transmembrane epithelial antigen of the
prostate 1 [STEAP1], cyclin D1 [CCND1], NKX2-2 transcription factor [NKX2-2],
plakophilin 1 [PKP1], and transmembrane protein 47 [TMEM47]) were chosen for
further analyses based on their steep linear dynamic range in detecting tumor
cells seeded in normal mononuclear cells and on their homogeneous expression
among EFT tumors. Prognostic effect was evaluated in 35 histology-negative
diagnostic marrows. Marker negativity of STEAP1, CCND1, or NKX2-2, as well as
three markers in combination, was strongly correlated with patient survival as
well as survival without new metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: This gene expression array-based approach identified novel markers
that may be informative at diagnosis for risk group assessment. Their clinical
utility needs to be tested in large patient cohorts.

PMID: 18056173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 1;313(1):58-66. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Nkx2.2 regulates cell fate choice in the enteroendocrine cell lineages of the
intestine.

Desai S(1), Loomis Z, Pugh-Bernard A, Schrunk J, Doyle MJ, Minic A, McCoy E,
Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Colorado at
Denver Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Nkx2.2 is a homeodomain-containing transcription factor essential for pancreatic 
islet cell specification. In this study we investigate the role of Nkx2.2 within 
the small intestine. We have determined that Nkx2.2 is expressed at the onset of 
intestinal epithelial cell differentiation in specific intestinal cell
populations, including a subset of enteroendocrine cells. Similar to its role in 
the pancreatic islet, Nkx2.2 regulates cell fate choices within the intestinal
enteroendocrine population; in the Nkx2.2 null mice, several hormone-producing
enteroendocrine cell populations are absent or reduced and the ghrelin-producing 
cell population is upregulated. The remaining intestinal cell populations,
including the paneth cells, goblet cells, and enterocytes appear to be unaffected
by the loss of Nkx2.2. Furthermore, similar to the pancreatic islet, Nkx2.2
appears to function upstream of Pax6 in regulating intestinal cell fates; Pax6
mRNA and protein expression is decreased in the Nkx2.2 null mice. These studies
identify a novel role for Nkx2.2 in intestinal endocrine cell development and
reveal the regulatory similarities between cell type specification in the
pancreatic islet and in the enteroendocrine population of the intestine.

PMCID: PMC2238176
PMID: 18022152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Prostate. 2008 Jan 1;68(1):50-60.

Neuroendocrine differentiation in the 12T-10 transgenic prostate mouse model
mimics endocrine differentiation of pancreatic beta cells.

Gupta A(1), Wang Y, Browne C, Kim S, Case T, Paul M, Wills ML, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2765, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine (NE) prostate cancer develops as an aggressive disease
that does not respond to androgen ablation therapy. It has been demonstrated that
the paracrine action of NE cells facilitates the progression of androgen
dependent adenocarcinoma to an androgen independent state, suggesting a
significant role for NE cells during failure of androgen ablation therapy.
METHODS: To investigate the pathways that are involved in NE differentiation of
prostate cancer, we have looked at the expression of genes known to be involved
in endocrine differentiation of beta-cells in the pancreas. This study has been
performed using the NE prostate cancer mouse model (12T-10) and the derivative
allograft model (NE-10).
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical studies have shown that the neuroendocrine prostate 
tumors express the transcription factors Foxa2, mouse achaete-scute homolog-1
(mash-1), neurogenin3 (Ngn3) and Nkx2.2. These tumors show a loss of
hairy/enhancer of split (Hes-1), a gene that inhibits NE differentiation. Human
NE prostate cancers also express Foxa2 and human achaete-scute homolog-1
(HASH-1). These genes are expressed in NE prostate tumors in the similar
sequential manner as they appear in a pancreatic beta-cell endocrine
differentiation. Foxa2 expression is detected in early prostatic intraepithelial 
neoplasia (PIN). Mash-1 expression is detected in a few clusters within low grade
PIN lesions and Nkx2.2 expression is rarely detected in individual scattered
cells within the PIN lesion. Ngn3 and Nkx2.2 frequently appear in the invasive NE
cancer. Subsequent NE metastasis to lung and liver show a distinct gene
expression pattern. The lung metastasis expresses Ngn3 but does not express
Nkx2.2 whereas liver metastases do not express Ngn3 but express Nkx2.2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Ngn3 and Nkx2.2 expression are markers
for site-specific metastasis and/or transcriptionally regulated genes that are
required for organ-specific metastasis. This study indicates that a pathway
similar to pancreatic beta-cell differentiation is involved in NE differentiation
of prostate cancer.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18004726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Dev Biol. 2007 Dec 15;312(2):523-32. Epub 2007 Oct 5.

Genetic identification of a novel NeuroD1 function in the early differentiation
of islet alpha, PP and epsilon cells.

Chao CS(1), Loomis ZL, Lee JE, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Colorado at Denver and Health Science Center, Biochemistry and
Molecular Genetics Department, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Nkx2.2 and NeuroD1 are vital for proper differentiation of pancreatic islet cell 
types. Nkx2.2-null mice fail to form beta cells, have reduced numbers of alpha
and PP cells and display an increase in ghrelin-producing epsilon cells.
NeuroD1-null mice display a reduction of alpha and beta cells after embryonic day
(e) 17.5. To begin to determine the relative contributions of Nkx2.2 and NeuroD1 
in islet development, we generated Nkx2.2-/-;NeuroD1-/- double knockout (DKO)
mice. As expected, the DKO mice fail to form beta cells, similar to the
Nkx2.2-null mice, suggesting that the Nkx2.2 phenotype may be dominant over the
NeuroD1 phenotype in the beta cells. Surprisingly, however, the alpha, PP and
epsilon phenotypes of the Nkx2.2-null mice are partially rescued by the
simultaneous elimination of NeuroD1, even at early developmental time points when
NeuroD1 null mice alone do not display a phenotype. Our results indicate that
Nkx2.2 and NeuroD1 interact to regulate pancreatic islet cell fates, and this
epistatic relationship is cell-type dependent. Furthermore, this study reveals a 
previously unappreciated early function of NeuroD1 in regulating the
specification of alpha, PP and epsilon cells.

PMCID: PMC2174610
PMID: 17988662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Cell Biochem. 2008 May 1;104(1):224-36.

Conversion of immortal liver progenitor cells into pancreatic endocrine
progenitor cells by persistent expression of Pdx-1.

Jin CX(1), Li WL, Xu F, Geng ZH, He ZY, Su J, Tao XR, Ding XY, Wang X, Hu YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai
200433, P. R. China.

The conversion of expandable liver progenitor cells into pancreatic beta cells
would provide a renewable cell source for diabetes cell therapy. Previously, we
reported the establishment of liver epithelial progenitor cells (LEPCs). In this 
work, LEPCs were modified into EGFP/Pdx-1 LEPCs, cells with stable expression of 
both Pdx-1 and EGFP. Unlike previous work, with persistent expression of Pdx-1,
EGFP/Pdx-1 LEPCs acquired the phenotype of pancreatic endocrine progenitor cells 
rather than giving rise to insulin-producing cells directly. EGFP/Pdx-1 LEPCs
proliferated vigorously and expressed the crucial transcription factors involved 
in beta cell development, including Ngn3, NeuroD, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Pax4, Pax6,
Isl1, MafA and endogenous Pdx-1, but did not secrete insulin. When cultured in
high glucose/low serum medium supplemented with cytokines, EGFP/Pdx-1 LEPCs
stopped proliferating and gave rise to functional beta cells without any evidence
of exocrine or other islet cell lineage differentiation. When transplanted into
diabetic SCID mice, EGFP/Pdx-1 LEPCs ameliorated hyperglycemia by secreting
insulin in a glucose regulated manner. Considering the limited availability of
beta cells, we propose that our experiments will provide a framework for
utilizing the immortal liver progenitor cells as a renewable cell source for the 
generation of functional pancreatic beta cells.

PMID: 17979180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Dev Dyn. 2007 Nov;236(11):2993-3006.

Rab23 GTPase is expressed asymmetrically in Hensen's node and plays a role in the
dorsoventral patterning of the chick neural tube.

Li N(1), Volff JN, Wizenmann A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Würzburg, JRG Developmental Neurobiology, Würzburg, Germany.

The mouse Rab23 protein, a Ras-like GTPase, inhibits signaling through the Sonic 
hedgehog pathway and thus exerts a role in the dorsoventral patterning of the
spinal cord. Rab23 mouse mutant embryos lack dorsal spinal cord cell types. We
cloned the chicken Rab23 gene and studied its expression in the developing
nervous system. Chick Rab23 mRNA is initially expressed in the entire neural tube
but retracts to the dorsal alar plate. Unlike in mouse, we find Rab23 in chick
already expressed asymmetrically during gastrulation. Ectopic expression of Rab23
in ventral midbrain induced dorsal genes (Pax3, Pax7) ectopically and reduced
ventral genes (Nkx2.2 and Nkx6) without influencing cell proliferation or
neurogenesis. Thus, in the developing brain of chick embryos Rab23 acts in the
same manner as described for the caudal spinal cord in mouse. These data indicate
that Rab23 plays an important role in patterning the dorso-ventral axis by
dorsalizing the neural tube.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17937392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 15;311(2):603-12. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

MicroRNA profiling of developing and regenerating pancreas reveal
post-transcriptional regulation of neurogenin3.

Joglekar MV(1), Parekh VS, Mehta S, Bhonde RR, Hardikar AA.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells and Diabetes Section, #10, National Center for Cell Science,
Ganeshkhind Road, Pune 411007, India.

The mammalian pancreas is known to show a remarkable degree of regenerative
ability. Several studies until now have demonstrated that the mammalian pancreas 
can regenerate in normal as well as diabetic conditions. These studies illustrate
that pancreatic transcription factors that are seen to be expressed in a temporal
fashion during development are re-expressed during regeneration. The only known
exception to this is Neurogenin3 (NGN3). Though NGN3 protein, which marks all the
pro-endocrine cells during development, is not seen during mouse pancreas
regeneration, functional neo-islets are generated by 4 weeks after 70%
pancreatectomy. We observed that pancreatic transcription factors upstream of
ngn3 showed similar gene expression patterns during development and regeneration.
However, gene transcripts of transcription factors immediately downstream of ngn3
(neuroD and nkx2.2) did not show such similarities in expression. Since NGN3
protein was not detected at any time point during regeneration, we reasoned that 
post-transcriptional silencing of ngn3 by microRNAs may be a possible mechanism. 
We carried out microRNA analysis of 283 known and validated mouse microRNAs
during different stages of pancreatic development and regeneration and identified
that 4 microRNAs; miR-15a, miR-15b, miR-16 and miR-195, which can potentially
bind to ngn3 transcript, are expressed at least 200-fold higher in the
regenerating mouse pancreas as compared to embryonic day (e) 10.5 or e 16.5
developing mouse pancreas. Inhibition of these miRNAs in regenerating pancreatic 
cells using anti-sense miRNA-specific inhibitors, induces expression of NGN3 and 
its downstream players: neuroD and nkx2.2. Similarly, overexpression of miRNAs
targeting ngn3 during pancreas development shows reduction in the number of
hormone-producing cells. It appears that during pancreatic regeneration in mice, 
increased expression of these microRNAs allows endocrine regeneration via an
alternate pathway that does not involve NGN3 protein. Our studies on microRNA
profiling of developing and regenerating pancreas provide us with better
understanding of mechanisms that regulate post-natal islet neogenesis.

PMID: 17936263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Dec 1;505(4):379-403.

A model of early molecular regionalization in the chicken embryonic pretectum.

Ferran JL(1), Sánchez-Arrones L, Sandoval JE, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, University of Murcia, Murcia,
Spain.

The pretectal region of the brain is visualized as a dorsal region of prosomere 1
in the caudal diencephalon, including derivatives from both the roof and alar
plates. Its neuronal derivatives in the adult brain are known as pretectal
nuclei. The literature is inconsistent about the precise anteroposterior
delimitation of this region and on the number of specific histogenetic domains
and subdomains that it contains. We performed a cross-correlated gene-expression 
map of this brain area in chicken embryos, with the aim of identifying
differently fated pretectal domains on the basis of combinatorial gene expression
patterns. We examined in detail Pax3, Pax6, Pax7, Tcf4, Meis1, Meis2, Nkx2.2,
Lim1, Dmbx1, Dbx1, Six3, FoxP2, Zic1, Ebf1, and Shh mRNA expression, as well as
PAX3 and PAX7 immunoreaction, between stages HH11 and HH28. The patterns analyzed
serve to fix the cephalic and caudal boundaries of the pretectum and to define
three molecularly distinct anteroposterior pretectal domains (precommissural,
juxtacommissural, and commissural) and several dorsoventral subdomains. These
molecular specification patterns are established step by step between stages HH10
and HH18, largely before neurogenesis begins. This set of gene-architectonic data
constitutes a useful scaffold for correlations with fate maps and other
experimental embryologic results and may serve as well for inquiries on
homologies in this part of the brain.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17912743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Nov 1;505(1):73-91.

Characterization of progenitor domains in the developing mouse thalamus.

Vue TY(1), Aaker J, Taniguchi A, Kazemzadeh C, Skidmore JM, Martin DM, Martin JF,
Treier M, Nakagawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455, USA.

To understand the molecular basis of the specification of thalamic nuclei, we
analyzed the expression patterns of various transcription factors and defined
progenitor cell populations in the embryonic mouse thalamus. We show that the
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor Olig3 is expressed in the
entire thalamic ventricular zone and the zona limitans intrathalamica (ZLI).
Next, we define two distinct progenitor domains within the thalamus, which we
name pTH-R and pTH-C, located caudal to the ZLI. pTH-R is immediately caudal to
the ZLI and expresses Nkx2.2, Mash1, and Olig3. pTH-C is caudal to pTH-R and
expresses Ngn1, Ngn2, and Olig3. Short-term lineage analysis of Olig3-, Mash1-,
Ngn1-, and Ngn2-expressing progenitor cells as well as tracing the Pitx2 cell
lineage suggests that pTH-C is the only major source of thalamic nuclei
containing neurons that project to the cerebral cortex, whereas pTH-R and ZLI are
likely to produce distinct postmitotic populations outside of the
cortex-projecting part of the thalamus. To determine if pTH-C is composed of
subdomains, we characterized expression of the homeodomain protein Dbx1 and the
bHLH protein Olig2. We show that Dbx1 is expressed in caudodorsal-high to
rostroventral-low gradient within pTH-C. Analysis of heterozygous Dbx1(nlslacZ)
knockin mice demonstrated that Dbx1-expressing progenitors preferentially give
rise to caudodorsal thalamic nuclei. Olig2 is expressed in an opposite gradient
within pTH-C to that of Dbx1. These results establish the molecular heterogeneity
within the progenitor cells of the thalamus, and suggest that such heterogeneity 
contributes to the specification of thalamic nuclei.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 17729296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Dev Dyn. 2007 Sep;236(9):2661-7.

Zebrafish homologue irx1a is required for the differentiation of serotonergic
neurons.

Cheng CW(1), Yan CH, Choy SW, Hui MN, Hui CC, Cheng SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon,
Hong Kong.

Serotonergic (5HT) neurons produce neurotransmitter serotonin, which modulates
various neuronal circuits. The specification and differentiation of 5HT neurons
require both extrinsic signals such as Shh and Fgf, as well as intrinsic
transcription factors such as nkx2.2, mash1, phox2b, Gata2, and pet1. In this
study, we show that iroquois homeodomain factor irx1a, but not irx1b, is
expressed in the 5HT neurons. Knockdown of irx1a by antisense morpholino
nucleotides reveals that it is a critical determinant for the differentiation of 
5HT neurons in the hindbrain. However, irx1a morphants do not show a reduction of
the progenitors of 5HT neurons. Hence, irx1a is not required for the initial
specification but it is required for the complete differentiation of 5HT neurons.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17685478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Neurodegener Dis. 2007;4(4):333-8.

A Wnt signal regulates stem cell fate and differentiation in vivo.

Prakash N(1), Wurst W.

Author information: 
(1)GSF National Research Center for Environment and Health, Technical University 
Munich, Institute of Developmental Genetics, Munich, Germany.

Our knowledge about the normal generation of midbrain dopaminergic neurons in
vivois still rudimentary, despite many attempts to recapitulate the underlying
events in vitro. Because the loss of these neurons is implicated in Parkinson's
disease, this lack of information is one of the major drawbacks in the
development of better therapies for this severe human neurological disorder.
Recently, substantial advances have been made by demonstrating that the secreted 
molecule Wnt1 regulates a genetic network, including the transcription factors
Otx2 and Nkx2-2, for the initial establishment of the dopaminergic progenitor
domain in the mammalian ventral midbrain. In addition, Wnt1 appears to regulate
the differentiation of the postmitotic progeny of these precursors by initiating 
the expression of midbrain dopaminergic-specific transcription factors. A genetic
cascade controlled by the secreted molecule Sonic hedgehog, including the
transcription factors Lmx1a, Msx1 and Nkx6-1, acts in parallel with the
Wnt1-regulated network to establish the midbrain dopaminergic progenitor domain. 
The Sonic-hedgehog-controlled cascade may diverge from the Wnt1-regulated network
at later stages of neural development through induction of proneural
transcription factors required for the acquisition of generic neuronal properties
by the midbrain dopaminergic progeny. Here we provide a brief overview of these
regulatory gene networks.

PMID: 17627138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Anat. 2007 Aug;211(2):177-87. Epub 2007 Jul 9.

Molecular mechanisms in the formation of the medial longitudinal fascicle.

Ahsan M(1), Riley KL, Schubert FR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Biomolecular Sciences, School of Biological
Sciences, University of Portsmouth, UK.

The first neurons in the vertebrate brain form a stereotypical array of
longitudinal and transversal axon tracts, the early axon scaffold. This scaffold 
is thought to lay down the basic structure for the later, more complex neuronal
pathways in the brain. The ventral longitudinal tract is pioneered by neurons
located at the ventral midbrain-forebrain boundary, which form the medial
longitudinal fascicle. Recent studies have shed some light on the molecular
mechanisms that control the development of the medial longitudinal fascicle.
Here, we show that patterning molecules, notably the ventralizing signalling
molecule Shh, are involved in the formation of medial longitudinal fascicle
neurons and in medial longitudinal fascicle axon guidance. Downstream of Shh,
several homeobox genes are expressed in the tegmentum. We describe the expression
patterns of Sax1, Emx2, Six3, Nkx2.2 and Pax6 in the mesencephalon and pretectum 
in detail. Furthermore, we review the evidence of their molecular interactions,
and their involvement in neuronal fate specification. In particular, Sax1 plays a
major role in fate determination of medial longitudinal fascicle neurons.
Finally, we discuss the available data on axon guidance mechanisms for the medial
longitudinal fascicle, which suggest that different guidance molecules such as
class 3 Semaphorins, Slits and Netrins act to determine the caudal and ventral
course of the medial longitudinal fascicle axons.

PMCID: PMC2375775
PMID: 17623036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2783-93. Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Helt determines GABAergic over glutamatergic neuronal fate by repressing Ngn
genes in the developing mesencephalon.

Nakatani T(1), Minaki Y, Kumai M, Ono Y.

Author information: 
(1)KAN Research Institute Inc., KobeMI R&D Center, 6-7-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, 
Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

The mechanism underlying the determination of neurotransmitter phenotype in the
developing mesencephalon, particularly GABAergic versus glutamatergic fate,
remains largely unknown. Here, we show in mice that the basic helix-loop-helix
transcriptional repressor gene Helt (also known as Megane and Heslike) functions 
as a selector gene that determines GABAergic over glutamatergic fate in the
mesencephalon. Helt was coincidently expressed in all the progenitor domains for 
mesencephalic GABAergic neurons. In the mesencephalon of Helt-deficient embryos, 
GABAergic neurons were mostly absent and glutamatergic neurons emerged instead.
Conversely, ectopically expressed Helt suppressed glutamatergic formation and
induced GABAergic neurogenesis. However, the Helt mutants showed normal
progenitor domain formation. In consequence, postmitotic expression of the
homeodomain factor Nkx2.2, which was specifically expressed by GABAergic
populations in wild-type embryos, was maintained despite the transmitter
phenotype conversion from GABAergic to glutamatergic in the Helt mutants,
suggesting that Helt is not involved in neuronal identity specification.
Furthermore, we identified proneural genes Ngn1 and Ngn2, which were selectively 
expressed in glutamatergic progenitors in the developing mesencephalon and had
the ability to confer the glutamatergic fate, as downstream target genes of Helt.
These results suggest that Helt determines GABAergic over glutamatergic fate, at 
least in part, by repressing Ngn (Neurog) genes and that basic helix-loop-helix
transcription factor networks involving Helt and Ngns are commonly used in the
mesencephalon for determination of the GABAergic versus glutamatergic transmitter
phenotype.

PMID: 17611227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Neurotrauma. 2007 Jun;24(6):1013-25.

Nkx2.2 expression in differentiation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells and
inhibitory factors for differentiation of oligodendrocytes after traumatic spinal
cord injury.

Suyama K(1), Watanabe M, Sakai D, Osada T, Imai M, Mochida J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Surgical Science, Tokai University School
of Medicine, Kanagawa, Japan.

Because successful remyelination does not occur following traumatic spinal cord
injury, patients suffer from long tract dysfunction. However, demyelination is
followed by remyelination in early multiple sclerosis. Oligodendrocyte precursor 
cells constitute a large cell population in the adult mammalian central nervous
system. We demonstrated the proliferation, migration, and differentiation of
oligodendrocyte precursor cells in chemically induced demyelination, a model for 
multiple sclerosis, and reported that Nkx2.2 expression may regulate
oligodendrocyte precursor cell differentiation, making it a key factor in the
differentiation. To investigate what factors disturb remyelination in spinal cord
injury, we examined the oligodendrocyte precursor cell proliferation and
differentiation, and the expression of Nkx2.2 using contusive injury in rats as a
model for traumatic spinal cord injury. This study showed that oligodendrocyte
precursor cells proliferated after contusive injury but did not subsequently
differentiate. The number of Nkx2.2-positive oligodendrocyte precursor cells did 
not significantly change in the tissue surrounding the lesion. Within the
demyelinating lesion, the peak of Nkx2.2-positive oligodendrocyte precursor cell 
was delayed, and its level was lower than in the chemical models. No clearly
recognizable oligodendrocytes were found in the demyelinating lesion throughout
the observation period. To assess whether environmental changes differ between
these two models, mRNA expressions of various cytokines were evaluated and
compared. IL-1beta and IL-6 mRNA significantly increased in the contusion-induced
injury model, 6 h after the injury. These results suggest that environmental
factors such as cytokines may affect Nkx2.2 expression or oligodendrocyte
precursor cell differentiation in the contusion-induced spinal cord injury model.

PMID: 17600517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Endocr J. 2007 Aug;54(4):507-15. Epub 2007 May 18.

Role of FoxO Proteins in Pancreatic beta Cells.

Kitamura T(1), Ido Kitamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Signal Research Center, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi 371-8512, Japan.

Forkhead transcription factors of the FoxO family have important roles in
cellular proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation and stress resistance. FoxO
proteins also play important roles in metabolism of complex organisms. FoxO1
regulates glucose and lipid metabolism in liver, as well as preadipocyte,
myoblast and vascular endothelial cell differentiation. In the hypothalamus, FoxO
controls food intake. In this chapter, we review the role of FoxO in pancreatic
beta cells. Pancreatic beta cells secrete insulin to maintain the plasma glucose 
levels in a strict physiological range. Defects of beta cell function cause
diabetes. The expression pattern of FoxO1 during pancreatic organogenesis is
similar to that of Pdx1, Nkx2.2 and Pax4, transcription factors known to be
critical for beta cell development. FoxO1 is expressed in a subset of pancreatic 
duct cells, in which insulin and/or Pdx1 are occasionally expressed. FoxO1
inhibits beta cell proliferation through suppression of Pdx1 by competing with
FoxA2 and protects against beta cell failure induced by oxidative stress through 
NeuroD and MafA induction. Thus, a series of FoxO1 studies in pancreas suggested 
that FoxO1 plays important roles in pancreatic beta cell differentiation,
neogenesis, proliferation and stress resistance. Genetic or pharmacological
manipulation of FoxO can be used to prevent beta cell failure or aid in the
differentiation of uncommitted endocrine progenitors into beta cells for
transplantation.

PMID: 17510498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Neuroscience. 2007 Jun 8;146(4):1546-54. Epub 2007 May 2.

Glial-restricted precursors: patterns of expression of opioid receptors and
relationship to human immunodeficiency virus-1 Tat and morphine susceptibility in
vitro.

Buch SK(1), Khurdayan VK, Lutz SE, Knapp PE, El-Hage N, Hauser KF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of Kentucky, College of
Medicine, 800 Rose Street, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.

Recent evidence suggests that human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-induced
pathogenesis is exacerbated by opioid abuse and that the synergistic toxicity may
result from direct actions of opioids in immature glia or glial precursors. To
assess whether opioids and HIV proteins are directly toxic to glial-restricted
precursors (GRPs), we isolated neural stem cells from the incipient spinal cord
of embryonic day 10.5 ICR mice. GRPs were characterized immunocytochemically and 
by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). At 1 day in vitro
(DIV), GRPs failed to express mu opioid receptors (MOR or MOP) or kappa-opioid
receptors (KOR or KOP); however, at 5 DIV, most GRPs expressed MOR and KOR. The
effects of morphine (500 nM) and/or Tat (100 nM) on GRP viability were assessed
in GRPs at 5 DIV by examining the apoptotic effector caspase-3 and cell viability
(ethidium monoazide exclusion) at 96 h following continuous exposure. Tat or
morphine alone or in combination caused significant increases in GRP cell death
at 96 h, but not at 24 h, following exposure. Although morphine or Tat caused
increases in caspase-3 activity at 4 h, this was not accompanied with increased
cleaved caspase-3 immunoreactive or ethidium monoazide-positive dying cells at 24
h. The results indicate that prolonged morphine or Tat exposure is intrinsically 
toxic to isolated GRPs and/or their progeny in vitro. Moreover, MOR and KOR are
widely expressed by Sox2 and/or Nkx2.2-positive GRPs in vitro and the pattern of 
receptor expression appears to be developmentally regulated. The temporal
requirement for prolonged morphine and HIV-1 Tat exposure to evoke toxicity in
glia may coincide with the attainment of a particular stage of maturation and/or 
the development of particular apoptotic effector pathways and may be unique to
spinal cord GRPs. Should similar patterns occur in vivo then we predict that
immature astroglia and oligodendroglia may be preferentially vulnerable to HIV-1 
infection or chronic opiate exposure.

PMCID: PMC4308314
PMID: 17478053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Diabetes. 2007 Aug;56(8):1999-2007. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

Nkx2.2 regulates beta-cell function in the mature islet.

Doyle MJ(1), Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Genetics,
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

Nkx2.2 is a homeodomain transcription factor that is critical for pancreatic
endocrine cell specification and differentiation in the developing mouse embryo. 
The purpose of this study was to determine whether Nkx2.2 is also required for
the maintenance and function of the mature beta-cell in the postnatal islet. We
have demonstrated previously that a repressor derivative of Nkx2.2 can
functionally substitute for endogenous Nkx2.2 to fully restore alpha- and
immature beta-cells in the embryonic islet; however, Nkx2.2 activator functions
appear to be required to form a functional beta-cell. In this study, we have
created transgenic mouse lines to express the Nkx2.2-repressor derivative in the 
mature beta-cell in the presence of endogenous Nkx2.2. The transgenic mice were
assessed for beta-cell function, overall islet structure, and expression of
beta-cell-specific markers. Using this transgenic approach, we have determined
that the Nkx2.2-repressor derivative disrupts endogenous Nkx2.2 expression in
adult mice and causes downregulation of the mature beta-cell factors, MafA and
Glut2. Consistently, the Nkx2.2-repressor mice display reduced insulin gene
expression and pancreatic insulin content and impaired insulin secretion. At
weaning, the male Nkx2.2-repressor mice are overtly diabetic and all
Nkx2.2-repressor transgenic mice exhibit glucose intolerance. Furthermore, the
loss of beta-cell function in the Nkx2.2-repressor transgenic mice is associated 
with disrupted islet architecture. These studies indicate a previously
undiscovered role for Nkx2.2 in the maintenance of mature beta-cell function and 
the formation of normal islet structure.

PMCID: PMC2805073
PMID: 17456846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Development. 2007 May;134(10):1977-89. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

Genomic characterization of Gli-activator targets in sonic hedgehog-mediated
neural patterning.

Vokes SA(1), Ji H, McCuine S, Tenzen T, Giles S, Zhong S, Longabaugh WJ, Davidson
EH, Wong WH, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) acts as a morphogen to mediate the specification of distinct
cell identities in the ventral neural tube through a Gli-mediated (Gli1-3)
transcriptional network. Identifying Gli targets in a systematic fashion is
central to the understanding of the action of Shh. We examined this issue in
differentiating neural progenitors in mouse. An epitope-tagged Gli-activator
protein was used to directly isolate cis-regulatory sequences by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP). ChIP products were then used to screen custom genomic
tiling arrays of putative Hedgehog (Hh) targets predicted from transcriptional
profiling studies, surveying 50-150 kb of non-transcribed sequence for each
candidate. In addition to identifying expected Gli-target sites, the data
predicted a number of unreported direct targets of Shh action. Transgenic
analysis of binding regions in Nkx2.2, Nkx2.1 (Titf1) and Rab34 established these
as direct Hh targets. These data also facilitated the generation of an algorithm 
that improved in silico predictions of Hh target genes. Together, these
approaches provide significant new insights into both tissue-specific and general
transcriptional targets in a crucial Shh-mediated patterning process.

PMID: 17442700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2007 Aug;33(4):431-9. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Relevance of combinatorial profiles of intermediate filaments and transcription
factors for glioma histogenesis.

Colin C(1), Virard I, Baeza N, Tchoghandjian A, Fernandez C, Bouvier C, Calisti
A, Tong S, Durbec P, Figarella-Branger D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biopathologie de l'Adhésion et de la Signalisation, EA3281,
IPHM, Faculté de Médecine Timone, Marseilles, France.

In order to define specific markers for histogenesis of three well-characterized 
subgroups of human gliomas (pilocytic astrocytomas, glioblastoma multiforme and
oligodendrogliomas), we studied the expression of relevant markers that
characterize gliomagenesis, by immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization.
They include the intermediate filament proteins glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), vimentin and nestin, the transcription factors Olig2, Nkx2.2 and Sox10,
and the proteolipid protein transcripts plp/dm20. We show that the three major
categories of human gliomas express a combinatorial profile of markers that gives
new insights to their histogenesis and may help diagnosis. Pilocytic astrocytomas
strongly express GFAP, vimentin, Olig2, Nkx2.2 and Sox10 but not nestin. In
contrast, glioblastomas strongly express GFAP, vimentin and nestin but these
tumours are heterogeneous regarding the expression of the transcription factors
studied. Finally, in oligodendrogliomas, intermediate filament proteins are
generally not observed whereas Olig2 was found in almost all tumour cells nuclei 
while only a subpopulation of tumour cells expressed Nkx2.2 and Sox10.

PMID: 17442061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Tissue Eng. 2007 Apr;13(4):775-88.

Transgene expression level and inherent differences in target gene activation
determine the rate and fate of neurogenin3-mediated islet cell differentiation in
vitro.

Boretti MI(1), Gooch KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, Institute for Medicine and Engineering,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

A significant challenge in many areas of tissue engineering is a readily
available source of cells. One approach to address this challenge is to direct
the differentiation of expandable stem or progenitor cells or the
transdifferentiation of an already differentiated cell type to the desired cell
type. A variety of methods have been explored for directing cell differentiation,
including the ectopic expression of transcriptional factors that are known to
influence cell differentiation during development. One such transcription factor,
neurogenin3 (Ngn3), plays a critical role in islet cell development in vivo.
Ectopic expression of Ngn3 in various cell types has previously been shown to
promote differentiation toward islet cell phenotypes, but the overall efficiency 
of this differentiation and the specific islet cell type produced vary widely
between reports. The present work evaluates the hypotheses that cellular response
is determined by (1) differentiation status of the starting cell, (2) basal
expression of other transcriptional factors, and (3) level of ectopic Ngn3
expression. Retroviral vectors were used to express Ngn3 in primary adult
pancreatic ductal epithelial cells (PDEC), embryonic and adult stem cells (ESC
and ASC), and transformed mouse pancreatic adenocarcinoma (mPAC) cells in vitro. 
Changes in phenotypes were assessed using quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR), gene arrays, and immunohistochemistry. When 
Ngn3 was ectopically expressed in mouse and rat PDEC, downstream transcription
factors (e.g., NeuroD, Nkx2.2, Isl-1) and endocrine hormones (most notably,
ghrelin and somatostatin) were highly upregulated in a dose-dependent manner. In 
comparison to mPAC and mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC), PDEC displayed higher
expression of most islet markers after normalization to Ngn3 levels. Differences 
in the basal expression and activation of transcription factors (e.g., Pax4,
Pax6, and Nkx6.1) were observed between cell types, suggesting a mechanism by
which precursors might preferentially generate different islet cell types.

PMID: 17355210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Development. 2007 Apr;134(8):1617-29. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Combinatorial actions of patterning and HLH transcription factors in the
spatiotemporal control of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing spinal
cord.

Sugimori M(1), Nagao M, Bertrand N, Parras CM, Guillemot F, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

During development, the three major neural cell lineages, neurons,
oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, differentiate in specific temporal orders at
topologically defined positions. How the timing and position of their generation 
are coordinately regulated remains poorly understood. Here, we provide evidence
that the transcription factors Pax6, Olig2 and Nkx2.2 (Nkx2-2), which define the 
positional identity of multipotent progenitors early in development, also play
crucial roles in controlling the timing of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the
developing ventral spinal cord. We show that each of these factors has a unique
ability to either enhance or inhibit the activities of the proneural
helix-loop-helix (HLH) factors Ngn1 (Neurog1), Ngn2 (Neurog2), Ngn3 (Neurog3) and
Mash1 (Ascl1), and the inhibitory HLH factors Id1 and Hes1, thereby regulating
both the timing of differentiation of multipotent progenitors and their fate.
Consistent with this, dynamic changes in their co-expression pattern in vivo are 
closely correlated to stage- and domain-specific generation of three neural cell 
lineages. We also show that genetic manipulations of their temporal expression
patterns in mice alter the timing of differentiation of neurons and glia. We
propose a molecular code model whereby the combinatorial actions of two classes
of transcription factors coordinately regulate the domain-specific temporal
sequence of neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the developing spinal cord.

PMID: 17344230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 15;304(2):875-90. Epub 2007 Jan 20.

Function and regulation of zebrafish nkx2.2a during development of pancreatic
islet and ducts.

Pauls S(1), Zecchin E, Tiso N, Bortolussi M, Argenton F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università di Padova, via U. Bassi 58/B, 35131
Padova, Italy.

In the mouse Nkx2.2 is expressed in the entire pancreatic anlage. Nevertheless,
absence of Nkx2.2 only perturbs the development of endocrine cell types, notably 
beta-cells which are completely absent. In order to test the possibility that
Nkx2.2 might fulfil additional functions during pancreas development we analysed 
its zebrafish homologue nkx2.2a using gene targeting and GFP-transgenic fish
lines. Our results suggest similar roles for nkx2.2a and Nkx2.2 during the
development of the endocrine pancreas. Morpholino-based knock-down of nkx2.2a
leads to a reduction of alpha- and beta-cell number and an increase of
ghrelin-producing cells but, as in mice, does not affect delta-cells. Moreover,
like in the mouse, two spatially distinct promoters regulate expression of
nkx2.2a in precursors and differentiated islet cells. In addition we found that
in zebrafish nkx2.2a is also expressed in the anterior pancreatic bud and, later,
in the differentiated pancreatic ducts. A nkx2.2a-transgenic line in which
pancreatic GFP expression is restricted to the pancreatic ducts revealed that
single GFP-positive cells leave the anterior pancreatic bud and move towards the 
islet where they form intercellular connections between each other. Subsequently,
these cells generate the branched network of the larval pancreatic ducts.
Morpholinos that block nkx2.2a function also lead to the absence of the
pancreatic ducts. We observed the same phenotype in ptf1a-morphants that are
additionally characterized by a reduced number of nkx2.2a-positive duct
precursors. Whereas important details of the molecular program leading to the
differentiation of endocrine cell types are conserved between mammals and
zebrafish, our results reveal a new function for nkx2.2a in the development of
the pancreatic ducts.

PMID: 17335795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Stem Cells Dev. 2006 Dec;15(6):953-62.

Generation and characterization of novel tetracycline-inducible pancreatic
transcription factor-expressing murine embryonic stem cell lines.

Vincent R(1), Treff N, Budde M, Kastenberg Z, Odorico J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public
Health, Madison, WI 53792, USA. rkvincent@wisc.edu

Pancreatic development in mammals is controlled in part by the expression and
function of numerous genes encoding transcription factors. Yet, how these
regulate each other and their target genes is incompletely understood. Embryonic 
stem (ES) cells have recently been shown to be capable of differentiating into
pancreatic progenitor cells and insulin-producing cells, representing a useful in
vitro model system for studying pancreatic and islet development. To generate
tools to study the relationships of transcription factors in pancreatic
development we have established seven unique mouse ES cell lines with
tetracycline-inducible expression of either Hnf4alpha, Hnf6, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1,
Pax4, Pdx1, and Ptf1a cDNAs. Each of the cell lines was characterized for
induction of transgene expression after exposure to doxycycline (DOX) by
quantitative real-time PCR and immunofluorescence microscopy. Transgene
expression in the presence of DOX was at least 97-fold that seen in untreated
cells. Immunofluorescent staining of DOX-treated cultures showed efficient (>95% 
of cells) transgene protein expression while showing <5% positive staining in
uninduced cells. Each of the ES cell lines maintained their pluripotency as
measured by teratoma formation. Furthermore, transgene expression can be
efficiently achieved in vivo through DOX administration to mice. The
establishment of ES cell lines with temporally controllable induction of critical
pancreatic transcription factor genes provides a new set of tools that could be
used to interrogate gene regulatory networks in pancreatic development and
potentially generate greater numbers of beta cells from ES cells.

PMID: 17253956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Development. 2007 Feb;134(3):515-23. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

Nkx2.2-repressor activity is sufficient to specify alpha-cells and a small number
of beta-cells in the pancreatic islet.

Doyle MJ(1), Loomis ZL, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology, University of Colorado at Denver Health Sciences
Center, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

The homeodomain protein Nkx2.2 (Nkx2-2) is a key regulator of pancreatic islet
cell specification in mice; Nkx2.2 is essential for the differentiation of all
insulin-producing beta-cells and of the majority of glucagon-producing
alpha-cells, and, in its absence, these cell types are converted to a ghrelin
cell fate. To understand the molecular functions of Nkx2.2 that regulate these
early cell-fate decisions during pancreatic islet development, we created
Nkx2.2-dominant-derivative transgenic mice. In the absence of endogenous Nkx2.2, 
the Nkx2.2-Engrailed-repressor derivative is sufficient to fully rescue
glucagon-producing alpha-cells and to partially rescue insulin-producing
beta-cells. Interestingly, the insulin-positive cells that do form in the rescued
mice do not express the mature beta-cell markers MafA or Glut2 (Slc2a2),
suggesting that additional activator functions of Nkx2.2 are required for
beta-cell maturation. To explore the mechanism by which Nkx2.2 functions as a
repressor in the islet, we assessed the pancreatic expression of the Groucho
co-repressors, Grg1, Grg2, Grg3 and Grg4 (Tle1-Tle4), which have been shown to
interact with and modulate Nkx2.2 function. We determined that Grg3 is highly
expressed in the embryonic pancreas in a pattern similar to Nkx2.2. Furthermore, 
we show that Grg3 physically interacts with Nkx2.2 through its TN domain. These
studies suggest that Nkx2.2 functions predominantly as a transcriptional
repressor during specification of endocrine cell types in the pancreas.

PMCID: PMC2805074
PMID: 17202186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2007 Mar;34(3):310-23. Epub 2006 Dec 28.

Human oligodendrocytes derived from embryonic stem cells: Effect of noggin on
phenotypic differentiation in vitro and on myelination in vivo.

Izrael M(1), Zhang P, Kaufman R, Shinder V, Ella R, Amit M, Itskovitz-Eldor J,
Chebath J, Revel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

In attempts to produce mature oligodendrocytes from human embryonic stem (huES)
cells, we searched conditions inducing transcription factors Olig1/2, as well as 
Nkx2.2 and Sox10, which are needed for maturation. This was obtained by retinoic 
acid treatment followed by noggin, an antagonist of bone morphogenetic proteins
(BMPs). We found that retinoic acid induces BMPs in huES cells. Addition of
noggin at a specific step was essential to form numerous mature oligodendrocytes 
with ramified branches and producing myelin basic protein (MBP). We describe a
procedure converting huES cells into enriched populations of oligodendrocyte
precursors that can be expanded and passaged repeatedly and subsequently
differentiated into mature cells. Transplantation of such precursors showed that 
pretreatment by noggin markedly stimulates their capacity to myelinate in the
brain of MBP-deficient shiverer mice in organotypic cultures and in living
animals. Arrays of numerous long MBP+ fibers were generated over extended areas
in the brain, with evidence of cell migration after transplantation and with
formation of compact myelin sheaths.

PMID: 17196394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2006 Dec;65(12):1149-56.

Expression of oligodendroglial and astrocytic lineage markers in diffuse gliomas:
use of YKL-40, ApoE, ASCL1, and NKX2-2.

Rousseau A(1), Nutt CL, Betensky RA, Iafrate AJ, Han M, Ligon KL, Rowitch DH,
Louis DN.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, 149 13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

The phenotypic heterogeneity of astrocytic and oligodendroglial tumor cells
complicates establishing accurate diagnostic criteria, and lineage-specific
markers would facilitate diagnosis of glioma subtypes. Based on data from the
literature and from expression microarrays, we selected molecules relevant to
gliogenesis and glial lineage specificity and then used immunohistochemistry to
assess expression of these molecules in 55 diffuse gliomas, including 8 biphasic 
oligoastrocytomas, 21 oligodendrogliomas (all with 1p/19qloss), 21 astrocytomas, 
and 5 glioblastomas. For the astrocytic lineage markers (GFAP, YKL-40, and ApoE),
GFAP expression was significantly higher in the astrocytic component of
oligoastrocytomas compared with the oligodendroglial part; similar patterns were 
detected for YKL-40 and ApoE, although the differences were not significant.
GFAP, YKL-40, and ApoE reliably distinguished grade II-III oligodendrogliomas
from grade II-IV astrocytomas (p < 0.0001, p = 0.002, and p < 0.0001,
respectively). Among the oligodendroglial lineage markers (Olig2, Sox10, ASCL1,
and NKX2-2), ASCL1 and NKX2-2 displayed significantly different immunostaining
between oligodendrogliomas and astrocytomas (p = 0.017 and 0.004, respectively), 
but none clearly differentiated between the 2 glial populations of
oligoastrocytomas. In addition to GFAP, therefore, YKL-40, ApoE, ASCL1, and
NKX2-2 represent promising tumor cell markers to distinguish oligodendrogliomas
from astrocytomas.

PMID: 17146289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Stem Cell Rev. 2006;2(1):5-10.

Specification and differentiation of serotonergic neurons.

Alenina N(1), Bashammakh S, Bader M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin-Buch, Germany.

Serotonin is an important neurotransmitter with multiple functions in the whole
central nervous system. Its synthesis, however, is restricted to a very limited
number of cells in the brainstem raphe nuclei with a vast axonal network. These
cells express markers of the serotonin lineage such as the rate-limiting enzyme
in serotonin synthesis, tryptophan hydroxylase 2, the serotonin transporter, and 
the transcription factor Pet1. Pet1 together with Lmx1b, Nkx2.2, Mash1, Gata2,
Gata3, and Phox2b form a transcriptional network, which specifies the
differentiation of serotonergic neurons around embryonic day 11 in the mouse.
These cells are generated in rhombomeres r1-r3 and r5-r7 caudal to the midbrain- 
hindbrain organizer under the control of the fibroblast growth factors 4 and 8
and sonic hedgehog (SHH) from precursors, which have produced motoneurons before.
Because serotonin is a relevant pathophysiological factor in several neurological
diseases such as bipolar disorder and depression tools to generate or maintain
serotonergic neurons might be of therapeutic value. Such tools can be assessed in
embryonic stem cells, which can be differentiated in vitro to produce
serotonergic neurons. Culture systems for these cells including embryoid bodies
based and monolayer differentiation have been established, which allows the
generation of up to 50% serotonergic neurons in all neurons developed.

PMID: 17142880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Neurosci. 2006 Nov 15;26(46):11948-60.

Growth factor treatment and genetic manipulation stimulate neurogenesis and
oligodendrogenesis by endogenous neural progenitors in the injured adult spinal
cord.

Ohori Y(1), Yamamoto S, Nagao M, Sugimori M, Yamamoto N, Nakamura K, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Neurons and oligodendrocytes are highly vulnerable to various insults, and their 
spontaneous replacement occurs to only a limited extent after damage in the adult
spinal cord. The environment of injured tissue is thus thought to restrict the
regenerative capacity of endogenous neural stem/progenitor cells; strategies for 
overcoming such restrictions remain to be developed. Here, we combined growth
factor treatment and genetic manipulation to stimulate neurogenesis and
oligodendrogenesis by endogenous progenitors in vivo. The recombinant retrovirus 
pMXIG, which was designed to coexpress green fluorescent proteins (GFPs) and a
neurogenic/gliogenic transcription factor, was directly injected into the injured
spinal cord parenchyma to manipulate proliferative cells in situ. We found that
cells expressing Olig2, Nkx2.2, and NG2 were enriched among virus-infected,
GFP-positive (GFP+) cells. Moreover, a fraction of GFP+ cells formed neurospheres
and differentiated into neurons, astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes in vitro,
demonstrating that GFP retroviruses indeed infected endogenous neural progenitors
in vivo. Neuronal differentiation of control virus-infected cells did not occur
at a detectable level in the injured spinal cord. We found, however, that direct 
administration of fibroblast growth factor 2 and epidermal growth factor into
lesioned tissue could induce a significant fraction of GFP-labeled cells to
express immature neuronal markers. Moreover, retrovirus-mediated overexpression
of the basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors Neurogenin2 and Mash1,
together with growth factor treatment, enhanced the production and maturation of 
new neurons and oligodendrocytes, respectively. These results demonstrate that
endogenous neural progenitors can be manipulated to replace neurons and
oligodendrocytes lost to insults in the injured spinal cord.

PMID: 17108169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 15;302(2):683-93. Epub 2006 Oct 10.

Induction of oligodendrocyte differentiation by Olig2 and Sox10: evidence for
reciprocal interactions and dosage-dependent mechanisms.

Liu Z(1), Hu X, Cai J, Liu B, Peng X, Wegner M, Qiu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, School of Medicine,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Recent studies have suggested that oligodendrocyte development is likely to be
under the control of a hierarchy of lineage-specific transcription factors. In
the developing mouse spinal cord, expression of Olig2, Sox10 and Nkx2.2 is
sequentially up-regulated in cells of oligodendrocyte lineage. These
transcription factors play essential roles in oligodendrocyte specification and
differentiation. However, the regulatory relationship and functional interactions
among these transcription factors have not been determined. In this study, we
systematically investigated the function and hierarchical relationship of Olig2, 
Sox10 and Nkx2.2 transcription factors in the control of oligodendrocyte
differentiation. It was found that over-expression of Olig2 is sufficient to
induce Sox10, Nkx2.2 and precocious oligodendrocyte differentiation in embryonic 
chicken spinal cord. Sox10 expression alone is also sufficient to stimulate
ectopic oligodendrocyte differentiation and weakly induce Nkx2.2 expression.
Although genetic evidence indicated that Sox10 functions downstream of Olig2,
Sox10 activity can modulate Olig2 expression. In addition, we presented evidence 
that the control of oligodendrocyte differentiation by Olig2, Sox10 and Nkx2.2 is
a dosage-dependent developmental process and can be affected by both
haploinsufficiency and over-dosage.

PMID: 17098222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Dec 15;15(24):3508-19. Epub 2006 Nov 2.

Intragenic deletion of Tgif causes defectsin brain development.

Kuang C(1), Xiao Y, Yang L, Chen Q, Wang Z, Conway SJ, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of
Medicine and the Walther Cancer Institute, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

TG-interacting factor (TGIF) is a homeodomain-containing protein and functions as
a transcriptional repressor within the TGF-beta and retinoic acid signaling
pathways. Heterozygous mutations of TGIF have been found in patients with
holoprosencephaly (HPE), which is the most common congenital brain malformation
in humans. However, targeted null deletions of the entire Tgif gene in mice
surprisingly revealed no apparent brain defects. We report here that deletion of 
the third exon of Tgif gene resulted in a defined spectrum of brain developmental
defects including exencephaly, microcephaly, HPE, and abnormalities in embryonic 
brain ventricle formation and cleavage. These defects could be detected in mice
both heterozygous and homozygous for the targeted Tgif deletion. Moreover,
expression of dorsal-ventral patterning genes including Shh, Pax6 and Nkx2.2 was 
altered. The ventricular neuroepithelium exhibited focalized increase of cell
proliferation rate and resultant tissue expansion. The incidence of brain
abnormalities within the mutant mice was dependent on its genetic background,
suggesting that additional genetic modifiers functionally interact with Tgif
during embryonic brain development. The intragenic Tgif deletion mouse,
therefore, would serve as a useful model that can be used to unravel the genetic 
complexity implicated in the pathogenesis of HPE.

PMID: 17082251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Eur J Neurosci. 2006 Oct;24(7):1885-96.

Transplanted dopamine neurons derived from primate ES cells preferentially
innervate DARPP-32 striatal progenitors within the graft.

Ferrari D(1), Sanchez-Pernaute R, Lee H, Studer L, Isacson O.

Author information: 
(1)McLean Hospital/Harvard University Udall Parkinson's Disease Research Center
of Excellence, 115 Mill St, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.

The correct identity and functional capacity of transplanted dopamine (DA)
neurons derived in vitro from embryonic stem (ES) cells is a critical factor for 
the development of an ES cell-based replacement therapy for Parkinson's disease. 
We transplanted primate Cyno-1 ES cells differentiated in vitro for 4 (progenitor
ES cells) or 6 (differentiated ES cells) weeks, or control fetal primate cells
into the striatum of hemi-parkinsonian rats. Partial behavioral recovery in
amphetamine-induced rotation was correlated with the number of ES-derived
tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (TH+) neurons in the grafts (r=0.5, P<0.05). Post
mortem analysis of ES-derived grafts revealed TH+neurons with mature morphology, 
similar to fetal DA neurons, and expression of midbrain transcription factors,
such as Engrailed (En) and Nurr-1. While the total number of TH+neurons was not
different between the two groups, TH/En co-expression was significantly higher
(>90%) in grafts from differentiated ES cells than in grafts derived from
progenitor cells (<50%), reflecting a more heterogeneous cellular composition.
Within the grafts there was an overlap between ES-derived TH+axonal arbors and
clusters of primate ES-derived striatal neurons expressing brain factor 1 (Bf-1, 
Foxg1) and DA and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein (DARPP-32). Such overlap was
never observed for other regional transcription factors that define neighboring
forebrain domains in the developing brain, such as Nkx2.1 (medial ganglionic
eminence), Nkx2.2 (pallidal and diencephalic progenitors) or Pax6 (dorsal
telencephalic progenitors). Despite the heterogeneity of ES-derived graft cell
composition, these results demonstrate normal phenotypic specification, conserved
natural axonal target selectivity and functionality of DA neurons derived from
primate ES cells.

PMCID: PMC2602801
PMID: 17067292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Stem Cells. 2007 Feb;25(2):340-53. Epub 2006 Oct 19.

NG2 and Olig2 expression provides evidence for phenotypic deregulation of
cultured central nervous system and peripheral nervous system neural precursor
cells.

Dromard C(1), Bartolami S, Deleyrolle L, Takebayashi H, Ripoll C, Simonneau L,
Prome S, Puech S, Tran VB, Duperray C, Valmier J, Privat A, Hugnot JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U583, Physiopathologie et Thérapie des Déficits Sensoriels et Moteurs
Institut des Neurosciences de Montpellier, Hôpital St ELOI, BP 74103 80, avenue
Augustin Fliche 34091 Montpellier Cedex 05, France.

Neural stem cells cultured with fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2)/epidermal
growth factor (EGF) generate clonal expansions called neurospheres (NS), which
are widely used for therapy in animal models. However, their cellular composition
is still poorly defined. Here, we report that NS derived from several embryonic
and adult central nervous system (CNS) regions are composed mainly of remarkable 
cells coexpressing radial glia markers (BLBP, RC2, GLAST),
oligodendrogenic/neurogenic factors (Mash1, Olig2, Nkx2.2), and markers that in
vivo are typical of the oligodendrocyte lineage (NG2, A2B5, PDGFR-alpha). On NS
differentiation, the latter remain mostly expressed in neurons, together with
Olig2 and Mash1. Using cytometry, we show that in growing NS the small population
of multipotential self-renewing NS-forming cells are A2B5(+) and NG2(+).
Additionally, we demonstrate that these NS-forming cells in the embryonic spinal 
cord were initially NG2(-) and rapidly acquired NG2 in vitro. NG2 and Olig2 were 
found to be rapidly induced by cell culture conditions in spinal cord neural
precursor cells. Olig2 expression was also induced in astrocytes and embryonic
peripheral nervous system (PNS) cells in culture after EGF/FGF treatment. These
data provide new evidence for profound phenotypic modifications in CNS and PNS
neural precursor cells induced by culture conditions.

PMID: 17053213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Comp Neurol. 2006 Dec 10;499(5):745-67.

Chicken lateral septal organ and other circumventricular organs form in a
striatal subdomain abutting the molecular striatopallidal border.

Bardet SM(1), Cobos I, Puelles E, Martínez-De-La-Torre M, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, Medical School, University of
Murcia, Murcia E30071, Spain.

The avian lateral septal organ (LSO) is a telencephalic circumventricular
specialization with liquor-contacting neurons (Kuenzel and van Tienhoven [1982]
J. Comp. Neurol. 206:293-313). We studied the topological position of the chicken
LSO relative to molecular borders defined previously within the telencephalic
subpallium (Puelles et al. [2000] J. Comp. Neurol. 424:409-438). Differential
expression of Dlx5 and Nkx2.1 homeobox genes, or the Shh gene encoding a secreted
morphogen, allows distinction of striatal, pallidal, and preoptic subpallial
sectors. The chicken LSO complex was characterized chemoarchitectonically from
embryonic to posthatching stages, by using immunohistochemistry for calbindin,
tyrosine hydroxylase, NKX2.1, and BEN proteins and in situ hybridization for
Nkx2.1, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Shh, and Dlx5 mRNA. Medial and lateral parts of LSO
appear, respectively, at the striatal part of the septum and adjacent bottom of
the lateral ventricle (accumbens), in lateral continuity with another
circumventricular organ that forms along a thin subregion of the entire striatum,
abutting the molecular striatopallidal boundary; we called this the
"striatopallidal organ" (SPO). The SPO displays associated distal periventricular
cells, which are lacking in the LSO. Moreover, the SPO is continuous
caudomedially with a thin, linear ependymal specialization found around the
extended amygdala and preoptic areas. This differs from SPO and LSO in some
molecular aspects. We tentatively identified this structure as being composed of 
an "extended amygdala organ" (EAO) and a "preoptohypothalamic organ" (PHO). The
position of LSO, SPO, EAO, and PHO within a linear Dlx5-expressing ventricular
domain that surrounds the Nkx2.1-expressing pallidopreoptic domain provides an
unexpected insight into possible common and differential causal mechanisms
underlying their formation.

PMID: 17048229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Dev Biol. 2007 Jan 1;301(1):117-29. Epub 2006 Sep 16.

Discontinuous organization and specification of the lateral floor plate in
zebrafish.

Schäfer M(1), Kinzel D, Winkler C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Am
Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

The floor plate is a signaling center in the ventral neural tube of vertebrates
with important functions during neural patterning and axon guidance. It is
composed of a centrally located medial floor plate (MFP) and a bilaterally
positioned lateral floor plate (LFP). While the role of the MFP as source of
signaling molecules like, e.g., Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is well understood, the
exact organization and function of the LFP are currently unclear. Based on
expression analyses, the one cell wide LFP in zebrafish has been postulated to be
a homogenous structure. We instead show that the zebrafish trunk LFP is
discontinuously arranged. Single LFP cells alternate with p3 neuronal precursor
cells, which develop V3 interneurons along the anteroposterior (AP) axis. Our
mutant analyses indicate that both, formation of LFP and p3 cells require
Delta-Notch signaling. Importantly, however, the two cell types are
differentially regulated by Hedgehog (HH) and Nkx2.2 activities. This implicates 
a novel mechanism of neural tube patterning, in which distinct cell populations
within one domain of the ventral neural tube are differently specified along the 
AP axis. We conclude that different levels of HH and Nkx2.2 activities are
responsible for the alternating appearance of LFP and p3 neuronal progenitor
cells in the zebrafish ventral neural tube.

PMID: 17045256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Stem Cells. 2007 Jan;25(1):2-9. Epub 2006 Oct 5.

Concise review: epigenetic mechanisms contribute to pluripotency and cell lineage
determination of embryonic stem cells.

Gan Q(1), Yoshida T, McDonald OG, Owens GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

Epigenetic mechanisms, such as histone modifications and DNA methylation, have
been shown to play a key role in the regulation of gene transcription. Results of
recent studies indicate that a novel "bivalent" chromatin structure marks key
developmental genes in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), wherein a number of
untranscribed lineage-control genes, such as Sox1, Nkx2-2, Msx1, Irx3, and Pax3, 
are epigenetically modified with a unique combination of activating and
repressive histone modifications that prime them for potential activation (or
repression) upon cell lineage induction and differentiation. However, results of 
these studies also showed that a subset of lineage-control genes, such as Myf5
and Mash1, were not marked by these histone modifications, suggesting that
distinct epigenetic mechanisms might exist for lineage-control genes in ESCs. In 
this review article, we summarize evidence regarding possible mechanisms that
control these unique histone modifications at lineage-control gene loci in ESCs
and consider their possible contribution to ESC pluripotency. In addition, we
propose a novel "histone modification pulsing" model wherein individual
pluripotent stem cells within the inner cell mass of blastocysts undergo
transient asynchronous histone modifications at these developmental gene loci,
thereby conferring differential responsiveness to environmental cues and
morphogenic gradients important for cell lineage determination. Finally, we
consider how these rapid histone modification exchanges become progressively more
stable as ESCs undergo differentiation and maturation into specialized cell
lineages.

PMID: 17023513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Neurosci. 2006 Sep 20;26(38):9722-35.

Identification of Sox17 as a transcription factor that regulates oligodendrocyte 
development.

Sohn J(1), Natale J, Chew LJ, Belachew S, Cheng Y, Aguirre A, Lytle J,
Nait-Oumesmar B, Kerninon C, Kanai-Azuma M, Kanai Y, Gallo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC 20010, USA.

Microarray analysis of oligodendrocyte lineage cells purified by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) from 2',3'-cyclic nucleotide
3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP)-enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) transgenic
mice revealed Sox17 (SRY-box containing gene 17) gene expression to be
coordinately regulated with that of four myelin genes during postnatal
development. In CNP-EGFP-positive (CNP-EGFP+) cells, Sox17 mRNA and protein
levels transiently increased between postnatal days 2 and 15, with white matter
O4+ preoligodendrocytes expressing greater Sox17 levels than Nkx2.2+ (NK2
transcription factor related, locus 2) NG2+, or GalC+ (galactocerebroside) cells.
In spinal cord, Sox17 protein expression was undetectable in the primary motor
neuron domain between embryonic days 12.5 and 15.5 but was evident in Nkx2.2+ and
CC1+ cells. In cultured oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs), Sox17 levels
were maximal in O4+ cells and peaked during the phenotypic conversion from
bipolar to multipolar. Parallel increases in Sox17 and p27 occurred before MBP
protein expression, and Sox17 upregulation was prevented by conditions inhibiting
differentiation. Sox17 downregulation with small interfering RNAs increased OPC
proliferation and decreased lineage progression after mitogen withdrawal, whereas
Sox17 overexpression in the presence of mitogen had opposite effects. Sox17
overexpression enhanced myelin gene expression in OPCs and directly stimulated
MBP gene promoter activity. These findings support important roles for Sox17 in
controlling both oligodendrocyte progenitor cell cycle exit and differentiation.

PMID: 16988043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Dev Cell. 2006 Sep;11(3):325-37.

Wnt signaling inhibitors regulate the transcriptional response to morphogenetic
Shh-Gli signaling in the neural tube.

Lei Q(1), Jeong Y, Misra K, Li S, Zelman AK, Epstein DJ, Matise MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 675 Hoes Lane,
Piscataway, 08854, USA.

Shh-Gli signaling controls cell fates in the developing ventral neural tube by
regulating the patterned expression of transcription factors in neural
progenitors. However, the molecular mechanisms that limit target gene responses
to specific domains are unclear. Here, we show that Wnt pathway inhibitors
regulate the threshold response of a ventral Shh target gene, Nkx2.2, to
establish its restricted expression in the ventral spinal cord. Identification
and characterization of an Nkx2.2 enhancer reveals that expression is directly
regulated by positive Shh-Gli signaling and negative Tcf repressor activity. Our 
data indicate that the dorsal limit of Nkx2.2 is controlled by Tcf4-mediated
transcriptional repression, and not by a direct requirement for high-level
Shh-Gli signaling, arguing against a simple model based on differential Gli
factor affinities in target genes. These results identify a transcriptional
mechanism that integrates graded Shh and Wnt signaling to define progenitor gene 
expression domains and cell fates in the neural tube.

PMID: 16950124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Stem Cells. 2006 Nov;24(11):2514-21. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

Direct derivation of neural rosettes from cloned bovine blastocysts: a model of
early neurulation events and neural crest specification in vitro.

Lazzari G(1), Colleoni S, Giannelli SG, Brunetti D, Colombo E, Lagutina I, Galli 
C, Broccoli V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Tecnologie della Riproduzione, Istituto Sperimentale Italiano
Lazzaro Spallanzani, CIZ s.r.l., Cremona, Italy. giovannalazzari@galli2.it

Embryonic stem cells differentiate into neuroectodermal cells under specific
culture conditions. In primates, these cells are organized into rosettes
expressing Pax6 and Sox1 and are responsive to inductive signals such as Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) and retinoic acid. However, direct derivation of organized
neuroectoderm in vitro from preimplantation mammalian embryos has never been
reported. Here, we show that bovine inner cell masses from nuclear transfer and
fertilized embryos, grown on feeders in serum-free medium, form polarized rosette
structures expressing nestin, Pax6, Pax7, Sox1, and Otx2 and exhibiting
interkinetic nuclear migration activity and cell junction distribution as in the 
developing neural tube. After in vitro expansion, neural rosettes give rise to
p75-positive neural crest precursor cell lines capable of long-term proliferation
and differentiation in autonomic and sensory peripheral neurons, glial cells,
melanocytes, smooth muscle cells, and chondrocytes, recapitulating in vitro the
unique plasticity of the neural crest lineage. Challenging the rosette dorsal
fate by early exposure to Shh induces the expression of ventral markers Isl1,
Nkx2.2, and Nkx6.1 and differentiation of mature astrocytes and neurons of
central nervous system ventral identity, demonstrating appropriate response to
inductive signals. All together, these findings indicate that neural rosettes
directly derived from cloned and fertilized bovine embryos represent an in vitro 
model of early neural specification and differentiation events. Moreover, this
study provides a source of highly proliferative neural crest precursor cell lines
of wide differentiation potential for cell therapy and tissue engineering
applications.

PMID: 16931774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 15;298(2):415-29. Epub 2006 Jul 4.

Gata6 is an important regulator of mouse pancreas development.

Decker K(1), Goldman DC, Grasch CL, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado at Denver Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO
80045, USA.

Gata4, Gata5, and Gata6 represent a subfamily of zinc-finger transcriptional
regulators that are important in the development and differentiation of numerous 
tissues, including many endodermally-derived organs. We demonstrate that Gata4
and Gata6 have overlapping expression patterns in the early pancreatic
epithelium. Later, Gata4 becomes restricted to exocrine tissue and Gata6 becomes 
restricted to a subset of endocrine cells. In addition, we show Gata6, but not
Gata4, physically interacts with Nkx2.2, an essential islet transcription factor.
To begin determining the roles that Gata4 and Gata6 play during pancreatic
development, we expressed Gata4-Engrailed and Gata6-Engrailed dominant repressor 
fusion proteins in the pancreatic epithelium and in the islet. At e17.5,
transgenic Gata6-Engrailed embryos exhibit two distinct phenotypes: a complete
absence of pancreas or a reduction in pancreatic tissue. In the embryos that do
form pancreas, there is a significant reduction of all pancreatic cell types,
with the few differentiated endocrine cells clustered within, or in close
proximity to, enlarged ductal structures. Conversely, the majority of transgenic 
Gata4-Engrailed embryos do not have a pancreatic phenotype. This study suggests
that Gata6 is an important regulator of pancreas specification.

PMCID: PMC2824170
PMID: 16887115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Diabetes. 2006 Aug;55(8):2379-86.

Association studies of variants in the genes involved in pancreatic beta-cell
function in type 2 diabetes in Japanese subjects.

Yokoi N(1), Kanamori M, Horikawa Y, Takeda J, Sanke T, Furuta H, Nanjo K, Mori H,
Kasuga M, Hara K, Kadowaki T, Tanizawa Y, Oka Y, Iwami Y, Ohgawara H, Yamada Y,
Seino Y, Yano H, Cox NJ, Seino S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Because impaired insulin secretion is characteristic of type 2 diabetes in
Asians, including Japanese, the genes involved in pancreatic beta-cell function
are candidate susceptibility genes for type 2 diabetes. We examined the
association of variants in genes encoding several transcription factors (TCF1,
TCF2, HNF4A, ISL1, IPF1, NEUROG3, PAX6, NKX2-2, NKX6-1, and NEUROD1) and genes
encoding the ATP-sensitive K(+) channel subunits Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) and SUR1 (ABCC8)
with type 2 diabetes in a Japanese cohort of 2,834 subjects. The exon 16 -3c/t
variant rs1799854 in ABCC8 showed a significant association (P = 0.0073), and
variants in several genes showed nominally significant associations (P < 0.05)
with type 2 diabetes. Although the E23K variant rs5219 in KCNJ11 showed no
association with diabetes in Japanese (for the K allele, odds ratio [OR] 1.08
[95% CI 0.97-1.21], P = 0.15), 95% CI around the OR overlaps in meta-analysis of 
European populations, suggesting that our results are not inconsistent with the
previous studies. This is the largest association study so far conducted on these
genes in Japanese and provides valuable information for comparison with other
ethnic groups.

PMID: 16873704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;26(15):5735-43.

FoxA2, Nkx2.2, and PDX-1 regulate islet beta-cell-specific mafA expression
through conserved sequences located between base pairs -8118 and -7750 upstream
from the transcription start site.

Raum JC(1), Gerrish K, Artner I, Henderson E, Guo M, Sussel L, Schisler JC,
Newgard CB, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medical Center,723 Light Hall, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The MafA transcription factor is both critical to islet beta-cell function and
has a unique pancreatic cell-type-specific expression pattern. To localize the
potential transcriptional regulatory region(s) involved in directing expression
to the beta cell, areas of identity within the 5' flanking region of the mouse,
human, and rat mafA genes were found between nucleotides -9389 and -9194, -8426
and -8293, -8118 and -7750, -6622 and -6441, -6217 and -6031, and -250 and +56
relative to the transcription start site. The identity between species was
greater than 75%, with the highest found between bp -8118 and -7750 (
approximately 94%, termed region 3). Region 3 was the only upstream mammalian
conserved region found in chicken mafA (88% identity). In addition, region 3
uniquely displayed beta-cell-specific activity in cell-line-based reporter
assays. Important regulators of beta-cell formation and function, PDX-1, FoxA2,
and Nkx2.2, were shown to specifically bind to region 3 in vivo using the
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Mutational and functional analyses
demonstrated that FoxA2 (bp -7943 to -7910), Nkx2.2 (bp -7771 to -7746), and
PDX-1 (bp -8087 to -8063) mediated region 3 activation. Consistent with a role in
transcription, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of PDX-1 led to decreased
mafA mRNA production in INS-1-derived beta-cell lines (832/13 and 832/3), while
MafA expression was undetected in the pancreatic epithelium of Nkx2.2 null
animals. These results suggest that beta-cell-type-specific mafA transcription is
principally controlled by region 3-acting transcription factors that are
essential in the formation of functional beta cells.

PMCID: PMC1592775
PMID: 16847327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Physiol. 2006 Sep 1;575(Pt 2):403-10. Epub 2006 Jul 6.

Genetic networks controlling the development of midbrain dopaminergic neurons.

Prakash N(1), Wurst W.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Technical University 
Munich, Institute of Developmental Genetics, Ingolstaedter Landstr. 1, D-85764
Munich/Neuherberg, Germany.

Recent data have substantially advanced our understanding of midbrain
dopaminergic neuron development. Firstly, a Wnt1-regulated genetic network,
including Otx2 and Nkx2-2, and a Shh-controlled genetic cascade, including Lmx1a,
Msx1 and Nkx6-1, have been unravelled, acting in parallel or sequentially to
establish a territory competent for midbrain dopaminergic precursor production at
relatively early stages of neural development. Secondly, the same factors (Wnt1
and Lmx1a/Msx1) appear to regulate midbrain dopaminergic and/or neuronal fate
specification in the postmitotic progeny of these precursors by controlling the
expression of midbrain dopaminergic-specific and/or general proneural factors at 
later stages of neural development. For the first time, early inductive events
have thus been linked to later differentiation processes in midbrain dopaminergic
neuron development. Given the pivotal importance of this neuronal population for 
normal function of the human brain and its involvement in severe neurological and
psychiatric disorders such as Parkinson's Disease, these advances open new
prospects for potential stem cell-based therapies. We will summarize these new
findings in the overall context of midbrain dopaminergic neuron development in
this review.

PMCID: PMC1819467
PMID: 16825303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Exp Neurol. 2006 Oct;201(2):349-58. Epub 2006 Jun 30.

Cytoplasmic translocation of Olig2 in adult glial progenitors marks the
generation of reactive astrocytes following autoimmune inflammation.

Cassiani-Ingoni R(1), Coksaygan T, Xue H, Reichert-Scrivner SA, Wiendl H, Rao MS,
Magnus T.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular Immunology Section, Neuroimmunology Branch, National Institute of
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA. cassianr@ninds.nih.gov

The injury response in the brain involves complex interplay between neural and
immune components. Following inflammatory insults to the adult CNS, formation of 
an astroglial scar often impedes functional repair. Glial progenitor cells
expressing the nuclear transcription factor Olig2 possibly generate astrocytes in
response to various types of injuries; however, the mechanisms underlying this
differentiation are unclear. In a model of immune-mediated injury
(MOG(35-55)-experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis), we show that the
conversion from progenitor to reactive astrocyte is marked by the translocation
of Olig2 into the cytoplasm. Evidence of this process is found for months after
disease initiation in the absence of new inflammatory infiltrates. A proportion
of cells with cytoplasmic Olig2 was found to express NG2 or Nkx2.2, but only
Nkx2.2 was occasionally retained by GFAP+ cells. We further show that
differentiation to astrocytes is induced in glial progenitors in vitro through
exposure to the pro-inflammatory cytokine IFN-gamma, but not to TNF-alpha.
Together, these data ascribe a pivotal role to Olig2+ glial precursor cells in
the adult CNS, linking autoimmune inflammation and glial scar formation.

PMID: 16814281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Nat Genet. 2006 Jul;38(7):835-41. Epub 2006 Jun 11.

Epigenetic characterization of the early embryo with a chromatin
immunoprecipitation protocol applicable to small cell populations.

O'Neill LP(1), VerMilyea MD, Turner BM.

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin and Gene Expression Group, Institute of Biomedical Research,
University of Birmingham Medical School, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) defines the genomic distribution of proteins
and their modifications but is limited by the cell numbers required (ideally
>10(7)). Here we describe a protocol that uses carrier chromatin and PCR,
'carrier' ChIP (CChIP), to permit analysis of as few as 100 cells. We assayed
histone modifications at key regulator genes (such as Nanog, Pou5f1 (also known
as Oct4) and Cdx2) by CChIP in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells and in inner cell 
mass (ICM) and trophectoderm of cultured blastocysts. Activating and silencing
modifications (H4 acetylation and H3K9 methylation) mark active and silent
promoters as predicted, and we find close correlation between values derived from
CChIP (1,000 ES cells) and conventional ChIP (5 x 10(7) ES cells). Studies on
genes silenced in both ICM and ES cells (Cdx2, Cfc1, Hhex and Nkx2-2, also known 
as Nkx) show that the intensity of silencing marks is relatively diminished in ES
cells, indicating a possible relaxation of some components of silencing on
adaptation to culture.

PMID: 16767102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Stem Cells. 2006 Oct;24(10):2209-19. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Mesenchymal stem cells instruct oligodendrogenic fate decision on adult neural
stem cells.

Rivera FJ(1), Couillard-Despres S, Pedre X, Ploetz S, Caioni M, Lois C, Bogdahn
U, Aigner L.

Author information: 
(1)Volkswagen-Foundation Research Group, University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany.

Adult stem cells reside in different tissues and organs of the adult organism.
Among these cells are MSCs that are located in the adult bone marrow and NSCs
that exist in the adult central nervous system (CNS). In transplantation
experiments, MSCs demonstrated neuroprotective and neuroregenerative effects that
were associated with functional improvements. The underlying mechanisms are
largely unidentified. Here, we reveal that the interactions between adult MSCs
and NSCs, mediated by soluble factors, induce oligodendrogenic fate decision in
NSCs at the expense of astrogenesis. This was demonstrated (a) by an increase in 
the percentage of cells expressing the oligodendrocyte markers GalC and myelin
basic protein, (b) by a reduction in the percentage of glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP)-expressing cells, and (c) by the expression pattern of cell fate
determinants specific for oligodendrogenic differentiation. Thus, it involved
enhanced expression of the oligodendrogenic transcription factors Olig1, Olig2,
and Nkx2.2 and diminished expression of Id2, an inhibitor of oligodendrogenic
differentiation. Results of (a) 5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine pulse-labeling of cells, 
(b) cell fate analysis, and (c) cell death/survival analysis suggested an
inductive mechanism and excluded a selection process. A candidate factor screen
excluded a number of growth factors, cytokines, and neurotrophins that have
previously been shown to influence neurogenesis and neural differentiation from
the oligodendrogenic activity derived from the MSCs. This work might have major
implications for the development of future transplantation strategies for the
treatment of degenerative diseases in the CNS.

PMID: 16763198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jul 7;345(3):1167-76. Epub 2006 May 11.

Multipotential nestin and Isl-1 positive mesenchymal stem cells isolated from
human pancreatic islets.

Eberhardt M(1), Salmon P, von Mach MA, Hengstler JG, Brulport M, Linscheid P,
Seboek D, Oberholzer J, Barbero A, Martin I, Müller B, Trono D, Zulewski H.

Author information: 
(1)Division for Endocrinology, Diabetes and Clinical Nutrition, Department of
Research, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland.

Mesenchymal cells in the developing pancreas express the neural stem cell marker 
nestin and the transcription factor islet-1 (Isl-1). Using defined culture
conditions we isolated on a single cell basis nestin producing cells from human
pancreatic islets. These cells were immortalized with lentiviral vectors coding
for telomerase and mBmi. They are positive for Isl-1 and nestin and have the
potential to adopt a pancreatic endocrine phenotype with expression of critical
transcription factors including Ipf-1, Isl-1, Ngn-3, Pax4, Pax6, Nkx2.2, and
Nkx6.1 as well as the islet hormones insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin. In
addition, they can be differentiated into human albumin producing cells in vivo
when grafted into a SCID mouse liver. In accordance with a mesenchymal phenotype,
the cells were also able to adopt adipocytic or osteocytic phenotypes in vitro.
In conclusion, cultured pancreatic islets contain nestin and Isl-1 positive
mesenchymal stem cells with multipotential developmental capacity.

PMID: 16713999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):405-16.

Expression profiling of EWS/FLI identifies NKX2.2 as a critical target gene in
Ewing's sarcoma.

Smith R(1), Owen LA, Trem DJ, Wong JS, Whangbo JS, Golub TR, Lessnick SL.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Children, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

Erratum in
    Cancer Cell. 2007 Jan;11(1):97.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):331-2.

Our understanding of Ewing's sarcoma development mediated by the EWS/FLI fusion
protein has been limited by a lack of knowledge regarding the tumor cell of
origin. To circumvent this, we analyzed the function of EWS/FLI in Ewing's
sarcoma itself. By combining retroviral-mediated RNA interference with
reexpression studies, we show that ongoing EWS/FLI expression is required for the
tumorigenic phenotype of Ewing's sarcoma. We used this system to define the full 
complement of EWS/FLI-regulated genes in Ewing's sarcoma. Functional analysis
revealed that NKX2.2 is an EWS/FLI-regulated gene that is necessary for oncogenic
transformation in this tumor. Thus, we developed a highly validated
transcriptional profile for the EWS/FLI fusion protein and identified a critical 
target gene in Ewing's sarcoma development.

PMID: 16697960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):331-2.

Ewing's sarcoma: general insights from a rare model.

Davis S(1), Meltzer PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2006 May;9(5):405-16.

Ewing's sarcoma is characterized by the presence of fusion oncoproteins involving
EWSR1 and an ETS gene, most commonly FLI1. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Smith et
al. have combined RNA interference with expression profiling to study the pattern
of gene expression downstream of the most common of these fusions, EWS/FLI. Using
this strategy, Smith et al. have identified a homeobox gene, NKX2.2, which is
both highly expressed in Ewing's sarcoma and essential for the transforming
activity of EWS/FLI.

PMID: 16697953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Neurosci. 2006 May 10;26(19):5037-48.

Ventral neural progenitors switch toward an oligodendroglial fate in response to 
increased Sonic hedgehog (Shh) activity: involvement of Sulfatase 1 in modulating
Shh signaling in the ventral spinal cord.

Danesin C(1), Agius E, Escalas N, Ai X, Emerson C, Cochard P, Soula C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, Unité Mixte de Recherche 5547, Université
Paul Sabatier, 31062 Toulouse Cedex, France.

In the embryonic chick ventral spinal cord, the initial emergence of
oligodendrocytes is a relatively late event that depends on prolonged Sonic
hedgehog (Shh) signaling. In this report, we show that specification of
oligodendrocyte precursors (OLPs) from ventral Nkx2.2-expressing neural
progenitors occurs precisely when these progenitors stop generating neurons,
indicating that the mechanism of the neuronal/oligodendroglial switch is a common
feature of ventral OLP specification. We further show that an experimental early 
increase in the concentration of Shh is sufficient to induce premature
specification of OLPs at the expense of neuronal genesis indicating that the
relative doses of Shh received by ventral progenitors determine whether they
become neurons or glia. Accordingly, we observe that the Shh protein accumulates 
at the apical surface of Nkx2.2-expressing cells just before OLP specification,
providing direct evidence that these cells are subjected to a higher
concentration of the morphogen when they switch to an oligodendroglial fate.
Finally, we show that this abrupt change in Shh distribution is most likely
attributable to the timely activity of Sulfatase 1 (Sulf1), a secreted enzym that
modulates the sulfation state of heparan sulfate proteoglycans. Sulf1 is
expressed in the ventral neuroepithelium just before OLP specification, and we
show that its experimental overexpression leads to apical concentration of Shh on
neuroepithelial cells, a decisive event for the switch of ventral neural
progenitors toward an oligodendroglial fate.

PMID: 16687495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Glia. 2006 Jul;54(1):35-46.

Transcription factor co-expression patterns indicate heterogeneity of
oligodendroglial subpopulations in adult spinal cord.

Kitada M(1), Rowitch DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Oligodendrocytes and their precursors serve critical roles in the maintenance of 
neurological function. Although activity of the transcription factors (TFs)
Olig1, Olig2, Sox10, and Nkx2.2 is required during early oligodendrocyte
development, their later expression in adult central nervous system is rather
poorly characterized. Here we have analyzed co-expression patterns of these
transcriptional proteins in the mouse cervical spinal cord. Our findings indicate
that TF co-expression patterns describe heterogeneity in adult oligodendroglial
populations (1) in distinct sub-regions of grey and white matter and (2) with
respect to level of maturation from proliferating precursors to myelinating
oligodendrocytes. Our findings suggest that TF co-expression patterns identify
and might regulate distinct functional classes of grey and white matter
oligodendroglia.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16673374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Neuroscience. 2006;139(4):1355-67. Epub 2006 Mar 31.

Transcription factor protein expression patterns by neural or neuronal progenitor
cells of adult monkey subventricular zone.

Tonchev AB(1), Yamashima T, Sawamoto K, Okano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Restorative Neurosurgery, Division of Neuroscience, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Medical Science, Japan.

The anterior subventricular zone of the adult mammalian brain contains progenitor
cells which are upregulated after cerebral ischemia. We have previously reported 
that while a part of the progenitors residing in adult monkey anterior
subventricular zone travels to the olfactory bulb, many of these cells sustain
location in the anterior subventricular zone for months after injury, exhibiting 
a phenotype of either neural or neuronal precursors. Here we show that ischemia
increased the numbers of anterior subventricular zone progenitor cells expressing
developmentally regulated transcription factors including Pax6 (paired-box 6),
Emx2 (empty spiracles-homeobox 2), Sox 1-3 (sex determining region Y-box 1-3),
Ngn1 (neurogenin 1), Dlx1,5 (distalless-homeobox 1,5), Olig1,3 (oligodendrocyte
lineage gene 1,3) and Nkx2.2 (Nk-box 2.2), as compared with control brains.
Analysis of transcription factor protein expression by sustained neural or
neuronal precursors in anterior subventricular zone revealed that these two cell 
types were positive for characteristic sets of transcription factors. The
proteins Pax6, Emx2, Sox2,3 and Olig1 were predominantly localized to dividing
neural precursors while the factors Sox1, Ngn1, Dlx1,5, Olig2 and Nkx2.2 were
mainly expressed by neuronal precursors. Further, differences between monkeys and
non-primate mammals emerged, related to expression patterns of Pax6, Olig2 and
Dlx2. Our results suggest that a complex network of developmental signals might
be involved in the specification of primate progenitor cells.

PMID: 16580139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Dev Biol. 2006 Jun 15;294(2):554-63. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

A robust system for RNA interference in the chicken using a modified microRNA
operon.

Das RM(1), Van Hateren NJ, Howell GR, Farrell ER, Bangs FK, Porteous VC, Manning 
EM, McGrew MJ, Ohyama K, Sacco MA, Halley PA, Sang HM, Storey KG, Placzek M,
Tickle C, Nair VK, Wilson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of
Sheffield, Firth Court, Western Bank, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK.

RNA interference (RNAi) provides an effective method to silence gene expression
and investigate gene function. However, RNAi tools for the chicken embryo have
largely been adapted from vectors designed for mammalian cells. Here we present
plasmid and retroviral RNAi vectors specifically designed for optimal gene
silencing in chicken cells. The vectors use a chicken U6 promoter to express RNAs
modelled on microRNA30, which are embedded within chicken microRNA operon
sequences to ensure optimal Drosha and Dicer processing of transcripts. The
chicken U6 promoter works significantly better than promoters of mammalian origin
and in combination with a microRNA operon expression cassette (MOEC), achieves up
to 90% silencing of target genes. By using a MOEC, we show that it is also
possible to simultaneously silence two genes with a single vector. The vectors
express either RFP or GFP markers, allowing simple in vivo tracking of vector
delivery. Using these plasmids, we demonstrate effective silencing of Pax3, Pax6,
Nkx2.1, Nkx2.2, Notch1 and Shh in discrete regions of the chicken embryonic
nervous system. The efficiency and ease of use of this RNAi system paves the way 
for large-scale genetic screens in the chicken embryo.

PMID: 16574096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Dev Neurosci. 2006;28(1-2):102-17.

Notch1 signaling influences v2 interneuron and motor neuron development in the
spinal cord.

Yang X(1), Tomita T, Wines-Samuelson M, Beglopoulos V, Tansey MG, Kopan R, Shen
J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Program in
Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The Notch signaling pathway plays a variety of roles in cell fate decisions
during development. Previous studies have shown that reduced Notch signaling
results in premature differentiation of neural progenitor cells, while increased 
Notch activities promote apoptotic death of neural progenitor cells in the
developing brain. Whether Notch signaling is involved in the specification of
neuronal subtypes is unclear. Here we examine the role of Notch1 in the
development of neuronal subtypes in the spinal cord using conditional knockout
(cKO) mice lacking Notch1 specifically in neural progenitor cells. Notch1
inactivation results in accelerated neuronal differentiation in the ventral
spinal cord and gradual disappearance of the ventral central canal. These changes
are accompanied by reduced expression of Hes1 and Hes5 and increased expression
of Mash1 and Neurogenin 1 and 2. Using markers (Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Olig2, Pax6 and
Dbx1) for one or multiple progenitor cell types, we found reductions of all
subtypes of progenitor cells in the ventral spinal cord of Notch1 cKO mice.
Similarly, using markers (Islet1/2, Lim3, Sim1, Chox10, En1 and Evx1/2) specific 
for motor neurons and distinct classes of interneurons, we found increases in the
number of V0-2 interneurons in the ventral spinal cord of Notch1 cKO mice.
Specifically, the number of Lim3+/Chox10+ V2 interneurons is markedly increased
while the number of Lim3+/Islet+motor neurons is decreased in the Notch1 cKO
spinal cord, suggesting that V2 interneurons are generated at the expense of
motor neurons in the absence of Notch1. These results provide support for a role 
of Notch1 in neuronal subtype specification in the ventral spinal cord.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16508308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Endocrinol. 2006 Feb;188(2):287-94.

Involvement of PDX-1 in activation of human insulin gene transcription.

Le Lay J(1), Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University, 2001
West End Ave Nashville, Tennessee 37235, USA.

Islet beta cell-specific transcription of the insulin gene is mediated through
the binding of the islet-enriched PDX-1, BETA2, and MafA transcription factors to
conserved 5'-flanking region regulatory elements. However, additional
non-conserved sequences within this region are also significant in regulating
expression. Thus, PDX-1 binds to and activates the GG2 element located between
nucleotides -145 and -140 of the human gene, while the corresponding, but
non-identical, site in the rodent insulin genes are negatively regulated by the
Nkx2.2 transcription factor. Here, we show that despite binding PDX-1
approximately 20-fold less effectively than the conserved insulin A3 and A1 sites
in gel mobility shift assays, human GG2 appears to be more important for the
activation of transfected human insulin enhancer-driven reporter constructs in
beta cell lines. Furthermore, functional interaction analysis in non-islet cell
lines demonstrated that PDX-1 binding to GG2, A1, and A3 contributes to
synergistic activation of insulin gene expression with MafA. Our analysis also
illustrated the requirement of poorly conserved human sequences between -293 and 
-251 in mediating activity through the more upstream A3 binding site.
Collectively these experiments have revealed distinct features in control of the 
human and rodent insulin genes by PDX-1, processes that may be involved in
regulating insulin expression under both normal and diabetic conditions in
humans.

PMID: 16461554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Development. 2006 Jan;133(1):89-98.

A Wnt1-regulated genetic network controls the identity and fate of
midbrain-dopaminergic progenitors in vivo.

Prakash N(1), Brodski C, Naserke T, Puelles E, Gogoi R, Hall A, Panhuysen M,
Echevarria D, Sussel L, Weisenhorn DM, Martinez S, Arenas E, Simeone A, Wurst W.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Technical University 
Munich, Institute of Developmental Genetics, Ingolstaedter Landstrasse 1, 85764
Munich/Neuherberg, Germany.

Midbrain neurons synthesizing the neurotransmitter dopamine play a central role
in the modulation of different brain functions and are associated with major
neurological and psychiatric disorders. Despite the importance of these cells,
the molecular mechanisms controlling their development are still poorly
understood. The secreted glycoprotein Wnt1 is expressed in close vicinity to
developing midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Here, we show that Wnt1 regulates the
genetic network, including Otx2 and Nkx2-2, that is required for the
establishment of the midbrain dopaminergic progenitor domain during embryonic
development. In addition, Wnt1 is required for the terminal differentiation of
midbrain dopaminergic neurons at later stages of embryogenesis. These results
identify Wnt1 as a key molecule in the development of midbrain dopaminergic
neurons in vivo. They also suggest the Wnt1-controlled signaling pathway as a
promising target for new therapeutic strategies in the treatment of Parkinson's
disease.

PMID: 16339193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Dev Neurosci. 2005;27(6):364-77.

Gliogenic radial glial cells show heterogeneity in the developing mouse spinal
cord.

Ogawa Y(1), Takebayashi H, Takahashi M, Osumi N, Iwasaki Y, Ikenaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurobiology and Bioinformatics, National Institute for
Physiological Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Japan.

The central nervous system of the mammalian embryo is organized according to the 
expression of region-specific transcription factors along the anteroposterior
and/or the dorsoventral axis. For example, the dorsal ventricular zone (VZ) of
the embryonic spinal cord expresses Pax3 and Pax7, the ventral VZ expresses Pax6,
and the more ventral VZ expresses Nkx2.2. Properties of neuronal precursors
located in the VZ are determined by the characteristic expression patterns of
these transcription factors, leading to the generation of distinct classes of
neurons. Recent studies demonstrated that radial glial cells produce neurons in
addition to glia during central nervous system development. Thus, neuronal
precursor diversity may be dependent upon the diversity of radial glial cells. To
investigate this hypothesis, we analyzed the expression of radial glial cell
markers and transcription factors in the mouse embryonic spinal cord. We show
that radial glial cells indeed express domain-specific transcription factor.
Moreover, they varied in expression of the astrocyte-specific glutamate
transporter. The region where the astrocyte-specific glutamate transporter is
strongly expressed in the ventral radial glial cells is closely related to the
Pax6-expressing domain, and the weakly expressing region corresponding to the
Nkx2.2-expressing domain. Furthermore, dorsal radial fibers expressed ephrin-B1. 
Thus, different types of radial glial cells exist in different domains defined by
the transcription factor expression at E12.5. We also show that this diversity
continues to the gliogenic stage of radial glial cells. This raises the idea that
astrocytes generated from different domains along the dorsoventral axis in the
mouse spinal cord have distinct characteristics.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16280634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Stem Cells. 2006 Apr;24(4):1001-10. Epub 2005 Oct 27.

Olig2 overexpression induces the in vitro differentiation of neural stem cells
into mature oligodendrocytes.

Copray S(1), Balasubramaniyan V, Levenga J, de Bruijn J, Liem R, Boddeke E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physiology, University Medical Centre Groningen,
University of Groningen, A. Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands.
j.c.v.m.copray@med.rug.nl

Differentiation induction of neural stem cells (NSCs) into oligodendrocytes
during embryogenesis is the result of a complex interaction between local
induction factors and intracellular transcription factors. At the early stage of 
differentiation, in particular, the helix-loop-helix transcription factors Olig1 
and Olig2 have been shown to be essential for oligodendrocyte lineage
determination. In view of the possible application of NSCs as a source for
remyelinating cell transplants in demyelinating diseases (e.g., multiple
sclerosis), in vitro procedures need to be developed to drive the oligodendrocyte
differentiation process. Mere culture in medium supplemented with major embryonic
oligodendrogenic induction factors, such as Sonic hedgehog, results in
oligodendrocyte differentiation of only about 10% of NSCs. We previously showed
that induction of Olig1 expression by gene transfection could indeed initiate the
first stage of oligodendrocyte differentiation in NSCs, but appeared to be unable
to generate fully mature, functional oligodendrocytes. In this study, we
transfected NSCs isolated from the embryonic mouse brain with the Olig2 gene and 
found that the introduced overexpression of Olig2 could induce the development of
fully mature oligodendrocytes expressing the transcription factor Nkx2.2 and all 
major myelin-specific proteins. Moreover, Olig2-transfected NSCs, in contrast to 
nontransfected NSCs, developed into actively remyelinating oligodendrocytes after
transplantation into the corpus callo-sum of long-term cuprizonefed mice, an
animal model for demyelination. Our results show that transfection of genes
encoding for oligodendrogenic transcription factors can be an efficient way to
induce the differentiation of NSCs into functional oligodendrocytes.

PMID: 16253982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Neurosci. 2005 Sep 7;25(36):8311-21.

Combinatorial profiles of oligodendrocyte-selective classes of transcriptional
regulators differentially modulate myelin basic protein gene expression.

Gokhan S(1), Marin-Husstege M, Yung SY, Fontanez D, Casaccia-Bonnefil P, Mehler
MF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Brain Disorders and Neural Regeneration, Albert Einstein College
of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

Recent studies suggest that specific neural basic helix-loop-helix (HLH; i.e.,
Olig1 and Olig2, Mash1), associated inhibitory HLH (i.e., Id2 and Id4),
high-mobility group domain (i.e., Sox10), and homeodomain (i.e., Nkx2.2)
transcription factors are involved in oligodendrocyte (OL) lineage specification 
and progressive stages of maturation including myelination. However, the
developmental interplay among these lineage-selective determinants, in a cell-
and maturational stage-specific context, has not yet been defined. We show here
in vivo and in vitro developmental expression profiles for these distinct classes
of transcriptional regulators of OLs. We show that progressive stages of OL
lineage maturation are characterized by dynamic changes in the subcellular
distribution of these transcription factors and by different permutations of
combinatorial transcriptional codes. Transient transfections of these precise
combinatorial codes with a luciferase reporter gene driven by the myelin basic
protein promoter define how changes in the molecular composition of these
transcriptional complexes modulate myelin gene expression. Our overall findings
suggest that the dynamic interplay between developmental stage-specific classes
of transcriptional activators and associated inhibitory factors orchestrate
myelin gene expression during terminal maturation of the mammalian CNS.

PMID: 16148239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 18;280(46):38438-44. Epub 2005 Sep 7.

Interactions between areas I and II direct pdx-1 expression specifically to islet
cell types of the mature and developing pancreas.

Van Velkinburgh JC(1), Samaras SE, Gerrish K, Artner I, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

PDX-1 regulates transcription of genes involved in islet beta cell function and
pancreas development. Islet-specific expression is controlled by 5'-flanking
sequences from base pair (bp) -2917 to -1918 in transgenic experiments, which
encompasses both conserved (i.e. Area I (bp -2761/-2457), Area II (bp
-2153/-1923)) and non-conserved pdx-1 sequences. However, only an Area II-driven 
transgene is independently active in vivo, albeit in only a fraction of islet
PDX-1-producing cells. Our objective was to identify the sequences within the
-2917/-1918-bp region that act in conjunction with Area II to allow comprehensive
expression in islet PDX-1(+) cells. In cell line-based transfection assays, only 
Area I effectively potentiated Area II activity. Both Area I and Area II
functioned in an orientation-independent manner, whereas synergistic,
enhancer-like activation was uniquely found with duplicated Area II. Chimeras of 
Area II and the generally active SV40 enhancer or the beta cell-specific insulin 
enhancer suggested that islet cell-enriched activators were necessary for Area I 
activation, because Area II-mediated stimulation was reduced by the SV40 enhancer
and activated by the insulin enhancer. Several conserved sites within Area I were
important in Area I/Area II activation, with binding at bp -2614/-2609
specifically controlled by Nkx2.2, an insulin gene regulator that is required for
terminal beta cell differentiation. The ability of Area I to modulate Area II
activation was also observed in vivo, as an Area I/Area II-driven transgene
recapitulated the endogenous pdx-1 expression pattern in developing and adult
islet cells. These results suggest that Area II is a central pdx-1 control
region, whose islet cell activity is uniquely modified by Area I regulatory
factors.

PMID: 16147997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Diabetes. 2005 Sep;54(9):2568-75.

Differentiation of human liver-derived, insulin-producing cells toward the
beta-cell phenotype.

Zalzman M(1), Anker-Kitai L, Efrat S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978, Israel.

beta-Cell transplantation is viewed as a cure for type 1 diabetes; however, it is
limited by the number of pancreas donors. Human stem cells offer the promise of
an abundant source of insulin-producing cells, given the existence of methods for
manipulating their differentiation. We have previously demonstrated that the
expression of the beta-cell transcription factor pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1
(PDX-1) in human fetal liver cells activates multiple aspects of the beta-cell
phenotype. These cells, termed FH-B-TPN cells, produce insulin, release insulin
in response to physiological glucose levels, and replace beta-cell function in
diabetic immunodeficient mice. However, they deviate from the normal beta-cell
phenotype by the lack of expression of a number of beta-cell genes, the
expression of non-beta-cell genes, and a lower insulin content. Here we aimed to 
promote differentiation of FH-B-TPN cells toward the beta-cell phenotype using
soluble factors. Cells cultured with activin A in serum-free medium upregulated
expression of NeuroD and Nkx2.2 and downregulated paired box homeotic gene 6
(PAX-6). Glucokinase and prohormone convertase 1/3 were also upregulated, whereas
pancreatic polypeptide and glucagon as well as liver markers were downregulated. 
Insulin content was increased by up to 33-fold, to approximately 60% of the
insulin content of normal beta-cells. The cells were shown to contain human
C-peptide and release insulin in response to physiological glucose levels. Cell
transplantation into immunodeficient diabetic mice resulted in the restoration of
stable euglycemia. The cells continued to express insulin in vivo, and no cell
replication was detected. Thus, the manipulation of culture conditions induced a 
significant and stable differentiation of FH-B-TPN cells toward the beta-cell
phenotype, making them excellent candidates for beta-cell replacement in type 1
diabetes.

PMID: 16123344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. World J Gastroenterol. 2005 Jul 21;11(27):4161-6.

Differentiation of embryonic stem cells into insulin-producing cells promoted by 
Nkx2.2 gene transfer.

Shiroi A(1), Ueda S, Ouji Y, Saito K, Moriya K, Sugie Y, Fukui H, Ishizaka S,
Yoshikawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Department of Parasitology, Nara Medical
University, Kashihara, Nara 634-8521, Japan.

AIM: To investigate the ability of a genetically altered embryonic stem (ES) cell
line to generate insulin-producing cells in vitro following transfer of the
Nkx2.2 gene.
METHODS: Hamster Nkx2.2 genes were transferred into mouse ES cells. Parental and 
Nkx2.2-transfected ES cells were initiated toward differentiation in embryoid
body (EB) culture for 5 d and the resulting EBs were transferred to an attached
culture system. Dithizone (DTZ), a zinc-chelating agent known to selectively
stain pancreatic beta cells, was used to detect insulin-producing cells. The
outgrowths were incubated in DTZ solution (final concentration, 100 microg/mL)
for 15 min before being examined microscopically. Gene expression of the
endocrine pancreatic markers was also analyzed by RT-PCR. In addition, insulin
production was determined immunohistochemically and its secretion was examined
using an ELISA.
RESULTS: DTZ-stained cellular clusters appeared after approximately 14 d in the
culture of Nkx2.2-transfected ES cells (Nkx-ES cells), which was as much as 2 wk 
earlier, than those in the culture of parental ES cells (wt-ES). The frequency of
DTZ-positive cells among total cultured cells on day 28 accounted for
approximately 1.0% and 0.1% of the Nkx-ES- and wt-ES-derived EB outgrowths,
respectively. The DTZ-positive cellular clusters were found to be immunoreactive 
to insulin, while the gene expressions of pancreatic-duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1), 
proinsulin 1 and proinsulin 2 were observed in the cultures that contained
DTZ-positive cellular clusters. Insulin secretion was also confirmed by ELISA,
whereas glucose-dependent secretion was not demonstrated.
CONCLUSION: Nkx2.2-transfected ES cells showed an ability to differentiate into
insulin-producing cells.

PMCID: PMC4615436
PMID: 16015683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jul;233(3):946-53.

NeuroD1 in the endocrine pancreas: localization and dual function as an activator
and repressor.

Itkin-Ansari P(1), Marcora E, Geron I, Tyrberg B, Demeterco C, Hao E, Padilla C, 
Ratineau C, Leiter A, Lee JE, Levine F.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego, School of Medicine, Stem
Cell Program, The Burnham Institute, La Jolla, California 92093-0816, USA.
pitkinan@ucsd.edu

The basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor NeuroD1 regulates cell fate in
the nervous system but previously has not been considered to function similarly
in the endocrine pancreas due to its reported expression in all islet cell types 
in the newborn mouse. Because we found that NeuroD1 potently represses
somatostatin expression in vitro, its pattern of expression was examined in both 
strains of mice in which lacZ has been introduced into the NeuroD1 locus by
homologous recombination. Analysis of adult transgenic mice revealed that NeuroD1
is predominantly expressed in beta-cells and either absent or expressed below the
limit of lacZ detection in mature alpha-, delta-, or PP cells. Consistent with a 
previous report, NeuroD1 colocalizes with glucagon as well as insulin in immature
islets of the newborn mouse. However, no colocalization of NeuroD1with
somatostatin was detected in the newborn. In vitro, ectopic expression of NeuroD1
in TRM-6/PDX-1, a human pancreatic delta-cell line, resulted in potent repression
of somatostatin concomitant with induction of the beta-cell hormones insulin and 
islet amyloid polypeptide. Additionally, NeuroD1 induced expression of Nkx2.2, a 
transcription factor expressed in beta- but not delta-cells. Transfection studies
using insulin and somatostatin promoters confirm the ability of NeuroD1 to act as
both a transcriptional repressor and activator in the same cell, suggesting a
more complex role for NeuroD1 in the establishment and/or maintenance of mature
endocrine cells than has been recognized previously.

PMID: 15906379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Neurosci. 2005 May 11;25(19):4856-67.

Otx2 regulates subtype specification and neurogenesis in the midbrain.

Vernay B(1), Koch M, Vaccarino F, Briscoe J, Simeone A, Kageyama R, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire/Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, Université Louis Pasteur, 67404 Illkirch cedex, Strasbourg, France.

The transcription factor Otx2 is required to determine mesencephalic versus
metencephalic (cerebellum/pons) territory during embryogenesis. This function of 
Otx2 primarily involves positioning and maintaining the mid-hindbrain organizer
at the border between midbrain and anterior hindbrain. Otx2 expression is
maintained long after this organizer is established. We therefore generated
conditional mutants of Otx2 using the Cre/loxP system to study later roles during
rostral brain development. For inactivation of Otx2 in neuronal progenitor cells,
we crossed Otx2(flox/flox) animals with Nestin-Cre transgenic animals. In
Nestin-Cre/+; Otx2(flox/flox) embryos, Otx2 activity was lost from the ventral
midbrain starting at embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5). In these mutant embryos, the
mid-hindbrain organizer was properly positioned at E12.5, although Otx2 is absent
from the midbrain. Hence, the Nestin-Cre/+; Otx2(flox/flox) animals represent a
novel mouse model for studying the role of Otx2 in the midbrain, independently of
abnormal development of the mid-hindbrain organizer. Our data demonstrate that
Otx2 controls the development of several neuronal populations in the midbrain by 
regulating progenitor identity and neurogenesis. Dorsal midbrain progenitors
ectopically expressed Math1 and generate an ectopic cerebellar-like structure.
Similarly, Nkx2.2 ectopic expression ventrally into tegmentum progenitors is
responsible for the formation of serotonergic neurons and hypoplasia of the red
nucleus in the midbrain. In addition, we discovered a novel role for Otx2 in
regulating neurogenesis of dopaminergic neurons. Altogether, these results
demonstrate that Otx2 is required from E10.5 onward to regulate neuronal subtype 
identity and neurogenesis in the midbrain.

PMID: 15888661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 May 17;102(20):7297-302. Epub 2005 May 9.

The Nkx6.1 homeodomain transcription factor suppresses glucagon expression and
regulates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in islet beta cells.

Schisler JC(1), Jensen PB, Taylor DG, Becker TC, Knop FK, Takekawa S, German M,
Weir GC, Lu D, Mirmira RG, Newgard CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and Metabolism Center, 
Durham, NC 27704, USA.

We have previously described rat insulinoma INS-1-derived cell lines with robust 
or poor glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS). In the current study, we
have further resolved these lines into three classes: class 1,
glucose-unresponsive/glucagon-expressing; class 2,
glucose-unresponsive/glucagon-negative; and class 3,
glucose-responsive/glucagon-negative. The transcription factor Nkx2.2 was
expressed with relative abundance of 3.3, 1.0, and 1.0 in class 1, class 2, and
class 3 cells, respectively, whereas Nkx6.1 expression had the opposite trend:
1.0, 2.6, and 6.4 in class 1, class 2, and class 3 cells, respectively. In class 
1 cells, overexpressed Nkx6.1 suppressed glucagon expression but did not affect
the levels of several other prominent beta cell transcription factors. RNA
interference (RNAi)-mediated suppression of Nkx6.1 in class 3 cells resulted in a
doubling of glucagon mRNA, with no effect on Pdx1 levels, whereas suppression of 
Pdx1 in class 3 cells caused a 12-fold increase in glucagon transcript levels,
demonstrating independent effects of Nkx6.1 and Pdx1 on glucagon expression in
beta cell lines. RNAi-mediated suppression of Nkx6.1 expression in class 3 cells 
also caused a decrease in GSIS from 13.9- to 3.7-fold, whereas suppression of
Pdx1 reduced absolute amounts of insulin secretion without affecting fold
response. Finally, RNAi-mediated suppression of Nkx6.1 mRNA in primary rat islets
was accompanied by a significant decrease in GSIS relative to control cells. In
sum, our studies have revealed roles for Nkx6.1 in suppression of glucagon
expression and control of GSIS in islet beta cells.

PMCID: PMC1091752
PMID: 15883383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Stem Cells. 2005 Mar;23(3):442-53.

Induction of oligodendrocytes from adult human olfactory epithelial-derived
progenitors by transcription factors.

Zhang X(1), Cai J, Klueber KM, Guo Z, Lu C, Qiu M, Roisen FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville, 
School of Medicine, Louisville, Kentucky 40202, USA.

Neurosphere-forming cell (NSFC) lines have been derived from cultures of adult
olfactory neuroepithelium obtained from patients and cadavers. These progenitors 
remain undifferentiated when maintained in minimal essential medium with 10%
fetal bovine serum, but have the potential to differentiate along glial or
neuronal lineages. However, few of these cells ever express mature neuronal or
glial markers in defined medium. To evaluate the potential of NSFCs to form
oligodendrocytes, two transcription factors, Olig2 and Nkx2.2, were introduced
into NSFCs to determine whether their expression is sufficient for
oligodendrocyte differentiation, as has been shown in the embryonic avian and
murine central nervous systems in vivo. NSFCs transfected with Olig2 or Nkx2.2
alone exhibited no phenotypic lineage restriction. In contrast, simultaneous
transfection of Olig2 and Nkx2.2 cDNA produced characteristic oligodendrocyte
morphology and antigenicity, including myelin basic protein (MBP). Furthermore, a
population of Olig2-expressing NSFCs also expressed Sox10. Cotransfection of
NSFCs with Nkx2.2 and Sox10, but not Olig2 and Sox10, produced a MBP(+)
oligodendrocytic phenotype. Coculture of NSFCs transfected with Olig2 and Nkx2.2 
or Nkx2.2 and Sox10 with purified sensory neurons, demonstrated frequent contacts
between NSFC processes and axons, including the early stages of ensheathment.
These studies demonstrate transcription factors governing early development of
chick and mouse oligodendrocyte formation, also apply to human progenitors
isolated from adult olfactory neuroepithelium. Our long-term goal is to develop
cell populations for future studies used to determine the therapeutic utility of 
these olfactory-derived NSFCs for autologous transplantation into donors with
central nervous system trauma or neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 15749939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Dev Biol. 2005 Mar 15;279(2):356-67.

Sonic hedgehog and retinoic acid are not sufficient to induce motoneuron
generation in the avian caudal neural tube.

Afonso ND(1), Catala M.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 7000 and Laboratoire d'Histologie et Embryologie, Faculté de Médecine
Pitié-Salpêtrière, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 105, Bd. de l'Hôpital, 75634
Paris Cedex 13, France.

The caudal neural tube (CNT) of the avian embryo is devoid of both dorsal and
ventral roots. We show that the lack of ventral roots in the CNT, from somite 48 
caudalwards, is due to an absence of post-mitotic motoneurons (MNs). The absence 
of MNs is not due to a defective notochordal induction since Sonic Hedgehog (SHH)
signaling is intact and the caudal notochord is able to induce ectopic MNs when
grafted laterally to a host neural tube. The transcription factors involved in MN
specification (Pax6, Nkx6.1, and Olig2) are all expressed in the CNT, despite the
lower expression level of Pax6, but an overlap between Olig2 and the ventrally
expressed transcription factor Nkx2.2 is observed in the CNT. Grafting a quail
CNT into the cervical level of a chick host rescues MN generation, demonstrating 
both the CNT potential for MN generation and the key role of the caudal
environment in the MN differentiation blockade. The transplantation of the
CNT-flanking somites into the cervical level does not inhibit MN generation.
Furthermore, implantation of a retinoic-acid-soaked bead laterally to the CNT
does not rescue MN generation. Together, these data indicate that the rostral
environment contains a signal different from both SHH and Retinoic Acid that acts
on MN differentiation.

PMID: 15733664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Exp Neurol. 2005 Mar;192(1):11-24.

Endogenous Nkx2.2+/Olig2+ oligodendrocyte precursor cells fail to remyelinate the
demyelinated adult rat spinal cord in the absence of astrocytes.

Talbott JF(1), Loy DN, Liu Y, Qiu MS, Bunge MB, Rao MS, Whittemore SR.

Author information: 
(1)The MD/PhD Program, University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Chronic demyelination is a pathophysiologic component of compressive spinal cord 
injury (SCI) and a characteristic finding in demyelinating diseases including
multiple sclerosis (MS). A better characterization of endogenous cells
responsible for successful remyelination is essential for designing therapeutic
strategies aimed at restoring functional myelin. The present study examined the
spatiotemporal response of endogenous oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs)
following ethidium bromide (EB)-induced demyelination of the adult rat spinal
cord. Beginning at 2 days post-EB injection (dpi), a robust mobilization of
highly proliferative NG2(+) cells within the lesion was observed, none of which
expressed the oligodendrocyte lineage-associated transcription factor Nkx2.2. At 
7 dpi, a significant up-regulation of Nkx2.2 by OPCs within the lesion was
observed, 90% of which coexpressed NG2 and virtually all of which coexpressed the
bHLH transcription factor Olig2. Despite successful recruitment of
Nkx2.2(+)/Olig2(+) OPCs within the lesion, demyelinated axons were not
remyelinated by these OPCs in regions lacking astrocytes. Rather, Schwann cell
remyelination predominated throughout the central core of the lesion,
particularly around blood vessels. Oligodendrocyte remyelination was observed in 
the astrogliotic perimeter, suggesting a necessary role for astrocytes in
oligodendrocyte maturation. In addition, reexpression of the radial glial
antigen, RC-1, by reactive astrocytes and ependymal cells was observed following 
injury. However, these cells did not express the neural stem cell
(NSC)-associated transcription factors Sox1 or Sox2, suggesting that the
endogenous response is primarily mediated by glial progenitors. In vivo
electrophysiology demonstrated a limited and unsustained functional recovery
concurrent with endogenous remyelination following EB-induced lesions.

PMCID: PMC2813490
PMID: 15698615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16284-94. Epub 2005 Feb 3.

Stage-specific expression of myelin basic protein in oligodendrocytes involves
Nkx2.2-mediated repression that is relieved by the Sp1 transcription factor.

Wei Q(1), Miskimins WK, Miskimins R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Biomedical Sciences, University of South Dakota School of
Medicine, Vermillion, South Dakota 57069, USA.

The homeodomain-containing protein Nkx2.2 is critical for the development of
oligodendrocyte lineage cells, but the target genes of Nkx2.2 regulation have not
been identified. In the present study, we found that the myelin basic protein
gene is one of the genes that is regulated by Nkx2.2. Expression of Nkx2.2
represses the expression of myelin basic protein in oligodendrocyte progenitors. 
Two regulatory elements in the myelin basic protein promoter were identified and 
found to interact with Nkx2.2 in vitro. Despite their sequence divergence, both
sites were involved in the Nkx2.2-mediated repression of the myelin basic protein
promoter. Binding of Nkx2.2 also blocked and disrupted the binding of the
transcriptional activator Puralpha to the myelin basic protein promoter.
Additionally Nkx2.2 recruited a histone deacetylase 1-mSin3A complex to the
myelin basic protein promoter. We also found that the transcription factor Sp1
was able to compete off the binding of Nkx2.2 to its consensus binding site in
vitro and reversed the repressive effect of Nkx2.2 in vivo. Our data revealed a
novel role for Nkx2.2 in preventing the precocious expression of myelin basic
protein in immature oligodendrocytes. Based on this study and our previous
reports, a model for myelin basic protein gene control is proposed.

PMID: 15695521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Virchows Arch. 2005 Jan;446(1):56-63. Epub 2004 Nov 30.

Expression of stem cell markers and transcription factors during the remodeling
of the rat pancreas after duct ligation.

Peters K(1), Panienka R, Li J, Klöppel G, Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Kiel, Kiel, Germany.
k.peters@path.uni-kiel.de

Ligation of the pancreatic duct has been shown to induce islet cell neogenesis
from duct cells in the adult rat pancreas. The transcription factors that
regulate islet cell neogenesis and the phenotype of putative precursor cells
involved in neogenesis are unknown. We, therefore, studied the expression of the 
transcription factors Pdx1, Pbx1, Meis2, Nkx2.2 and the putative stem cell
markers c-Kit and nestin in rat pancreata 3, 5 and 7 days after duct ligation.
Immunocytochemical staining revealed a subpopulation of cells in the ligated
portion of the pancreas that was positive for the putative stem cell markers
c-Kit and nestin. The c-Kit immunoreactivity was upregulated, reaching a peak at 
day 3, while nestin expression peaked at day 7. The c-Kit-positive cells were
located among the duct and islet cells, while nestin-expressing cells were found 
scattered in the duct epithelium at day 3 and around the ducts at day 7. Both
c-Kit- and nestin-positive cells showed high proliferative activity, as
determined by BrdU labeling. Pdx1 and Nkx2.2 were found predominantly in the duct
cells of the ligated pancreas. There were significant changes in the expression
patterns of Pbx1 and Meis2 in the ductular complexes. The findings indicate that 
the stem cell markers c-Kit and nestin as well as the transcription factors Pdx1 
and Nkx2.2 are upregulated in compartments of the pancreas that are involved in
islet cell neogenesis after duct ligation.

PMID: 15660282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jan 7;33(1):1-12. Print 2005.

Contextual interactions determine whether the Drosophila homeodomain protein,
Vnd, acts as a repressor or activator.

Yu Z(1), Syu LJ, Mellerick DM.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, University of Michigan 8301B MSRB III, 1150 W. Medical
Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0646, USA.

At the molecular level, members of the NKx2.2 family of transcription factors
establish neural compartment boundaries by repressing the expression of homeobox 
genes specific for adjacent domains [Muhr et al. (2001) Cell, 104, 861-873; Weiss
et al. (1998) Genes Dev., 12, 3591-3602]. The Drosophila homologue, vnd,
interacts genetically with the high-mobility group protein, Dichaete, in a manner
suggesting co-operative activation [Zhao and Skeath (2002) Development, 129,
1165-1174]. However, evidence for direct interactions and transcriptional
activation is lacking. Here, we present molecular evidence for the interaction of
Vnd and Dichaete that leads to the activation of target gene expression.
Two-hybrid interaction assays indicate that Dichaete binds the Vnd homeodomain,
and additional Vnd sequences stabilize this interaction. In addition, Vnd has two
activation domains that are typically masked in the intact protein. Whether vnd
can activate or repress transcription is context-dependent. Full-length Vnd, when
expressed as a Gal4 fusion protein, acts as a repressor containing multiple
repression domains. A divergent domain in the N-terminus, not found in vertebrate
Vnd-like proteins, causes the strongest repression. The co-repressor, Groucho,
enhances Vnd repression, and these two proteins physically interact. The data
presented indicate that the activation and repression domains of Vnd are complex,
and whether Vnd functions as a transcriptional repressor or activator depends on 
both intra- and inter-molecular interactions.

PMCID: PMC546129
PMID: 15640442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Endocrinology. 2005 Mar;146(3):1025-34. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Minireview: transcriptional regulation in pancreatic development.

Habener JF(1), Kemp DM, Thomas MK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Howard 
Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, 55 Fruit Street, WEL320,
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. jhabener@partners.org

Considerable progress has been made in the understanding of the sequential
activation of signal transduction pathways and the expression of transcription
factors during pancreas development. Much of this understanding has been obtained
by analyses of the phenotypes of mice in which the expression of key genes has
been disrupted (knockout mice). Knockout of the genes for Pdx1, Hlxb9, Isl1, or
Hex results in an arrest of pancreas development at a very early stage (embryonic
d 8-9). Disruption of genes encoding components of the Notch signaling pathway,
e.g. Hes1 or neurogenin-3, abrogates development of the endocrine pancreas
(islets of Langerhans). Disruption of transcription factor genes expressed more
downstream in the developmental cascade (Beta2/NeuroD, Pax4, NKx2.2, and Nkx6.1) 
curtails the formation of insulin-producing beta-cells. An understanding of the
importance of transcription factor genes during pancreas development has provided
insights into the pathogenesis of diabetes, in which the mass of
insulin-producing beta-cells is reduced.

PMID: 15604203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mech Dev. 2005 Jan;122(1):43-56.

Hedgehog and retinoid signalling confines nkx2.2b expression to the lateral floor
plate of the zebrafish trunk.

Schäfer M(1), Kinzel D, Neuner C, Schartl M, Volff JN, Winkler C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Am
Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

The ventral neural tube of vertebrates consists of distinct neural progenitor
domains positioned along the dorsoventral (DV) axis that develop different types 
of moto- and interneurons. Several signalling molecules, most notably Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh), retinoic acid (RA) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) have been
implicated in the generation of these domains. Shh is secreted from the floor
plate, the ventral most neural tube structure that consists of the medial (MFP)
and the lateral floor plate (LFP). While the MFP is well characterized,
organization and function of the LFP remains unclear. Here, we describe the novel
homeobox gene nkx2.2b that is strongly expressed in the trunk LFP of zebrafish
and thus represents a unique marker for the characterization of LFP formation and
the identification of LFP deficient mutants. nkx2.2b and its paralog nkx2.2a
(formerly known as nk2.2 and nkx2.2) arose by gene duplication in zebrafish. Both
duplicates show significant differences in their expression patterns. For
example, while prominent nkx2.2a expression has been described in the ventral
brain [Barth, K.A., Wilson, S.W., 1995. Expression of zebrafish nk2.2 is
influenced by sonic hedgehog/vertebrate hedgehog-1 and demarcates a zone of
neuronal differentiation in the embryonic forebrain. Development 121, 1755-1768],
hardly any expression can be found in the trunk LFP, which is in contrast to
nkx2.2b. Overexpression, mutant and inhibitor analyses show that nkx2.2b
expression in the LFP is up-regulated by Shh, but repressed by retinoids and
ectopic islet-1 (isl1) expression. In contrast to previously described zebrafish 
trunk LFP markers, like e.g. tal2 or foxa2, nkx2.2b is exclusively expressed in
the LFP. Thus, it represents a unique tool to analyse the mechanisms of ventral
neural tube patterning in zebrafish.

PMID: 15582776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Chem Senses. 2004 Nov;29(9):823-31.

A strong nerve dependence of sonic hedgehog expression in basal cells in mouse
taste bud and an autonomous transcriptional control of genes in differentiated
taste cells.

Miura H(1), Kato H, Kusakabe Y, Tagami M, Miura-Ohnuma J, Ninomiya Y, Hino A.

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki
305-8642, Japan. hmiura@affrc.go.jp

The nerve-dependency of gene expression in mouse taste bud was examined through
an analysis of changes in gene expression in and around the taste buds in
circumvallate papillae after surgery of cranial nerve IXth (glossopharyngeal
nerve). The number of cells expressing T1r3, gustducin, Mash1 and Nkx2.2
gradually decreased after denervation. However, the expression intensity of these
genes was barely influenced by denervation, and strong expression was observed at
6 days after denervation. In contrast, the basal cell-specific Sonic hedgehog
(Shh) expression in the taste buds was decreased markedly at 6 h after
denervation. In the regeneration process of taste buds, Shh expression was
observed during a very early phase before taste bud formation. These results
indicate the autonomous transcriptional control of genes in differentiated taste 
cells and the strong nerve-dependency of Shh expression in basal cells.
Furthermore, in order to reveal the mitotic activity of Shh-expressing cells in
taste buds, the BrdU-labeling experiments were performed using a combination of
BrdU-immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization. BrdU-signal was very rarely 
observed in Shh-expressing cells immediately after BrdU injection, and the
signals were noted mainly in Ptc-expressing cells. BrdU signals rapidly increased
in Shh-expressing cells in following 12 h and began to decrease after 2 days
post-injection. These results suggest that most Shh-expressing cells are not
mitotically active, but that Shh-expressing cells may be in the early transient
developmental state of taste cells in taste buds.

PMID: 15574818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Neurosci. 2004 Nov 17;24(46):10530-41.

Postnatal neurogenesis and gliogenesis in the olfactory bulb from NG2-expressing 
progenitors of the subventricular zone.

Aguirre A(1), Gallo V.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2004 Dec 1;24(48):1 p following 10973.

We used a 2',3'-cyclic nucleotide 3'-phosphodiesterase (CNP)-enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP) transgenic mouse to study postnatal subventricular
zone (SVZ) progenitor fate, with a focus on the olfactory bulb (OB). The
postnatal OB of the CNP-EGFP mouse contained EGFP+ interneurons and
oligodendrocytes. In the anterior SVZ, the majority of EGFP+ progenitors were
NG2+. These NG2+/EGFP+ progenitors expressed the OB interneuron marker Er81, the 
neuroblast markers doublecortin (DC) and Distalless-related homeobox (DLX), or
the oligodendrocyte progenitor marker Nkx2.2. In the rostral migratory stream
(RMS), EGFP+ cells displayed a migrating phenotype. A fraction of these cells
were either NG2-/Er81+/DC+/DLX+ or NG2+/Nkx2.2+. DiI
(1,1'-dioctadecyl-3,3,3',3'-tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate) injection
into the lateral ventricle (LV) of early postnatal mice demonstrated that
NG2+/EGFP+ progenitors migrate from the SVZ through the RMS into the OB.
Moreover, fluorescence-activated cell-sorting-purified NG2+/CNP-EGFP+ or
NG2+/beta-actin-enhanced yellow fluorescent protein-positive (EYFP+) progenitors 
transplanted into the early postnatal LV displayed extensive rostral and caudal
migration. EYFP+ or EGFP+ graft-derived cells within the RMS were DLX+/Er81+ or
Nkx2.2+, migrated to the OB, and differentiated to interneurons and
oligodendrocytes. In the subcortical white matter (SCWM), grafted cells
differentiated to either oligodendrocytes or astrocytes. Transplantation of
NG2+/EYFP+ progenitors selectively purified from the SVZ showed that these cells 
were migratory and generated glia and neurons in the OB, hippocampus, and
striatum. In contrast, cortical, OB, or cerebellar NG2+ cells had a very limited 
migratory potential and gave rise to glia in the SCWM and striatum. Our findings 
indicate region-specific differences between NG2+ progenitor cells and show that 
NG2+ cells can migrate throughout the RMS and contribute to both gliogenesis and 
neurogenesis in the postnatal OB.

PMID: 15548668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2004 Nov;27(3):247-54.

Increased expression of Nkx2.2 and Olig2 identifies reactive oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells responding to demyelination in the adult CNS.

Fancy SP(1), Zhao C, Franklin RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair and Centre for Veterinary Sciences,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB3 0ES, United Kingdom.

Within the adult CNS, a quiescent population of oligodendrocyte progenitor cells 
(OPCs) become activated in response to demyelination and give rise to
remyelinating oligodendrocytes. During development, OPC differentiation is
controlled by several transcription factors including Olig1 and Olig2, and
Nkx2.2. We hypothesized that these genes may serve similar functions in activated
adult OPCs allowing them to become remyelinating oligodendrocytes and tested this
hypothesis by examining their expression during the remyelination of a
toxin-induced rodent model of demyelination. During the acute phase of
demyelination, OPCs within the lesion increased their expression of Nkx2.2 and
Olig2, two transcription factors that in combination are critical for
oligodendrocyte differentiation during developmental myelination. This activation
was not associated with increases in Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression, which does 
not appear essential for CNS remyelination. Consistent with a role in the
activation and differentiation of OPCs, these increases were delayed in old adult
animals where the rate of remyelination is slowed. Our data suggest the
hypothesis that increased expression of Nkx2.2 and Olig2 plays a critically
important role in the differentiation of adult OPCs into remyelinating
oligodendrocytes and that these genes may present novel targets for therapeutic
manipulation in cases where remyelination is impaired.

PMID: 15519240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Neuroscience. 2004;128(4):785-96.

Molecular profiling indicates avian branchiomotor nuclei invade the hindbrain
alar plate.

Ju MJ(1), Aroca P, Luo J, Puelles L, Redies C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, University of Duisburg-Essen Medical School, D-45122
Essen, Germany.

It is generally believed that the spinal cord and hindbrain consist of a motor
basal plate and a sensory alar plate. We now have molecular markers for these
territories. The relationship of migrating branchiomotor neurons to molecularly
defined alar and basal domains was examined in the chicken embryo by mapping the 
expression of cadherin-7 and cadherin-6B, in comparison to genetic markers for
ventrodorsal patterning (Otp, Pax6, Pax7, Nkx2.2, and Shh) and motoneuron
subpopulations (Phox2b and Isl1). We show cadherin-7 is expressed in a complete
radial domain occupying a lateral region of the hindbrain basal plate. The
cadherin-7 domain abuts the medial border of Pax7 expression; this common limit
defines, or at least approximates, the basal/alar boundary. The hindbrain
branchiomotor neurons originate in the medial part of the basal plate, close to
the floor plate. Their cadherin-7-positive axons grow into the alar plate and
exit the hindbrain close to the corresponding afferent nerve root. The
cadherin-7-positive neuronal cell bodies later translocate laterally, following
this axonal trajectory, thereby passing through the cadherin-7-positive basal
plate domain. Finally, the cell bodies traverse the molecularly defined
basal/alar boundary and move into positions within the alar plate. After the
migration has ended, the branchiomotor neurons switch expression from cadherin-7 
to cadherin-6B. These findings demonstrate that a specific subset of primary
motor neurons, the branchiomotor neurons, migrate into the alar plate of the
chicken embryo. Consequently, the century-old concept that all primary motor
neurons come to reside in the basal plate should be revised.

PMID: 15464286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Glia. 2004 Oct;48(1):14-26.

Early stages of oligodendrocyte development in the embryonic murine spinal cord
proceed normally in the absence of Hoxa2.

Nicolay DJ(1), Doucette JR, Nazarali AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.

Recent discoveries have enhanced our knowledge of the transcriptional control of 
oligodendrocyte (OG) development. In particular, the transcription factors (TFs) 
Olig2, Pax6, and Nkx2.2 have been shown to be important in the specification
and/or maturation of the OG lineage. Although numerous other TFs are expressed by
OGs, little is known regarding their role(s) in oligodendrogenesis. One such TF
is the homeobox gene Hoxa2, which was recently shown to be expressed by O4(+)
pro-oligodendrocytes. The objectives of this study were to examine the expression
of Hoxa2 during the early stages of OG development, as well as to determine
whether Hoxa2 is required for specification and/or early maturation of OGs.
Immunocytochemical analysis of primary mixed glial cultures demonstrated that
Hoxa2 was expressed throughout oligodendrogenesis, diminishing only with the
acquisition of a myelinating phenotype. Serial transverse spinal cord sections
from embryonic days 12.5, 14.25, 16, and 18 Hoxa2(+/+), Hoxa2(+/-), and
Hoxa2(-/-) mice were subjected to single and double immunohistochemical analysis 
in order to examine Hoxa2, Olig2, Nkx2.2, and Pax6 expression profiles. Results
obtained from Hoxa2(+/+) and Hoxa2(+/-) mice suggested that Hoxa2 was expressed
by migratory oligodendroglial cells. In addition, comparison of spinal cord
sections obtained from Hoxa2(+/+), Hoxa2(+/-), and Hoxa2(-/-) mice suggested that
specification and early maturation of OGs proceeded normally in the absence of
Hoxa2, since there were no obvious alterations in the expression patterns of
Olig2, Nkx2.2, and/or Pax6. Hence, although Hoxa2 is expressed throughout OG
development, it does not appear to be critical for early stages of
oligodendrogenesis in the murine spinal cord.

PMID: 15326611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Development. 2004 Aug;131(16):4071-83.

Integration of anteroposterior and dorsoventral regulation of Phox2b
transcription in cranial motoneuron progenitors by homeodomain proteins.

Samad OA(1), Geisen MJ, Caronia G, Varlet I, Zappavigna V, Ericson J, Goridis C, 
Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS UMR7104, 
BP 10142-67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Little is known about the molecular mechanisms that integrate anteroposterior
(AP) and dorsoventral (DV) positional information in neural progenitors that
specify distinct neuronal types within the vertebrate neural tube. We have
previously shown that in ventral rhombomere (r)4 of Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 mutant mouse 
embryos, Phox2b expression is not properly maintained in the visceral motoneuron 
progenitor domain (pMNv), resulting in a switch to serotonergic fate. Here, we
show that Phox2b is a direct target of Hoxb1 and Hoxb2. We found a highly
conserved Phox2b proximal enhancer that mediates rhombomere-restricted expression
and contains separate Pbx-Hox (PH) and Prep/Meis (P/M) binding sites. We further 
show that both the PH and P/M sites are essential for Hox-Pbx-Prep ternary
complex formation and regulation of the Phox2b enhancer activity in ventral r4.
Moreover, the DV factor Nkx2.2 enhances Hox-mediated transactivation via a
derepression mechanism. Finally, we show that induction of ectopic
Phox2b-expressing visceral motoneurons in the chick hindbrain requires the
combined activities of Hox and Nkx2 homeodomain proteins. This study takes an
important first step to understand how activators and repressors, induced along
the AP and DV axes in response to signaling pathways, interact to regulate
specific target gene promoters, leading to neuronal fate specification in the
appropriate developmental context.

PMID: 15289435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Development. 2004 Aug;131(15):3773-84. Epub 2004 Jul 7.

The winged helix transcription factor Foxg1 facilitates retinal ganglion cell
axon crossing of the ventral midline in the mouse.

Pratt T(1), Tian NM, Simpson TI, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Biomedical Sciences, George Square, The
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK. t.pratt@ed.ac.uk

During normal development, retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) project axons along the 
optic nerve to the optic chiasm on the ventral surface of the hypothalamus. In
rodents, most RGC growth cones then cross the ventral midline to join the
contralateral optic tract; those that do not cross join the ipsilateral optic
tract. Contralaterally projecting RGCs are distributed across the retina whereas 
ipsilaterally projecting RGCs are concentrated in temporal retina. The
transcription factor Foxg1 (also known as BF1) is expressed at several key
locations along this pathway. Analysis of Foxg1 expression using lacZ reporter
transgenes shows that Foxg1 is normally expressed in most, if not all, nasal RGCs
but not in most temporal RGCs, neither at the time they project nor earlier in
their lineage. Foxg1 is also expressed at the optic chiasm. Mice that lack Foxg1 
die at birth and, although the shape of their eyes is abnormal, their retinas
still project axons to the brain via the optic chiasm. Using anterograde and
retrograde tract tracing, we show that there is an eightfold increase in the
ipsilateral projection in Foxg1-/- embryos. The distributions of cells expressing
the transcription factors Foxg1 and Nkx2.2, and cell-surface molecules Ephb2,
ephrin B2 and SSEA-1 (Fut4) have been correlated to the normally developing
retinothalamic projection and we show they are not much altered in the developing
Foxg1-/- retina and optic chiasm. As much of the increased ipsilateral projection
in Foxg1-/- embryos arises from temporal RGCs that are unlikely to have an
autonomous requirement for Foxg1, we propose that the phenotype reflects at least
in part a requirement for Foxg1 outwith the RGCs themselves, most likely at the
optic chiasm.

PMID: 15240555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Development. 2004 Jul;131(14):3295-306. Epub 2004 Jun 16.

Analysis of embryonic motoneuron gene regulation: derepression of general
activators function in concert with enhancer factors.

Lee SK(1), Jurata LW, Funahashi J, Ruiz EC, Pfaff SL.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

The underlying transcriptional mechanisms that establish the proper spatial and
temporal pattern of gene expression required for specifying neuronal fate are
poorly defined. We have characterized how the Hb9 gene is expressed in developing
motoneurons in order to understand how transcription is directed to specific
cells within the developing CNS. We found that non-specific general-activator
proteins such as E2F and Sp1 are capable of driving widespread low level
transcription of Hb9 in many cell types throughout the neural tube; however,
their activity is modulated by specific repressor and activator complexes. The
general-activators of Hb9 are suppressed from triggering inappropriate
transcription by repressor proteins Irx3 and Nkx2.2. High level motoneuron
expression is achieved by assembling an enhancesome on a compact
evolutionarily-conserved segment of Hb9 located from -7096 to -6896. The ensemble
of LIM-HD and bHLH proteins that interact with this enhancer change as motoneuron
development progresses, facilitating both the activation and maintenance of Hb9
expression in developing and mature motoneurons. These findings provide direct
support for the derepression model of gene regulation and cell fate specification
in the neural tube, as well as establishing a role for enhancers in targeting
gene expression to a single neuronal subtype in the spinal cord.

PMID: 15201216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Transplant Proc. 2004 May;36(4):1151-8.

Expression in murine teratocarcinoma F9 cells of transcription factors involved
in pancreas development.

O'Driscoll L(1), Gammell P, Clynes M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Cellular Biotechnology, Dublin City University,
Glasnevin, Dublin, Ireland. Lorraine.ODriscoll@dcu.ie

BACKGROUND: Although it has been established that formation and functional
differentiation of the pancreas from embryonic endoderm is associated with
activation/inactivation of many genes controlled by specific sets of
transcription factors, the role and activation sequence of individual
transcription factors has not yet been fully elucidated. This study sought to
differentiate a murine teratocarcinoma cell line, F9, to endodermal-like cells
and, subsequently; to investigate the effects of regulated expression of
transcription factors in pancreas development.
METHODS: Following differentiation using retinoic acid and db cAMP (RAC),
resulting F9 cells (F9-RAC) were transfected with cDNAs for PDX-1, ngn3, beta
2/NeuroD (beta 2), and Nkx2.2, singly or in combination. Expression of these
transcription factors was investigated using RT-PCR and immunofluorescence
techniques. RT-PCR analysis was used to assess the subsequent effects of
expression of these factors on endogenous genes related to pancreas development.
RESULTS: Regulated differentiation of F9 cells generated endodermal-like cell
types. Following transfection, PDX-1, ngn3, beta 2, and Nkx2.2 were expressed in 
F9-RAC cells, with their proteins localized mainly in cellular nuclei. Expression
of these factors apparently did not affect the endogenous expression of
preproinsulin, PDX-1, beta 2, Isl1, Pax4, Pax6, Sonic hedgehog, and Indian
hedgehog.
CONCLUSION: This study describes the successful transient expression of
transcription factors related to pancreas development, following directed
differentiation of F9 cells to endoderm-like cells, and shows that treatment of
F9 cells with a combination of RAC causes up-regulation of genes relevant to
pancreatic development. The lack of further effect of regulated transcription
factor expression on these genes may suggest that parietal endoderm- like cells
derived from F9 cells is not the optimal lineage from which to develop beta
cells. It may be useful to include F9-derived visceral endoderm in future
studies.

PMID: 15194401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Dev Biol. 2004 Jun 15;270(2):308-21.

Converse control of oligodendrocyte and astrocyte lineage development by Sonic
hedgehog in the chick spinal cord.

Agius E(1), Soukkarieh C, Danesin C, Kan P, Takebayashi H, Soula C, Cochard P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR5547 CNRS/UPS, Université Paul
Sabatier, Toulouse, France. agius@cict.fr

In the developing spinal cord, oligodendrocyte progenitors (OLPs) originate from 
the ventral neuroepithelium and the specification of this lineage depends on the 
inductive activity of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) produced by ventral midline cells. On 
the other hand, it has been shown that OLP identity is acquired by the
coexpression of the transcription factors olig2 and nkx2.2. Although initially
expressed in adjacent nonoverlapping domains of the ventral neuroepithelium,
these transcription factors become coexpressed in the pMN domain at the time of
OLP specification through dorsal extension of the Nkx2.2 domain. Here we show
that Shh is sufficient to promote the coexpression of Olig2 and Nkx2.2 in
neuroepithelial cells. In addition, Shh activity is necessary for this
coexpression since blocking Shh signalling totally abolishes Olig2 expression and
impedes dorsal extension of Nkx2.2. Although Shh at these stages affects
neuroepithelial cell proliferation, the dorsal extension of the Nkx2.2 domain is 
not due to progenitor proliferation but to repatterning of the ventral
neuroepithelium. Finally, Shh not only stimulates OLP specification but also
simultaneously restricts the ventral extension of the astrocyte progenitor (AP)
domain and reduces astrocyte development. We propose that specification of
distinct glial lineages is the result of a choice that depends on Shh signalling.

PMID: 15183716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Nat Neurosci. 2004 Jun;7(6):589-95. Epub 2004 May 9.

Ascl1/Mash1 is required for the development of central serotonergic neurons.

Pattyn A(1), Simplicio N, van Doorninck JH, Goridis C, Guillemot F, Brunet JF.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75005 Paris, France.

The transcriptional control of the differentiation of central serotonergic (5-HT)
neurons in vertebrates has recently come under scrutiny and has been shown to
involve the homeobox genes Nkx2-2 and Lmx1b, the Ets-domain gene Pet1 (also known
as Fev) and the zinc-finger gene Gata3. The basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) gene
Ascl1 (also known as Mash1) is coexpressed with Nkx2-2 in the neuroepithelial
domain of the hindbrain, which gives rise to 5-HT neurons. Here we show in the
mouse that Ascl1 is essential for the birth of 5-HT neurons, both as a proneural 
gene for the production of postmitotic neuronal precursors and as a determinant
of the serotonergic phenotype for the parallel activation of Gata3, Lmx1b and
Pet1. Thus Ascl1, which is essential for noradrenergic differentiation, is also a
determinant of the serotonergic phenotype.

PMID: 15133515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Development. 2004 May;131(9):2037-48.

Otx2 regulates the extent, identity and fate of neuronal progenitor domains in
the ventral midbrain.

Puelles E(1), Annino A, Tuorto F, Usiello A, Acampora D, Czerny T, Brodski C, Ang
SL, Wurst W, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, New Hunt's House, 4th Floor, King's
College London, Guy's Campus, London Bridge, London SE1 1UL, UK.

The specification of distinct neuronal cell-types is controlled by inducing
signals whose interpretation in distinct areas along the central nervous system
provides neuronal progenitors with a precise and typical expression code of
transcription factors. To gain insights into this process, we investigated the
role of Otx2 in the specification of identity and fate of neuronal progenitors in
the ventral midbrain. To achieve this, Otx2 was inactivated by Cre recombinase
under the transcriptional control of En1. Lack of Otx2 in the ventrolateral and
posterior midbrain results in a dorsal expansion of Shh expression and in a
dorsal and anterior rotation of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary and Fgf8
expression. Indeed, in this mutant correct positioning of the ventral site of
midbrain-hindbrain boundary and Fgf8 expression are efficiently controlled by
Otx1 function, thus allowing the study of the identity and fate of neuronal
progenitors of the ventral midbrain in the absence of Otx2. Our results suggest
that Otx2 acts in two ways: by repressing Nkx2.2 in the ventral midbrain and
maintaining the Nkx6.1-expressing domain through dorsal antagonism on Shh.
Failure of this control affects the identity code and fate of midbrain
progenitors, which exhibit features in common with neuronal precursors of the
rostral hindbrain even though the midbrain retains its regional identity and
these neuronal precursors are rostral to Fgf8 expression. Dopaminergic neurons
are greatly reduced in number, red nucleus precursors disappear from the ventral 
midbrain where a relevant number of serotonergic neurons are generated. These
results indicate that Otx2 is an essential regulator of the identity, extent and 
fate of neuronal progenitor domains in the ventral midbrain and provide novel
insights into the mechanisms by which neuronal diversity is generated in the
central nervous system.

PMID: 15105370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Glia. 2004 May;46(3):311-22.

Transient upregulation of Nkx2.2 expression in oligodendrocyte lineage cells
during remyelination.

Watanabe M(1), Hadzic T, Nishiyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neurobiology, University of Connecticut, Storrs, 
Connecticut 06269, USA.

While numerous oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) exist in the adult central
nervous system (CNS), the molecular signals that promote or inhibit their
differentiation into mature oligodendrocytes (OLs) are not known. To investigate 
whether remyelination in the adult CNS is regulated by the same mechanisms that
promote developmental myelination, we used an acute demyelinating/remyelinating
lesion in the adult rat spinal cord to examine the expression of the homeodomain 
transcription factor Nkx2.2, which has previously been implicated in
oligodendrocyte differentiation during embryonic development. After a
demyelinating insult, Nkx2.2 expression was upregulated first in NG2-expressing
OPCs surrounding the lesion and subsequently in both precursors and OLs that
appeared inside the lesion prior to the onset of remyelination. The temporal and 
spatial pattern of Nkx2.2 upregulation coincided with that of oligodendrocyte
differentiation characterized in our previous study. A similar increase in the
level of Nkx2.2 expression was observed in the postnatal developing optic nerve
in a wave from the proximal to the distal retinal end. In vitro Nkx2.2 was
expressed in OPCs and immature OLs isolated from postnatal rat spinal cord but
was absent from mature OLs. These observations indicate that the process of
generating new OLs in a remyelinating lesion recapitulates the developmental
program involving activation of the Nkx2.2 gene, which may trigger the existing
NG2-expressing precursors in the adult CNS to undergo terminal differentiation
into remyelinating OLs.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15048854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Dev Biol. 2004 Apr 1;268(1):123-34.

The role of Brn4/Pou3f4 and Pax6 in forming the pancreatic glucagon cell
identity.

Heller RS(1), Stoffers DA, Liu A, Schedl A, Crenshaw EB 3rd, Madsen OD, Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, DK-2820
Gentofte, Denmark. shll@hagedorn.dk

Brain 4 (Brn4/Pou3f4) and Pax6 are POU-homeodomain and paired-homeodomain
transcription factors, respectively, that are expressed in the brain and the
glucagon-expressing cells in the pancreas. Brn4 expression begins at embryonic
day 10 in the pancreas, just before pax6 and both appear in the glucagon
immunoreactive cells. At a later time point, E19, no Brn4 co-localization is
observed with insulin or somatostatin but a rare pancreatic polypeptide
(PP)-producing cell can be found, while Pax6 is found in all endocrine cells.
These data suggest that brn4 is the only alpha-cell specific transcription factor
yet identified; therefore, we sought to analyze alpha-cell development and
function in mice with a targeted disruption of the brn4 gene. In homozygous
brn4(-/-) mice, pancreatic bud formation, glucagon cell numbers and physiological
measurements all appear normal. Examination of other transcription factors found 
in the glucagon cells showed normal Pax6 and Nkx2.2 immunoreactivity, suggesting 
that Brn4 does not regulate these transcription factors. Pax6 mutant mice
(pax6(Sey/Sey)), with a natural inactivating mutation in pax6, have few endocrine
cells but normal numbers of Brn4 and Nkx2.2 cells. The pancreatic phenotype of
the pax6 mutants can be rescued with a YAC clone containing the human Pax6 gene.

PMID: 15031110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 21;279(21):22228-35. Epub 2004 Mar 16.

Identification of a novel PDX-1 binding site in the human insulin gene enhancer.

Le Lay J(1), Matsuoka TA, Henderson E, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37215, USA.

Islet beta cell type-specific transcription of the insulin gene is regulated by a
number of cis-acting elements found within the proximal 5'-flanking region. The
control sequences conserved between mammalian insulin genes are acted upon by
transcription factors, like PDX-1 and BETA-2, that are also involved in islet
beta cell function and formation. In the current study, we investigated the
contribution to human insulin expression of the GG2 motif found between
nucleotides -145 and -140 relative to the transcription start site. Site-specific
mutants were generated within GG2 that displayed a parallel increase (i.e. -144
base pair) or decrease (i.e. -141 base pair) in insulin enhancer-driven reporter 
and gel shift binding activity in beta cells consistent with human GG2 being
under positive regulatory control. In contrast, the corresponding site in the
rodent insulin gene, which only differs from the human at nucleotides -144 and
-141, is negatively regulated by the Nkx2.2 transcription factor (Cissell, M. A.,
Zhao, L., Sussel, L., Henderson, E., and Stein, R. (2003) J. Biol. Chem. 278,
751-756). Human GG2 activator binding activity was present in nuclear extracts
prepared from human islets and enriched in those from rodent beta cell lines. The
human GG2 activator binding factor(s) was shown to be approximately 38-40 kDa and
distinct from other size-matched islet-enriched transcription factors, including 
Nkx2.2, Pax-4, Cdx2/3, and Isl-1. Combined DNA chromatographic purification and
mass spectrometry analysis revealed that the GG2 activator was PDX-1. These
results demonstrate that the GG2 element, despite its divergence from the core
homeodomain consensus binding motif, is a site for PDX-1 activation in the human 
insulin gene.

PMID: 15028719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Development. 2004 Mar;131(5):1165-73.

Gata2 specifies serotonergic neurons downstream of sonic hedgehog.

Craven SE(1), Lim KC, Ye W, Engel JD, de Sauvage F, Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Genentech Inc., 1 DNA Way, South San
Francisco, California 94080, USA. craven@gene.com

Distinct classes of serotonergic (5-HT) neurons develop along the ventral midline
of the vertebrate hindbrain. Here, we identify a Sonic hedgehog (Shh)-regulated
cascade of transcription factors that acts to generate a specific subset of 5-HT 
neurons. This transcriptional cascade is sufficient for the induction of rostral 
5-HT neurons within rhombomere 1 (r1), which project to the forebrain, but not
for the induction of caudal 5-HT neurons, which largely terminate in the spinal
cord. Within the rostral hindbrain, the Shh-activated homeodomain proteins Nkx2.2
and Nkx6.1 cooperate to induce the closely related zinc-finger transcription
factors Gata2 and Gata3. Gata2 in turn is necessary and sufficient to activate
the transcription factors Lmx1b and Pet1, and to induce 5-HT neurons within r1.
In contrast to Gata2, Gata3 is not required for the specification of rostral 5-HT
neurons and appears unable to substitute for the loss of Gata2. Our findings
reveal that the identity of closely related 5-HT subclasses occurs through
distinct responses of adjacent rostrocaudal progenitor domains to broad ventral
inducers.

PMID: 14973276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Mar 2;101(9):2924-9. Epub 2004 Feb 17.

Ghrelin cells replace insulin-producing beta cells in two mouse models of
pancreas development.

Prado CL(1), Pugh-Bernard AE, Elghazi L, Sosa-Pineda B, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Barbara Davis Center, University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center, 4200 East 9th Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

The pancreatic islet is necessary for maintaining glucose homeostasis. Within the
pancreatic islet, the homeodomain protein Nkx2.2 is essential for the
differentiation of all insulin-producing beta cells and a subset of
glucagon-producing alpha cells (1). Mice lacking Nkx2.2 have relatively normal
sized islets, but a large number of cells within the mutant islet fail to produce
any of the four major islet hormones. In this study we demonstrate that Nkx2.2
mutant endocrine cells have been replaced by cells that produce ghrelin, an
appetite-promoting peptide predominantly found in the stomach. Intriguingly,
normal mouse pancreas also contains a small population of ghrelin-producing
cells, defining a new islet "epsilon" cell population. The expansion of
ghrelin-producing cells at the expense of beta cells may be a general phenomenon,
because we demonstrate that Pax4 mutant mice display a similar phenotype. We
propose that insulin and ghrelin cells share a common progenitor and that Nkx2.2 
and Pax4 are required to specify or maintain differentiation of the beta cell
fate. This finding also suggests that there is a genetic component underlying the
balance between insulin and ghrelin in regulating glucose metabolism.

PMCID: PMC365721
PMID: 14970313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Acta Neuropathol. 2004 Mar;107(3):277-82. Epub 2004 Jan 17.

Expression of oligodendrocyte lineage genes in oligodendroglial and astrocytic
gliomas.

Riemenschneider MJ(1), Koy TH, Reifenberger G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Moorenstrasse 5,
40225 Duesseldorf, Germany.

The oligodendrocyte lineage genes OLIG1 and OLIG2 have been reported as potential
diagnostic markers for oligodendrogliomas [Lu et al. (2001) Proc Natl Acad Sci
USA 98:10851-10856; Marie et al. (2001) Lancet 358:298-300]. We investigated the 
mRNA expression of OLIG1 and OLIG2, as well as four other genes involved in
oligodendrocyte development ( E2A, HEB, NKX2.2, and PDGFRA) in a panel of 70
gliomas, including 9 oligodendrogliomas, 11 anaplastic oligodendrogliomas, 5
oligoastrocytomas, 10 anaplastic oligoastrocytomas, 10 diffuse astrocytomas, 10
anaplastic astrocytomas, and 15 glioblastomas. Most tumors demonstrated higher
transcript levels of these genes as compared to non-neoplastic adult brain
tissue. Four glioblastomas showed markedly increased PDGFRA mRNA expression due
to PDGFRA gene amplification. Statistical analyses revealed no significant
expression differences between oligodendroglial and astrocytic tumors. In
oligodendroglial tumors, expression of the six genes was not significantly
correlated to loss of heterozygosity on chromosome arms 1p and 19q. Thus,
expression of the investigated oligodendrocyte lineage genes is up-regulated
relative to non-neoplastic brain tissue in the majority of oligodendroglial and
astrocytic tumors, suggesting that glioma cells are arrested in or recapitulate
molecular phenotypes corresponding to early stages of glial development. However,
the determination of mRNA expression of these genes by means of reverse
transcription-PCR does not appear to be diagnostically useful as a marker for
oligodendrogliomas.

PMID: 14730454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Dev Biol. 2004 Feb 1;266(1):178-89.

The concerted activities of Pax4 and Nkx2.2 are essential to initiate pancreatic 
beta-cell differentiation.

Wang J(1), Elghazi L, Parker SE, Kizilocak H, Asano M, Sussel L, Sosa-Pineda B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Tumor Cell Biology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Pancreatic beta cells play a central role in maintaining glucose homeostasis
because they secrete insulin in response to increased level of blood glucose;
failure of this capacity constitutes a major component of the pathogenesis of
diabetes. The identification of key regulators of pancreatic beta-cell
differentiation is relevant for the overall understanding of this process and for
future experiments aimed at regenerating insulin-producing beta cells from
pancreatic or embryonic stem cells. Several studies using transgenic or knockout 
mice have established that the development and function of pancreatic beta cells 
are controlled by several genes encoding specific transcription factors. By
inactivating the homeobox gene Pax4, we previously demonstrated that its function
is required for the formation of mature insulin-producing cells. Here, we show
that during pancreas ontogeny, Pax4 is expressed in differentiating endocrine
cells, including beta cells. Pax4 activity appears essential for appropriate
initiation of beta-cell differentiation because loss of Pax4 prevents the
expression of Pdx1, HB9 and insulin in beta-cell precursors. This role of Pax4
appears to be accomplished via its genetic interaction with another homeobox
gene, Nkx2.2.

PMID: 14729487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Mar;18(3):533-48. Epub 2003 Dec 30.

Conserved transcriptional regulatory domains of the pdx-1 gene.

Gerrish K(1), Van Velkinburgh JC, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, 723 Light Hall, Nashville, Tennessee 37215, USA.

The pancreas and duodenum homeobox protein 1 (PDX-1) homeodomain-containing
transcription factor affects both pancreatic endocrine cell development and adult
islet beta-cell function. Cell-type-specific expression is controlled by
sequences 5' flanking the pdx-1 gene transcription start site. One principal
control region is located roughly between -2800 and -1600 bp and spans three
conserved, distinct, and functionally important subdomains, termed areas I, II,
and III. In this study, we found that an upstream control region in the rat pdx-1
gene located between -6200 and -5670 bp is also present in the mouse, chicken,
and human genes. This region is capable of independently directing pancreatic
beta-cell-selective reporter gene expression and potentiating area I/II-driven
activity. This newly recognized conserved subdomain has been termed area IV. The 
islet-enriched forkhead box A2 (FoxA2), NK2 homeobox 2.2 (Nkx2.2), and pancreas
and duodenum homeobox protein 1 (PDX-1) transcription factors have been shown to 
activate area IV-driven reporter gene expression as well as bind to this region
of the endogenous gene in beta-cells. Analysis of the histone H3 and H4
acetylation level also indicated that areas I-IV are within transcriptionally
active chromatin in beta-cells. Our data suggests that pdx-1 transcription is
also regulated by factors acting upon conserved area IV sequences.

PMID: 14701942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Glia. 2004 Jan 1;45(1):67-74.

Olig genes are expressed in a heterogeneous population of precursor cells in the 
developing spinal cord.

Liu Y(1), Rao MS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, Maryland 
21224, USA.

Recent results from multiple laboratories have identified Olig genes as important
in regulating glial differentiation. Here we show that Olig2 expression at early 
stages of development (prior to E16.5) identifies a domain in the developing
spinal cord, which contains a heterogeneous population of progenitors that
includes stem cells and glial progenitors. We show that Nkx2.2 and Olig2, which
are present initially in nonoverlapping domains, are coexpressed at later stages,
likely due to a second wave of Olig expression. We find that Olig1, like Olig2,
is present in cells that coexpress astrocytic and radial glial markers and that
Olig1/2 double knockouts lead to a loss of oligodendrocytes with preservation of 
NG2 expression. These results coupled with previously published data indicate
that Olig1/2 and Nkx2.2, while clearly important in regulating early progenitor
cell differentiation, do not unambiguously demonstrate the existence of an
oligodendrocyte-neuron precursor or negate the existing retroviral lineage and
clonal analysis data that suggest the existence of other types of precursors such
as oligodendrocyte-astrocyte precursors or neuronal precursors.

Published 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc

PMID: 14648547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Glia. 2004 Jan 1;45(1):1-16.

Transplantation of glial-restricted precursor cells into the adult spinal cord:
survival, glial-specific differentiation, and preferential migration in white
matter.

Han SS(1), Liu Y, Tyler-Polsz C, Rao MS, Fischer I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19129, USA.

Glial-restricted precursor (GRP) cells are among a number of candidate cells for 
transplantation repair of CNS injury. The isolation and characterization of these
cells in vitro have been described previously, but their in vivo properties are
not well understood. We examined the fate and migration of grafted fetal GRP
cells harvested from alkaline phosphatase-expressing transgenic rats into intact 
and injured spinal cord. Transplanted GRP cells survived for at least 6 weeks and
differentiated along astrocytic and oligodendrocytic but not neuronal lineages.
Cells grafted into the intact spinal cord exhibited robust migration along
longitudinal white matter tracts and by 6 weeks migrated more than 15 mm. In
contrast, migration of GRP cells in the gray matter was very limited. We then
examined the phenotypic properties of proliferating endogenous precursors in
response to injury by BrdU labeling. The predominant proliferating population
seen after injury consisted of GRP-like cells with Nkx2.2/olig2 phenotype.
Incorporation of BrdU by endogenous cells suggests that the environment provides 
proliferation signals and is permissive to glial precursor survival. To test if
exogenous GRP cells would respond similarly, we transplanted GRP cells into a
lateral funiculus injury. GRP cells survived and differentiated along glial
lineages and migrated along white matter tracts in the injured spinal cord.
Directed homing toward the lesion was not seen and there was no significant bias 
in differentiation between cells transplanted into injured and uninjured spinal
cord. GRP cell transplants may therefore provide a cellular transplant that can
respond to appropriate endogenous cues to produce therapeutic molecules and new
glial cells after injury.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14648541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Neurosci. 2003 Nov 5;23(31):9961-7.

Lmx1b, Pet-1, and Nkx2.2 coordinately specify serotonergic neurotransmitter
phenotype.

Cheng L(1), Chen CL, Luo P, Tan M, Qiu M, Johnson R, Ma Q.

Author information: 
(1)The Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Serotonergic (5-HT) neurons in the brainstem modulate a wide range of
physiological processes and behaviors. Two transcription factor genes, Pet-1 and 
Nkx2.2, are necessary but not sufficient to specify the 5-HT transmitter
phenotype. Here we show that the Lim class homeobox gene Lmx1b is required for
proper formation of the entire 5-HT system in the hindbrain, as indicated by the 
loss of expression of genes necessary for serotonin synthesis and transport in
Lmx1b null mice. Lmx1b and Pet1 act downstream of Nkx2.2, and their expression is
independently regulated at the time when 5-HT transmitter phenotype is specified.
Ectopic expression of Lmx1b plus Pet-1 is able to induce formation of 5-HT cells 
in the most ventral spinal cord, where Nkx2.2 is normally expressed. Combined
expression of all three genes, Lmx1b, Pet-1, and Nkx2.2, drives 5-HT
differentiation in the dorsal spinal cord. Our studies therefore define a
molecular pathway necessary and sufficient to specify the serotonergic
neurotransmitter phenotype.

PMID: 14602809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Pancreas. 2003 Nov;27(4):345-55.

Analysis of expression profiles of islet-associated transcription and growth
factors during beta-cell neogenesis from duct cells in partially duct-ligated
mice.

Li M(1), Miyagawa J, Moriwaki M, Yuan M, Yang Q, Kozawa J, Yamamoto K, Imagawa A,
Iwahashi H, Tochino Y, Yamagata K, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: Beta-cell neogenesis from pancreatic duct cells has been reported
to occur in duct-ligated rat. Nevertheless, detailed process of this phenomenon
has not been clarified.
AIMS AND METHODOLOGY: To clarify the mechanism of beta-cell neogenesis, a partial
pancreatic duct ligation mouse model was created. Proliferation of duct cells,
beta-cell neogenesis, and expression of transcription factors and
differentiation/growth factors were studied by immunohistochemistry, cDNA array, 
and RT-PCR methods.
RESULTS: In the duct-ligated portion of the pancreas, newly formed islet-like
cell clusters (ICCs) were observed arising from the ducts on day 7 and afterward.
Transcription factors, such as pancreatic and duodenal homeobox gene-1 (PDX-1),
paired box factor 6 (Pax6), islet1 and Nkx2.2-positive cells, and protein gene
product 9.5 (PGP9.5) were also induced in duct lining cells. By cDNA microarray
analysis, expression of insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) and transforming
growth factor beta1 (TGF-beta1) were above control levels on day 5, and RT-PCR
showed an increase from day 5 to day 28. IGF-1 and activin A-positive cells were 
detected in ducts. In addition, expression of betacellulin (BTC), heparin-binding
epidermal growth factor-like growth factor (HB-EGF), and TGF-alpha were also
increased from day 3 or 5.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that beta-cell or endocrine precursors are
localized among duct lining cells. Induction of several islet cell-associated
transcription factors and differentiation and/or growth factors may play
important roles during beta-cell neogenesis in this model.

PMID: 14576499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Jan;18(1):142-9. Epub 2003 Oct 23.

Neurogenin3 activates the islet differentiation program while repressing its own 
expression.

Smith SB(1), Watada H, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Hormone Research Institute, University of California San
Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, California 94143-0534, USA.

Expression of the proendocrine factor Neurogenin3 determines which progenitor
cells in the developing pancreas will differentiate into the endocrine cells of
the islets of Langerhans. To better understand how Neurogenin3 directs endocrine 
differentiation, we examined the mechanisms by which Neurogenin3 regulates the
promoters of three transcription factor genes expressed in endocrine precursor
cells: the nkx2.2 gene, the PAX4 gene, and the NEUROG3 gene, the human gene
encoding Neurogenin3 itself. The function of all three promoters depends on at
least one critical E box, a common DNA sequence that forms a binding site for
basic helix-loop-helix proteins like Neurogenin3. Neurogenin3 bound to and
effectively activated transcription through the nkx2.2 and PAX4 E boxes. In
contrast, Neurogenin3 strongly repressed the NEUROG3 promoter, although a
proximal E box was required for activity in the absence of Neurogenin3,
suggesting that a ubiquitous transcriptional activator may bind to this site, and
that Neurogenin3 could act as a competitive inhibitor of this activator. This
hypothesis was supported by the lack of evidence for significant intrinsic
transcriptional repression capacity in the Neurogenin3 protein, and by the
ability of isolated DNA-binding basic helix-loop-helix domains to repress the
NEUROG3 promoter. Neurogenin3 produced additional repression, however, when the
protein included an intact transcriptional activation domain, suggesting that it 
may also induce the expression of a downstream transcriptional repressor. In
summary, while Neurogenin3 orchestrates islet cell differentiation by activating 
islet cell transcription factor genes, it simultaneously represses its own
promoter.

PMID: 14576336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Neurosci. 2003 Oct 22;23(29):9547-56.

Cross-repressive interaction of the Olig2 and Nkx2.2 transcription factors in
developing neural tube associated with formation of a specific physical complex.

Sun T(1), Dong H, Wu L, Kane M, Rowitch DH, Stiles CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

In developing neural tube, the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor
Olig2 interacts with the homeodomain transcription factor Nkx2.2 at two distinct 
stages. During neuronogenesis, a cross-repressive interaction appears to
establish the precise boundary between the p3 and pMN domains. At later times, a 
cooperative interaction is noted because Nkx2.2 promotes maturation of
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells specified by expression of Olig2. We show here
that the Olig2 protein can form a physical complex with Nkx2.2 protein in
mammalian cells and yeast two-hybrid trap assay. This interaction is specific
because Olig2 does not bind to a biologically irrelevant homeodomain
transcription factor (Nkx6.1), and Nkx2.2 does not interact with a biologically
irrelevant bHLH protein (NeuroD). Deletion mapping analysis suggests that
formation of an Olig2-Nkx2.2 physical complex is insufficient for the induction
of oligodendrocyte progenitors in developing spine; however, the protein-protein 
interaction observed might be important for the cross-repressive interaction
between Olig2 and Nkx2.2 that helps to establish the pMN-p3 boundary in the
developing spinal cord.

PMID: 14573534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biomed Pharmacother. 2003 Oct;57(8):341-50.

Induction of insulin production in rat pancreatic acinar carcinoma cells by
conophylline.

Umezawa K(1), Hiroki A, Kawakami M, Naka H, Takei I, Ogata T, Kojima I, Koyano T,
Kowithayakorn T, Pang HS, Kam TS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Science and Technology, Department of Applied Chemistry, Keio
University, 3-14-1 Hiyoshi, Kohoku-ku, Yokohama 223-0061, Japan.
umezawa@applc.keio.ac.jp

We set up a screening system to detect low-molecular-weight compounds that induce
insulin expression in pancreatic acinar carcinoma AR42J cells. They can
differentiate into insulin-producing cells with neuron-like morphological change 
when treated with activin A. We employed this morphological change for the
screening of beta-cell inducers among various signal transduction inhibitors. As 
a result, a vinca alkaloid, conophylline, induced neurite formation at 0.1
approximately 0.3 microg/ml in 72 h, like activin A. Conophylline-treated cells
were found to express insulin as measured at both mRNA and protein levels. By
RT-PCR analysis, conophylline-treated cells were shown to express neurogenin3
strongly. They also expressed Beta2/NeuroD and Nkx2.2, but not Pax4 and PP.
Although activin A induces nuclear translocation of Smad2, conophylline did not. 
But the latter induced p38 activation, like activin A, as detected by
phosphorylation. Pretreatment with a p38-specific inhibitor, SB203580, lowered
the conophylline-induced insulin production. Therefore, p38 activation would be
involved in the differentiation of AR42J cells into insulin-producing cells.
Studies on structure-activity relationship with conophyllidine, conofoline,
conophyllinine, and related monomer alkaloids showed that the dimeric
aspidosperma structure with the dihydrofuran unit in its center was essential for
the differentiation-inducing activity.

PMID: 14568228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Genetics. 2003 Sep;165(1):299-307.

Undulated short-tail deletion mutation in the mouse ablates Pax1 and leads to
ectopic activation of neighboring Nkx2-2 in domains that normally express Pax1.

Kokubu C(1), Wilm B, Kokubu T, Wahl M, Rodrigo I, Sakai N, Santagati F,
Hayashizaki Y, Suzuki M, Yamamura K, Abe K, Imai K.

Author information: 
(1)GSF-National Research Center for Environment and Health, Institute of
Developmental Genetics, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

Previous studies have indicated that the Undulated short-tail deletion mutation
in mouse Pax1 (Pax1(Un-s)) not only ablates Pax1, but also disturbs a gene or
genes nearby Pax1. However, which gene(s) is involved and how the Pax1(Un-s)
phenotype is confined to the Pax1-positive tissues remain unknown. In the present
study, we determined the Pax1(Un-s) deletion interval to be 125 kb and
characterized genes around Pax1. We show that the Pax1(Un-s) mutation affects
four physically linked genes within or near the deletion, including Pax1, Nkx2-2,
and their potential antisense genes. Remarkably, Nkx2-2 is ectopically activated 
in the sclerotome and limb buds of Pax1(Un-s) embryos, both of which normally
express Pax1. This result suggests that the Pax1(Un-s) deletion leads to an
illegitimate interaction between remotely located Pax1 enhancers and the Nkx2-2
promoter by disrupting an insulation mechanism between Pax1 and Nkx2-2.
Furthermore, we show that expression of Bapx1, a downstream target of Pax1, is
more strongly affected in Pax1(Un-s) mutants than in Pax1-null mutants,
suggesting that the ectopic expression of Nkx2-2 interferes with the Pax1-Bapx1
pathway. Taken together, we propose that a combination of a loss-of-function
mutation of Pax1 and a gain-of-function mutation of Nkx2-2 is the molecular basis
of the Pax1(Un-s) mutation.

PMCID: PMC1462742
PMID: 14504237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Aug;3(4):427-30.

Co-expression pattern of Shh with Prox1 and that of Nkx2.2 with Mash1 in mouse
taste bud.

Miura H(1), Kusakabe Y, Kato H, Miura-Ohnuma J, Tagami M, Ninomiya Y, Hino A.

Author information: 
(1)National Food Research Institute, 2-1-12 Kannondai, Ibaraki Tsukuba-shi
305-8642, Japan. hmiura@nfri.affrc.go.jp

In mammals, taste buds are maintained by continuous turnover of cells, even in
adulthood. Cell proliferation and differentiation continue to produce taste
cells, which express various genes related to taste reception. We found the
co-expression of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) with Prox1 and that of Nkx2.2 with Mash1 in
adult mouse taste buds. Whereas Prox1was expressed strongly in cells in the basal
region of mouse taste buds where Shh was co-expressed, it was expressed weakly in
almost all taste bud cells lacking Shh expression. At 0.5 day after birth, when
taste cells have not yet differentiated, the expressions of Shh and Prox1
completely overlapped in the epithelium of circumvallate papillae. Nkx2.2 was
observed in cells expressing Mash1, but not in cells expressing genes related to 
taste reception, such as gustducin and T1R3. Almost all fusiform cells expressing
Mash1 co-expressed Nkx2.2, while the majority of round cells expressing Mash1 in 
the basal region of taste buds lacked Nkx2.2 expression.

PMID: 12915306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nat Neurosci. 2003 Sep;6(9):933-8.

Lmx1b is essential for the development of serotonergic neurons.

Ding YQ(1), Marklund U, Yuan W, Yin J, Wegman L, Ericson J, Deneris E, Johnson
RL, Chen ZF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, School of Medicine Pain Center, Washington
University, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

The specification and differentiation of serotonergic (5-HT) neurons require both
extrinsic signaling molecules and intrinsic transcription factors to work in
concert or in cascade. Here we identify the genetic cascades that control the
specification and differentiation of 5-HT neurons in mice. A major determinant in
the cascades is an LIM homeodomain-containing gene, Lmx1b, which is required for 
the development of all 5-HT neurons in the central nervous system. Our results
suggest that, during development of 5-HT neurons, Lmx1b is a critical
intermediate factor that couples Nkx2-2-mediated early specification with
Pet1-mediated terminal differentiation. Moreover, our data indicate that genetic 
cascades controlling the caudal and rostral 5-HT neurons are distinct, despite
their shared components.

PMID: 12897786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Development. 2003 Sep;130(17):4149-59.

Complementary roles for Nkx6 and Nkx2 class proteins in the establishment of
motoneuron identity in the hindbrain.

Pattyn A(1), Vallstedt A, Dias JM, Sander M, Ericson J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institute, S-171 77
Stockholm, Sweden.

The genetic program that underlies the generation of visceral motoneurons in the 
developing hindbrain remains poorly defined. We have examined the role of Nkx6
and Nkx2 class homeodomain proteins in this process, and provide evidence that
these proteins mediate complementary roles in the specification of visceral
motoneuron fate. The expression of Nkx2.2 in hindbrain progenitor cells is
sufficient to mediate the activation of Phox2b, a homeodomain protein required
for the generation of hindbrain visceral motoneurons. The redundant activities of
Nkx6.1 and Nkx6.2, in turn, are dispensable for visceral motoneuron generation
but are necessary to prevent these cells from adopting a parallel program of
interneuron differentiation. The expression of Nkx6.1 and Nkx6.2 is further
maintained in differentiating visceral motoneurons, and consistent with this the 
migration and axonal projection properties of visceral motoneurons are impaired
in mice lacking Nkx6.1 and/or Nkx6.2 function. Our analysis provides insight also
into the role of Nkx6 proteins in the generation of somatic motoneurons. Studies 
in the spinal cord have shown that Nkx6.1 and Nkx6.2 are required for the
generation of somatic motoneurons, and that the loss of motoneurons at this level
correlates with the extinguished expression of the motoneuron determinant Olig2. 
Unexpectedly, we find that the initial expression of Olig2 is left intact in the 
caudal hindbrain of Nkx6.1/Nkx6.2 compound mutants, and despite this, all somatic
motoneurons are missing. These data argue against models in which Nkx6 proteins
and Olig2 operate in a linear pathway, and instead indicate a parallel
requirement for these proteins in the progression of somatic motoneuron
differentiation. Thus, both visceral and somatic motoneuron differentiation
appear to rely on the combined activity of cell intrinsic determinants, rather
than on a single key determinant of neuronal cell fate.

PMID: 12874134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2003 Jul 12;143(2):161-5.

Oligodendrocytes can be generated from the local ventricular and subventricular
zones of embryonic chicken midbrain.

Fu H(1), Cai J, Rutledge M, Hu X, Qiu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, School of Medicine,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

It is well established that early oligodendrocyte progenitors (OLPs) are induced 
by Sonic hedgehog (Shh) from the ventral ventricular zone throughout the entire
neural axis. Here, we report that OLP cells can also be generated from the dorsal
ventricular and subventricular zone in embryonic chicken midbrain at later
stages. Concomitantly, a low level of Shh expression is detected in the adjacent 
ventricular and subventricular zones, implying that oligodendrogenesis in the
dorsal midbrain is also regulated by Shh. In addition, Nkx2.2 and Olig2 are
co-expressed in the same OLPs generated from the dorsal midbrain, suggesting that
the dorsal oligodendrogenesis is similarly under the dual control of these two
transcription factors as in the developing spinal cord.

PMID: 12855187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Endocrinology. 2003 May;144(5):2025-33.

Aberrant regulation of human intestinal proglucagon gene expression in the
NCI-H716 cell line.

Cao X(1), Flock G, Choi C, Irwin DM, Drucker DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Banting and Best Diabetes Centre, Toronto General Hospital, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada M5G 2C4.

Despite interest in understanding glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) production, the
factors important for GLP-1 biosynthesis remain poorly understood. We examined
control of human proglucagon gene expression in NCI-H716 cells, a cell line that 
secretes GLP-1 in a regulated manner. Insulin, phorbol myristate acetate, or
forskolin, known regulators of rodent proglucagon gene expression, had no effect,
whereas sodium butyrate decreased levels of NCI-H716 proglucagon mRNA
transcripts. The inhibitory effect of sodium butyrate was mimicked by
trichostatin A but was not detected with sodium acetate or isobutyrate. The
actions of butyrate were not diminished by the ERK1/2 inhibitor PD98059, p38
inhibitor SB203580, or soluble guanylate cyclase inhibitor LY83583 or following
treatment of cells with KT5823, a selective inhibitor of cGMP-dependent protein
kinase. NCI-H716 cells expressed multiple proglucagon gene transcription factors 
including isl-1, pax-6, pax-2, cdx-2/3, pax-4, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3 
alpha, HNF-3beta, HNF-3 gamma, and Nkx2.2. Nevertheless, the butyrate-dependent
inhibition of proglucagon gene expression was not associated with coordinate
changes in transcription factor expression and both the human and rat transfected
proglucagon promoters were transcriptionally inactive in NCI-H716 cells. Hence,
NCI-H716 cells may not be a physiologically optimal model for studies of human
enteroendocrine proglucagon gene transcription.

PMID: 12697711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Dev Dyn. 2003 Apr;226(4):675-89.

Hes1 but not Hes5 regulates an astrocyte versus oligodendrocyte fate choice in
glial restricted precursors.

Wu Y(1), Liu Y, Levine EM, Rao MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah School of Medicine,
Salt Lake City, Utah, USA.

To determine the role of Hes genes in the differentiation process of
neuroepithelial (NEP) cells to glial restricted precursor cells (GRPs) and
subsequently GRPs to oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, we have examined the
effects of Hes1 and Hes5 on glial differentiation. We find that both Hes1 and
Hes5 are expressed by GRPs and that Hes1 can drive GRPs to an astrocyte cell fate
at the expense of oligodendrocyte differentiation. Overexpression of Hes1 in GRPs
results in the up-regulation of the astrocyte markers glial fibrillary acidic
protein and CD44 and the down-regulation of oligodendrocyte markers myelin
proteolipid protein/DM20, GalC, and CNPase. Transcription factors involved in
oligodendrocyte differentiation, such as Nkx2.2, Olig1, and Mash1, are also
down-regulated in Hes1-overexpressing cells. The effect of Hes1 on gliogenesis is
stage-specific as Hes1 does not direct NEP cells to an astrocytic fate. In
contrast to Hes1, Hes5 does not promote astrocyte differentiation. Instead, it
inhibits both astrocyte and oligodendrocyte differentiation. Overexpression of
Notch1 has an effect on gliogenesis similar to that of Hes1 and the mRNA levels
of Hes1 are up-regulated in cells overexpressing Notch1, suggesting that Notch1
could be an upstream activator of Hes1.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12666205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 9;278(19):17130-40. Epub 2003 Feb 25.

Distinct gene expression programs function in progenitor and mature islet cells.

Watada H(1), Scheel DW, Leung J, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0534, USA.

Homeodomain transcription factor Nkx2.2 is required for the final differentiation
of the beta-cells in the pancreas and for the production of insulin. Nkx2.2 is
expressed in islet cell precursors during pancreatic development and persists in 
a subset of mature islet cells including all beta-cells. To understand the
mechanisms regulating the expression of Nkx2.2 in these different cell
populations, we outlined the structure of the mouse nkx2.2 gene and identified
regions that direct cell type-specific expression. The nkx2.2 gene has two
noncoding alternative first exons (exons 1a and 1b). In transgenic mice,
sequences upstream from exon 1a directed expression predominantly in mature islet
cells. Within this exon 1a promoter, cooperative interactions between HNF3 and
basic helix-loop-helix factors neurogenin-3 or NeuroD1 binding to adjacent sites 
played key roles in its islet cell-specific expression. In contrast, sequences
upstream from exon 1b restricted expression specifically to islet cell
precursors. These studies reveal distinct mechanisms for directing the expression
of a key differentiation factor in precursors versus mature islet cells.

PMID: 12604598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Development. 2003 Mar;130(6):1193-202.

Targeted disruption of the homeobox gene Nkx2.9 reveals a role in development of 
the spinal accessory nerve.

Pabst O(1), Rummelies J, Winter B, Arnold HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biotechnology, Technical University of Braunschweig, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany.

The homeodomain-containing transcription factor Nkx2.9 is expressed in the
ventralmost neural progenitor domain of the neural tube together with the related
protein Nkx2.2 during early mouse embryogenesis. Cells within this region give
rise to V3 interneurons and visceral motoneurons in spinal cord and hindbrain,
respectively. To investigate the role of the Nkx2.9 gene, we generated a mutant
mouse by targeted gene disruption. Homozygous mutant animals lacking Nkx2.9 were 
viable and fertile with no apparent morphological or behavioral phenotype. The
distribution of neuronal progenitor cells and differentiated neurons in spinal
cord was unaffected in Nkx2.9-deficient animals. This finding is in contrast to
Nkx2.2-null mutants, which have been shown to exhibit ventral to dorsal
transformation of neuronal cell fates in spinal cord. Our results suggest that
specification of V3 interneurons in the posterior CNS does not require Nkx2.9,
most probably because of functional redundancy with the co-expressed Nkx2.2
protein. In hindbrain, however, absence of Nkx2.9 resulted in a significantly
altered morphology of the spinal accessory nerve (XIth), which appeared
considerably shorter and thinner than in wild-type animals. Consistent with this 
phenotype, immature branchial motoneurons of the spinal accessory nerve, which
normally migrate from a ventromedial to a dorsolateral position within the neural
tube, were markedly reduced in Nkx2.9-deficient embryos at E10.5, while
ventromedial motor column cells were increased in numbers. In addition, the vagal
and glossopharyngeal nerves appeared abnormal in approximately 50% of mutant
embryos, which may be related to the observed reduction of Phox2b expression in
the nucleus ambiguus of adult mutant mice. From these observations, we conclude
that Nkx2.9 has a specific function in the hindbrain as determinant of the
branchial motoneuron precursor cells for the spinal accessory nerve and possibly 
other nerves of the branchial-motor column. Like other Nkx genes expressed in the
CNS, Nkx2.9 seems to be involved in converting positional information into cell
fate decisions.

PMID: 12571110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Endocr J. 2002 Oct;49(5):561-72.

Beta cell neogenesis from ducts and phenotypic conversion of residual islet cells
in the adult pancreas of glucose intolerant mice induced by selective alloxan
perfusion.

Li M(1), Miyagawa J, Yamamoto K, Moriwaki M, Imagawa A, Iwahashi H, Yamagata K,
Tochino Y, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, B5, Osaka University, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan.

The aim of this study was to clarify the pattern of beta cell neogenesis in the
alloxan-perfused, beta cells-depleted segment of glucose intolerant mice induced 
by selective alloxan perfusion. First, duct cells proliferated in the perfused
segment, then cells co-expressing multiple islet hormones and transcription
factors such as PDX-1, Nkx2.2, Isl1, and Pax6 were observed in duct cells, and
newly formed islet-like cell clusters (ICCs) containing beta cells were
recognized. In residual beta cell-depleted islets, glucagon or somatostatin and
PDX-1 double-positive immature endocrine cells were recognized. Glucagon or
somatostatin, insulin and PDX-1 triple-positive cells then appeared and these
cells appeared to undergo terminal differentiation into beta cells. In
conclusion, we demonstrated at least two different processes of beta cell
neogenesis, i.e., formation of new ICCs from ductal epithelium and
redifferentiation of residual non-beta islet cells in this model. In addition,
transcription factors that appear in the processes of endocrine cell development 
may also play essential roles during beta cell neogenesis from duct cells.

PMID: 12507275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Dev Biol. 2003 Jan 1;253(1):84-98.

Neurogenin3 participates in gliogenesis in the developing vertebrate spinal cord.

Lee J(1), Wu Y, Qi Y, Xue H, Liu Y, Scheel D, German M, Qiu M, Guillemot F, Rao
M, Gradwohl G.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, Universite Louis Pasteur, 1 rue Laurent Fries, BP10142, 67404 Illkirch 
Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2003 Mar 15;255(2):440.

To study the role of basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors in
gliogenesis, we examined whether bHLH transcription factors were expressed in
glial precursor cells and participated in regulating oligodendrocyte and
astrocyte development. As assessed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), Neurogenin3 (Ngn3) was transiently expressed in bipotential
glial cells fated to become either oligodendrocytes or astrocytes. Mice lacking
Ngn3 displayed a loss of Nkx2.2 expression, a transcription factor required for
proper oligodendrogliogenesis. Furthermore, a reduction in the expression of
myelin basic protein (MBP), proteolipid protein (PLP), and glial fibrillary
acidic protein (GFAP), markers for mature oligodendrocytes and astrocytes, was
observed in the Ngn3 null mice. Overexpression of Ngn3 was sufficient to drive
expression from the PLP promoter in transient cotransfection assays. Overall, the
data suggest that Ngn3 may regulate glial differentiation at a developmental
stage prior to the segregation of the oligodendrocyte and astrocyte lineage.

PMID: 12490199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 10;278(2):751-6. Epub 2002 Nov 7.

Transcription factor occupancy of the insulin gene in vivo. Evidence for direct
regulation by Nkx2.2.

Cissell MA(1), Zhao L, Sussel L, Henderson E, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Consensus-binding sites for many transcription factors are relatively
non-selective and found at high frequency within the genome. This raises the
possibility that factors that are capable of binding to a cis-acting element in
vitro and regulating transcription from a transiently transfected plasmid, which 
would not have higher order chromatin structure, may not occupy this site within 
the endogenous gene. Closed chromatin structure and competition from another
DNA-binding protein with similar nucleotide specificity are two possible
mechanisms by which a transcription factor may be excluded from a potential
binding site in vivo. Multiple transcription factors, including Pdx-1, BETA-2,
and Pax6, have been implicated in expression of the insulin gene in pancreatic
beta cells. In this study, the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay has been used 
to show that these factors do, in fact, bind to insulin control region sequences 
in intact beta cells. In addition, another key islet-enriched transcription
factor, Nkx2.2, was found to occupy this region using the chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. In vitro DNA-binding and transient transfection assays
defined how Nkx2.2 affected insulin gene expression. Pdx-1 was also shown to bind
within a region of the endogenous islet amyloid polypeptide, pax-4, and
glucokinase genes that were associated with control in vitro. Because Pdx-1 does 
not regulate gene transcription in isolation, these sequences were examined for
occupancy by the other insulin transcriptional regulators. BETA-2, Pax6, and
Nkx2.2 were also found to bind to amyloid polypeptide, glucokinase, and pax-4
control sequences in vivo. These studies reveal the broad application of the
Pdx-1, BETA-2, Pax6, and Nkx2.2 transcription factors in regulating expression of
genes selectively expressed in islet beta cells.

PMID: 12426319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Cell Biol. 2002 Oct 28;159(2):303-12. Epub 2002 Oct 28.

Recapitulation of embryonic neuroendocrine differentiation in adult human
pancreatic duct cells expressing neurogenin 3.

Heremans Y(1), Van De Casteele M, in't Veld P, Gradwohl G, Serup P, Madsen O,
Pipeleers D, Heimberg H.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Center, Brussels Free University (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103,
B-1090 Brussels, Belgium.

Regulatory proteins have been identified in embryonic development of the
endocrine pancreas. It is unknown whether these factors can also play a role in
the formation of pancreatic endocrine cells from postnatal nonendocrine cells.
The present study demonstrates that adult human pancreatic duct cells can be
converted into insulin-expressing cells after ectopic, adenovirus-mediated
expression of the class B basic helix-loop-helix factor neurogenin 3 (ngn3),
which is a critical factor in embryogenesis of the mouse endocrine pancreas.
Infection with adenovirus ngn3 (Adngn3) induced gene and/or protein expression of
NeuroD/beta2, Pax4, Nkx2.2, Pax6, and Nkx6.1, all known to be essential for
beta-cell differentiation in mouse embryos. Expression of ngn3 in adult human
duct cells induced Notch ligands Dll1 and Dll4 and neuroendocrine- and
beta-cell-specific markers: it increased the percentage of synaptophysin- and
insulin-positive cells 15-fold in ngn3-infected versus control cells. Infection
with NeuroD/beta2 (a downstream target of ngn3) induced similar effects. These
data indicate that the Delta-Notch pathway, which controls embryonic development 
of the mouse endocrine pancreas, can also operate in adult human duct cells
driving them to a neuroendocrine phenotype with the formation of
insulin-expressing cells.

PMCID: PMC2173047
PMID: 12403815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5241-53.

The role of Phox2b in synchronizing pan-neuronal and type-specific aspects of
neurogenesis.

Dubreuil V(1), Hirsch MR, Jouve C, Brunet JF, Goridis C.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Département de Biologie, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46, rue
d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

Within the developing vertebrate nervous system, specific subclasses of neurons
are produced in vastly different numbers at defined times and locations. This
implies the concomitant activation of a program that controls pan-neuronal
differentiation and of a program that specifies neuronal subtype identity, but
how these programs are coordinated in time and space is not well understood. Our 
previous loss- and gain-of-function studies have defined Phox2b as a homeodomain 
transcription factor that coordinately regulates generic and type-specific
neuronal properties. It is necessary and sufficient to impose differentiation
towards a branchio- and viscero-motoneuronal phenotype and at the same time
promotes generic neuronal differentiation. We have examined the underlying
genetic interactions. We show that Phox2b has a dual action on pan-neuronal
differentiation. It upregulates the expression of proneural genes (Ngn2) when
expressed alone and upregulates the expression of Mash1 when expressed in
combination with Nkx2.2. By a separate pathway, Phox2b represses expression of
the inhibitors of neurogenesis Hes5 and Id2. The role of Phox2b in the
specification of neuronal subtype identity appears to depend in part on its
capacity to act as a patterning gene in the progenitor domain. Phox2b
misexpression represses the Pax6 and Olig2 genes, which should inhibit a
branchiomotor fate, and induces Nkx6.1 and Nkx6.2, which are expressed in
branchiomotor progenitors. We further show that Phox2b behaves like a
transcriptional activator in the promotion of both, generic neuronal
differentiation and expression of the motoneuronal marker Islet1. These results
provide insights into the mechanisms by which a homeodomain transcription factor 
through interaction with other factors controls both generic and type-specific
features of neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 12399315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Development. 2002 Nov;129(22):5117-30.

Bone morphogenetic proteins negatively control oligodendrocyte precursor
specification in the chick spinal cord.

Mekki-Dauriac S(1), Agius E, Kan P, Cochard P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR 5547 CNRS/UPS, Université Paul
Sabatier, 118 route de Narbonne, 31062 Toulouse, France.

In the vertebrate spinal cord, oligodendrocytes originate from a restricted
region of the ventral neuroepithelium. This ventral localisation of
oligodendrocyte precursors (OLPs) depends on the inductive influence of sonic
hedgehog (Shh) secreted by ventral midline cells. We have investigated whether
the ventral restriction of OLP specification might also depend on inhibiting
signals mediated by bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). BMPs invariably and
markedly inhibited oligodendrocyte development in ventral neural tissue both in
vitro and in vivo. Conversely, in vivo ablation of the dorsal most part of the
chick spinal cord or inactivation of BMP signalling using grafts of
noggin-producing cells promoted the appearance of neuroepithelial OLPs dorsal to 
their normal domain of emergence, showing that endogenous BMPs contribute to the 
inhibition of oligodendrocyte development in the spinal cord. BMPs were able to
oppose the Shh-mediated induction of OLPs in spinal cord neuroepithelial explants
dissected before oligodendrocyte induction, suggesting that BMPs may repress OLP 
specification by interfering with Shh signalling in vivo. Strikingly, among the
transcription factors involved in OLP specification, BMP treatment strongly
inhibited the expression of Olig2 but not of Nkx2.2, suggesting that BMP-mediated
inhibition of oligodendrogenesis is controlled through the repression of the
former transcription factor. Altogether, our data show that oligodendrogenesis is
not only regulated by ventral inductive signals such as Shh, but also by dorsal
inhibiting signals including BMP factors. They suggest that the dorsoventral
position of OLPs depends on a tightly regulated balance between Shh and BMP
activities.

PMID: 12399304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4785-96.

Dual origin of the floor plate in the avian embryo.

Charrier JB(1), Lapointe F, Le Douarin NM, Teillet MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, CNRS and Collège de France, 
UMR 7128, 49bis Avenue de la Belle Gabrielle, 94736 Nogent-sur-Marne Cedex,
France.

Molecular analysis carried out on quail-chick chimeras, in which quail Hensen's
node was substituted for its chick counterpart at the five- to six-somite stage
(ss), showed that the floor plate of the avian neural tube is composed of
distinct areas: (1) a median one (medial floor plate or MFP) derived from
Hensen's node and characterised by the same gene expression pattern as the node
cells (i.e. expression of HNF3beta and Shh to the exclusion of genes early
expressed in the neural ectoderm such as CSox1); and (2) lateral regions that are
differentiated from the neuralised ectoderm (CSox1 positive) and form the lateral
floor plate (LFP). LFP cells are induced by the MFP to express HNF3beta
transiently, Shh continuously and other floor-plate characteristic genes such as 
NETRIN: In contrast to MFP cells, LFP cells also express neural markers such as
Nkx2.2 and Sim1. This pattern of avian floor-plate development presents some
similarities to floor-plate formation in zebrafish embryos. We also demonstrate
that, although MFP and LFP have different embryonic origins in normal
development, one can experimentally obtain a complete floor plate in the neural
epithelium by the inductive action of either a notochord or a MFP. The competence
of the neuroepithelium to respond to notochord or MFP signals is restricted to a 
short time window, as only the posterior-most region of the neural plate of
embryos younger than 15 ss is able to differentiate a complete floor plate
comprising MFP and LFP. Moreover, MFP differentiation requires between 4 and 5
days of exposure to the inducing tissues. Under the same conditions LFP and
SHH-producing cells only induce LFP-type cells. These results show that the
capacity to induce a complete floor plate is restricted to node-derived tissues
and probably involves a still unknown factor that is not SHH, the latter being
able to induce only LFP characteristics in neuralised epithelium.

PMID: 12361970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Glia. 2002 Oct;40(1):25-43.

Oligodendrocyte and astrocyte development in rodents: an in situ and
immunohistological analysis during embryonic development.

Liu Y(1), Wu Y, Lee JC, Xue H, Pevny LH, Kaprielian Z, Rao MS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, Maryland 
21224, USA.

Lineally related multipotent neuroepithelial cells (NEP), neuronal restricted
precursors (NRP), and glial restricted precursors (GRP) have been identified in
the spinal cord. To determine the sequence of differentiation and identify
lineage and stage-specific markers, we have examined the spatiotemporal
expression of established glial markers during rodent embryonic development and
within fetal cell culture. In this report, we show that proliferating stem cells 
in the developing neural tube do not express any glial markers at E10.5. By E11, 
however, glial precursors have begun to differentiate and at least two regions of
the ventral neural tube containing glial precursor cells can be distinguished, an
Nkx2.2/Neurogenin 3 (Ngn3) domain and a platelet-derived growth factor receptor
alpha (PDGFRalpha)/Olig2/Sox10 domain. Radial glia, as identified by RC1
immunoreactivity, develop in concert with other glial precursors and can be
distinguished by their morphology, spatial distribution, and antigen expression. 
Astrocytes as assessed by glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunoreactivity
are first detected at E16. A novel dorsal domain of CD44 immunoreactivity that
can be distinguished from the more ventral glial precursor domains can be
detected as early as E13.5.

PMID: 12237841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Diabetologia. 2002 Aug;45(8):1142-53. Epub 2002 Jun 28.

Expression profile of MODY3/HNF-1alpha protein in the developing mouse pancreas.

Nammo T(1), Yamagata K, Hamaoka R, Zhu Q, Akiyama TE, Gonzalez FJ, Miyagawa J,
Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: One subtype of MODY (MODY3) results from the heterozygous
mutation of a hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha. The pattern of HNF-1alpha
expression in the normal pancreas has not been determined. This study aimed to
clarify the profile of HNF-1alpha protein expression in the developing mouse
pancreas.
METHODS: Double immunofluorescence staining was carried out for HNF-1alpha and
pancreatic hormones or transcription factors (PDX-1, Pax6, Isl1, and Nkx2.2). The
expression of these transcription factors was also studied in the beta cells of
HNF-1 alpha mutant mice.
RESULTS: HNF-1alpha was expressed by both endocrine and exocrine cells of the
pancreas. Double immunofluorescence staining showed that HNF-1alpha was expressed
in the nuclei of alpha cells, beta cells, delta cells, and pancreatic polypeptide
(PP) cells. HNF-1alpha was first detected in most pancreatic epithelial cells on 
embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5), and hormone-positive endocrine cells and
amylase-positive cells expressed HNF-1alpha on E15.5. Most of the Pax6-, Isl1-,
or PDX-1-positive cells showed co-expression of HNF-1alpha. However, HNF-1alpha
immunoreactivity was not observed in 36.0% of Nkx2.2-positive cells. Expression
of Nkx2.2, Isl1 and Pax6 seemed to be normal in the beta cells of transgenic mice
with dominant negative overexpression of HNF-1alpha. Expression of PDX-1 did not 
change in the beta cells of pre-diabetic HNF-1 alpha (-/-) mice, but expression
was markedly decreased in the diabetic stage.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: HNF-1alpha is expressed by both endocrine cells and
exocrine cells of the pancreas from the foetal stage along with other
transcription factors, so HNF-1alpha might play a role during development.

PMID: 12189445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Jun 11;99(12):8078-83. Epub 2002 Jun 4.

In vitro trans-differentiation of adult hepatic stem cells into pancreatic
endocrine hormone-producing cells.

Yang L(1), Li S, Hatch H, Ahrens K, Cornelius JG, Petersen BE, Peck AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA. yanglj@pathology.ufl.edu

Although organ-specific stem cells possess plasticity that permit differentiation
along new lineages, production of endocrine pancreas and insulin-secreting beta
cells from adult nonpancreatic stem cells has not been demonstrated. We present
evidence that highly purified adult rat hepatic oval "stem" cells, which are
capable of differentiation to hepatocytes and bile duct epithelium, can
trans-differentiate into pancreatic endocrine hormone-producing cells when
cultured in a high-glucose environment. These differentiated cells can
self-assemble to form three-dimensional islet cell-like clusters that express
pancreatic islet cell differentiation-related transcripts detectable by reverse
transcription-PCR/nested PCR (e.g., PDX-1, PAX-4, PAX-6, Nkx2.2 and Nkx6.1,
insulin I, insulin II, glucose transporter 2, and glucagon) and islet-specific
hormones detectable by immunocytochemistry (e.g., insulin, glucagon, and
pancreatic polypeptide). In addition, these cells concomitantly lose expression
of the hepatocyte protein Hep-par. When stimulated with glucose, these cells
synthesize and secrete insulin, a response enhanced by nicotinamide. In a pilot
study, the oval cell-derived islet cell-like clusters displayed the ability to
reverse hyperglycemia in a diabetic NOD-scid mouse. These results indicate that
primary adult liver stem cells can differentiate in a nonlineage-restricted
manner. Trans-differentiation into endocrine pancreas could have significant
implications for future therapies of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC123023
PMID: 12048252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Mech Dev. 2002 May;113(2):169-74.

Non-overlapping expression of Olig3 and Olig2 in the embryonic neural tube.

Takebayashi H(1), Ohtsuki T, Uchida T, Kawamoto S, Okubo K, Ikenaka K, Takeichi
M, Chisaka O, Nabeshima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Tumor Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
University, Yoshida, Konoe-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.
takebaya@lmls.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Olig family is a novel sub-family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors
recently identified. Olig1 and Olig2 were first reported to promote
oligodendrocyte differentiation, and later Olig2 was reported to be involved in
motoneuron specification as well. Olig3 was isolated as a third member of Olig
family, but its precise expression pattern is poorly understood. Here, we
describe detailed Olig3 expression analyses in the neural tube of embryonic mice.
Olig3 was first detected in the dorsal neural tube from the midbrain/hindbrain
boundary to the spinal cord. In E11.5 spinal cord, Olig3 was transiently
expressed in the lateral margin of the subventricular zone as three ventral
clusters at the level of the p3, p2 and p0 domains, as well as in the dorsal
neural tube. Olig3 was co-expressed with Nkx2.2 in the lateral margin of the p3
domain. In forebrain, Olig3 was expressed in the dorsal thalamus while Olig2 was 
complementarily expressed in the ventral thalamus with an adjacent boundary at
E12.5. Olig3 is specifically and transiently expressed in different types of
progenitors of embryonic central nervous system and then disappears in the course
of development.

PMID: 11960707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Brain Res Bull. 2002 Feb-Mar 1;57(3-4):435-8.

Gbx2 expression in the late embryonic chick dorsal thalamus.

Martínez-de-la-Torre M(1), Garda AL, Puelles E, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphological Sciences, University of Murcia, Murcia, Spain.
margaret@um.es

The expression pattern of the transcription factor gene Gbx2 in the forebrain of 
chicken embryos (embryonic day 14) was mapped using digoxigenin-labeled
riboprobes and compared with the expression of the transcription factors Pax6 and
Nkx2.2. The topographic analysis of Gbx2 expression on coronal and sagittal
sections discriminated the positions and boundaries of diverse neuronal nuclei
belonging to the dorsal thalamus from neighboring territories (the epithalamus,
ventral thalamus, pretectum, and the underlying basal plate). The differential
expression of Gbx2 within the dorsal thalamus clearly corresponds with the
existence of four primary subdivisions identified in a previous study from this
laboratory [13]: the anteroventral region and dorsal, intermediate, and ventral
tiers. The subhabenular region turned out not to express Gbx2; this possibly
implies it needs to be distinguished as a fifth separate dorsal thalamus
subdivision.

PMID: 11923005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 19;99(6):3818-23.

Profound defects in pancreatic beta-cell function in mice with combined
heterozygous mutations in Pdx-1, Hnf-1alpha, and Hnf-3beta.

Shih DQ(1), Heimesaat M, Kuwajima S, Stein R, Wright CV, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Defects in pancreatic beta-cell function contribute to the development of type 2 
diabetes, a polygenic disease that is characterized by insulin resistance and
compromised insulin secretion. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) -1alpha, -3beta,
-4alpha, and Pdx-1 contribute in the complex transcriptional circuits within the 
pancreas that are involved in beta-cell development and function. In mice, a
heterozygous mutation in Pdx-1 alone, but not Hnf-1alpha(+/-), Hnf-3beta(+/-), or
Hnf-4alpha(+/-), causes impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in mice. To
investigate the possible functional relationships between these transcription
factors on beta-cell activity in vivo, we generated mice with the following
combined heterozygous mutations: Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-),
Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-), Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-),
Hnf-1alpha(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-), and Hnf-3beta(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-). The greatest
loss in function was in combined heterozygous null alleles of Pdx-1 and
Hnf-1alpha (Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-)), or Pdx-1 and Hnf-3beta
(Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-)). Both double mutants develop progressively impaired
glucose tolerance and acquire a compromised first- and second-phase insulin
secretion profile in response to glucose compared with Pdx-1(+/-) mice alone. The
loss in beta-cell function in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-) mice was associated with 
decreased expression of Nkx-6.1, glucokinase (Gck), aldolase B (aldo-B), and
insulin, whereas Nkx2.2, Nkx-6.1, Glut-2, Gck, aldo-B, the liver isoform of
pyruvate kinase, and insulin expression was reduced in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-)
mice. The islet cell architecture was also abnormal in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-) 
and Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-) mice, with glucagon-expressing cells scattered
throughout the islet, a defect that may be connected to decreased E-cadherin
expression. Our data suggest that functional interactions between key islet
regulatory factors play an important role in maintaining islet architecture and
beta-cell function. These studies also established polygenic mouse models for
investigating the mechanisms contributing to beta-cell dysfunction in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC122607
PMID: 11904435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Development. 2002 Mar;129(6):1327-38.

Pax6 regulates specification of ventral neurone subtypes in the hindbrain by
establishing progenitor domains.

Takahashi M(1), Osumi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-1, Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that generation of different kinds of neurones is
controlled by combinatorial actions of homeodomain (HD) proteins expressed in the
neuronal progenitors. Pax6 is a HD protein that has previously been shown to be
involved in the differentiation of the hindbrain somatic (SM) motoneurones and V1
interneurones in the hindbrain and/or spinal cord. To investigate in greater
depth the role of Pax6 in generation of the ventral neurones, we first examined
the expression patterns of HD protein genes and subtype-specific neuronal markers
in the hindbrain of the Pax6 homozygous mutant rat. We found that Islet2 (SM
neurone marker) and En1 (V1 interneurone marker) were transiently expressed in a 
small number of cells, indicating that Pax6 is not directly required for
specification of these neurones. We also observed that domains of all other HD
protein genes (Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, Irx3, Dbx2 and Dbx1) were shifted and their
boundaries became blurred. Thus, Pax6 is required for establishment of the
progenitor domains of the ventral neurones. Next, we performed Pax6
overexpression experiments by electroporating rat embryos in whole embryo
culture. Pax6 overexpression in the wild type decreased expression of Nkx2.2, but
ectopically increased expression of Irx3, Dbx1 and Dbx2. Moreover,
electroporation of Pax6 into the Pax6 mutant hindbrain rescued the development of
Islet2-positive and En1-positive neurones. To know reasons for perturbed
progenitor domain formation in Pax6 mutant, we examined expression patterns of
Shh signalling molecules and states of cell death and cell proliferation. Shh was
similarly expressed in the floor plate of the mutant hindbrain, while the
expressions of Ptc1, Gli1 and Gli2 were altered only in the progenitor domains
for the motoneurones. The position and number of TUNEL-positive cells were
unchanged in the Pax6 mutant. Although the proportion of cells that were
BrdU-positive slightly increased in the mutant, there was no relationship with
specific progenitor domains. Taken together, we conclude that Pax6 regulates
specification of the ventral neurone subtypes by establishing the correct
progenitor domains.

PMID: 11880342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Development. 2002 Feb;129(3):681-93.

Dual origin of spinal oligodendrocyte progenitors and evidence for the
cooperative role of Olig2 and Nkx2.2 in the control of oligodendrocyte
differentiation.

Fu H(1), Qi Y, Tan M, Cai J, Takebayashi H, Nakafuku M, Richardson W, Qiu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, School of Medicine,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

In this study, we have investigated the relationship of Olig2+ and Nkx2.2+
oligodendrocyte progenitors (OLPs) by comparing the expression of Olig2 and
Nkx2.2 in embryonic chicken and mouse spinal cords before and during the stages
of oligodendrogenesis. At the stages of neurogenesis, Olig2 and Nkx2.2 are
expressed in adjacent non-overlapping domains of ventral neuroepithelium. During 
oligodendrogenesis stages, these two domains generate distinct populations of
OLPs. From the Olig2+ motoneuron precursor domain (pMN) arise the Olig2+/Pdgfra+ 
OLPs, whereas the Nkx2.2+ p3 domain give rise to Nkx2.2+ OLPs. Despite their
distinct origins, both populations of OLPs eventually appear to co-express Olig2 
and Nkx2.2 in the same cells. However, there is a species difference in the
timing of acquiring Nkx2.2 expression by the Olig2+/Pdgfra+ OLPs. The
co-expression of Nkx2.2 and Olig2 in OLPs is tightly associated with myelin gene 
expression in the normal and PDGFA(-/-) embryos, suggesting a cooperative role of
these transcription factors in the control of oligodendrocyte differentiation. In
support of this suggestion, inhibition of expression of these two transcription
factors in culture by antisense oligonucleotides has an additive inhibitory
effect on OLP differentiation and proteolipid protein (PLP) gene expression.

PMID: 11830569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mech Dev. 2002 Jan;110(1-2):203-7.

Isolation of Crb1, a mouse homologue of Drosophila crumbs, and analysis of its
expression pattern in eye and brain.

den Hollander AI(1), Ghiani M, de Kok YJ, Wijnholds J, Ballabio A, Cremers FP,
Broccoli V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University Medical Centre Nijmegen, P.O. Box
9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. a.denhollander@antrg.azn.nl

Mutations in the human Crumbs homologue 1 (CRB1) gene cause severe retinal
dystrophies. CRB1 is homologous to Drosophila Crumbs, a protein essential for
establishing and maintaining epithelial polarity. We have isolated the mouse
orthologue, Crb1, and analyzed its expression pattern in embryonic and post-natal
stages. Crb1 is expressed exclusively in the eye, and the central nervous system.
In the developing eye, expression of Crb1 is detected in the retinal progenitors,
and later on becomes restricted to the differentiated photoreceptor cells where
it remains active up to the adult stage. In the developing neural tube,
expression of Crb1 is restricted to its most ventral structures, coinciding with 
the expression domain of Nkx2.2. In the adult brain, Crb1 expression is defined
to areas where the production and migration of neurons occurs in adulthood.

PMID: 11744384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Neurosci. 2001 Dec 15;21(24):9814-23.

Transcription factor expression and Notch-dependent regulation of neural
progenitors in the adult rat spinal cord.

Yamamoto S(1), Nagao M, Sugimori M, Kosako H, Nakatomi H, Yamamoto N, Takebayashi
H, Nabeshima Y, Kitamura T, Weinmaster G, Nakamura K, Nakafuku M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurobioloy, Orthopaedic Surgery, and Neurosurgery, The
University of Tokyo Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Recent studies have demonstrated that neural stem cells and other progenitors are
present in the adult CNS. Details of their properties, however, remain poorly
understood. Here we examined the properties and control mechanisms of neural
progenitors in the adult rat spinal cord at the molecular level. Adult and
embryonic progenitors commonly expressed various homeodomain-type (Pax6, Pax7,
Nkx2.2, and Prox1) and basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)-type (Ngn2, Mash1, NeuroD1, 
and Olig2) transcriptional regulatory factors in vitro. Unlike their embryonic
counterparts, however, adult progenitors could not generate specific neurons that
expressed markers appropriate for spinal motoneurons or interneurons, including
Islet1, Lim1, Lim3, and HB9. Cells expressing the homeodomain factors Pax6, Pax7,
and Nkx2.2 also emerged in vivo in response to injury and were distributed in
unique patterns in the lesioned spinal cord. However, neither the expression of
the neurogenic bHLH factors including Ngn2, Mash1, and NeuroD1 nor subsequent
generation of new neurons could be detected in injured tissue. Our results
suggest that signaling through the cell-surface receptor Notch is involved in
this restriction. The expression of Notch1 in vivo was enhanced in response to
injury. Furthermore, activation of Notch signaling in vitro inhibited
differentiation of adult progenitors, whereas attenuation of Notch signals and
forced expression of Ngn2 significantly enhanced neurogenesis. These results
suggest that both the intrinsic properties of adult progenitors and local
environmental signals, including Notch signaling, account for the limited
regenerative potential of the adult spinal cord.

PMID: 11739589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Neuron. 2001 Sep 13;31(5):791-807.

The bHLH transcription factor Olig2 promotes oligodendrocyte differentiation in
collaboration with Nkx2.2.

Zhou Q(1), Choi G, Anderson DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 216-76, California Institute of Technology, 1201 E.
California Boulevard, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Olig2, a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor, is expressed in a
restricted domain of the spinal cord ventricular zone that sequentially generates
motoneurons and oligodendrocytes. Just prior to oligo-dendrocyte precursor
formation, the domains of Olig2 and Nkx2.2 expression switch from being mutually 
exclusive to overlapping, and Neurogenins1 and 2 are extinguished within this
region. Coexpression of Olig2 with Nkx2.2 in the spinal cord promotes ectopic and
precocious oligodendrocyte differentiation. Both proteins function as
transcriptional repressors in this assay. This effect is blocked by forced
expression of Neurogenin1. By contrast, misexpression of Olig2 alone derepresses 
Neurogenins and promotes motoneuron differentiation. Olig2 therefore functions
sequentially in motoneuron and oligodendrocyte fate specification. This dual
action is enabled by spatio-temporal changes in the expression domains of other
transcription factors with which Olig2 functionally interacts.

PMID: 11567617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Curr Biol. 2001 Sep 18;11(18):1413-20.

Olig bHLH proteins interact with homeodomain proteins to regulate cell fate
acquisition in progenitors of the ventral neural tube.

Sun T(1), Echelard Y, Lu R, Yuk DI, Kaing S, Stiles CD, Rowitch DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney
Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Organizing signals such as Sonic hedgehog are thought to specify
neuronal subtype identity by regulating the expression of homeodomain proteins in
progenitors of the embryonic neural tube. One of these, Nkx2.2, is necessary and 
sufficient for the development of V3 interneurons.
RESULTS: We report that Olig genes, encoding basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
proteins, are expressed in a subset of Nkx2.2 progenitors before the
establishment of interneurons and oligodendroglial precursors. Gain-of-function
analysis in transgenic mouse embryos indicates that Olig genes specifically
inhibit the establishment of Sim1-expressing V3 interneurons. Moreover,
coexpression of Olig2 with Nkx2.2 in the chick neural tube generated cells
expressing Sox10, a marker of oligodendroglial precursors. Colocalization of Olig
and Nkx2.2 proteins at the dorsal extent of the Nkx2.2 expression domain is
consistent with regulatory interactions that define the potential of progenitor
cells in the border region.
CONCLUSIONS: Interactions between homeodomain and Olig bHLH proteins evidently
regulate neural cell fate acquisition and diversification in the ventral neural
tube. In particular, interactions between Olig and Nkx2.2 proteins inhibit V3
interneuron development and promote the formation of alternate cell types,
including those expressing Sox10.

PMID: 11566099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Development. 2001 Jul;128(14):2723-33.

Control of oligodendrocyte differentiation by the Nkx2.2 homeodomain
transcription factor.

Qi Y(1), Cai J, Wu Y, Wu R, Lee J, Fu H, Rao M, Sussel L, Rubenstein J, Qiu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, School of Medicine,
University of Louisville, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Oligodendrocytes are derived from glial precursors that arise from the ventral
neural tube early in development. In the developing chicken CNS, oligodendrocyte 
progenitors selectively express Nkx2.2 homeodomain transcription factor, raising 
the possibility that Nkx2.2 may directly regulate oligogliogenesis. In this
study, we have examined Nkx2.2 expression in rodent glial precursors and studied 
the effect of a loss of Nkx2.2 on oligodendrocyte and astrocyte differentiation. 
We show that Nkx2.2 is also expressed in mammalian oligodendrocyte progenitors
and that the differentiation of MBP-positive and PLP-DM20-positive
oligodendrocytes is dramatically retarded in Nkx2.2-null mutants along the entire
rostrocaudal axis. In contrast, no effect is seen on astrocytic differentiation. 
Interestingly, absence of Nkx2.2 expression leads to a ventral expansion of the
Olig1/Olig2 expression in neuroepithelial cells into the Nkx2.2 domain and a
consequent increase in the production of Olig1/Olig2-positive and
platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha-positive oligodendrocyte
progenitors. These results strongly suggest that Nkx2.2 regulates the
differentiation and/or maturation, but not the initial specification, of
oligodendrocyte progenitors. Consistent with this suggestion, overproduction of
Nkx2.2 protein in fibroblast cells can induce gene expression from the
proteolipid protein promoter.

PMID: 11526078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Diabetes. 2001 Aug;50(8):1799-806.

IPF1/PDX1 deficiency and beta-cell dysfunction in Psammomys obesus, an animal
With type 2 diabetes.

Leibowitz G(1), Ferber S, Apelqvist A, Edlund H, Gross DJ, Cerasi E, Melloul D,
Kaiser N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hebrew University- Hadassah
Medical Center, Jerusalem. gleib@hadassah.org.il

The homeodomain transcription factor IPF1/PDX1 is required in beta-cells for
efficient expression of insulin, glucose transporter 2, and prohormone
convertases 1/3 and 2. Psammomys obesus, a model of diet-responsive type 2
diabetes, shows markedly depleted insulin stores when given a high-energy (HE)
diet. Despite hyperglycemia, insulin mRNA levels initially remained unchanged and
then decreased gradually to 15% of the basal level by 3 weeks. Moreover, insulin 
gene expression was not increased when isolated P. obesus islets were exposed to 
elevated glucose concentrations. Consistent with these observations, no
functional Ipf1/Pdx1 gene product was detected in islets of newborn or adult P.
obesus using immunostaining, Western blot, DNA binding, and reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analyses. Other beta-cell transcription
factors (e.g., ISL-1, Nkx2.2, and Nkx6.1) were expressed in P. obesus islets, and
the DNA binding activity of the insulin transcription factors RIPE3b1-Act and
IEF1 was intact. Ipf1/Pdx1 gene transfer to isolated P. obesus islets normalized 
the defect in glucose-stimulated insulin gene expression and prevented the rapid 
depletion of insulin content after exposure to high glucose. Taken together,
these results suggest that the inability of P. obesus islets to adapt to dietary 
overload, with depletion of insulin content as a consequence, results from
IPF1/PDX1 deficiency. However, because not all animals become hyperglycemic on HE
diet, additional factors may be important for the development of diabetes in this
animal model.

PMID: 11473041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Apr;86(4):1795-800.

Insulin production in a neuroectodermal tumor that expresses islet factor-1, but 
not pancreatic-duodenal homeobox 1.

Nakamura T(1), Kishi A, Nishio Y, Maegawa H, Egawa K, Wong NC, Kojima H, Fujimiya
M, Arai R, Kashiwagi A, Kikkawa R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Shiga University of Medical Science, Otsu, Shiga
520-2129, Japan.

We studied a 60-yr-old female with a brain tumor who showed severe symptoms of
hypoglycemia (plasma glucose, 2.2 mmol/L) and hyperinsulinemia (1.28 nmol/L)
after radiotherapy. The cystic brain tumor contained proinsulin and insulin at
concentrations of 13.6 and 1.22 nmol/L, respectively. Immunohistochemical studies
showed the tumor cells were ectodermal in origin but not endodermal, based on
three diagnostic features of neuroectodermal tumors 1) pseudorosette formation
noted under light microscopy, 2) finding of a small number of dense core
neurosecretory granules on electron microscopy, and 3) positive immunostaining
for both neuronal specific enolase and protein gene product 9.5. These cells also
expressed the transcription factor, neurogenin-3, NeuroD/beta 2, and islet factor
I, which are believed to be transcription factors in neuroectoderm as well as in 
pancreatic islet cells, but not pancreatic-duodenal homeobox 1, Pax4, or Nkx2.2. 
In addition, they did not express glucagon, somatostatin, or glucagon-like
peptide-1. Our results show the presence of proinsulin in an ectoderm cell brain 
tumor that does not express the homeobox gene, pancreatic-duodenal homeobox 1,
but expresses other transcription factors, i.e. neurogenin3, NeuroD/beta 2, and
islet factor-1, which are related to insulin gene expression in the brain tumor.

PMID: 11297620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Development. 2001 Apr;128(8):1369-79.

Distinct sites of origin of oligodendrocytes and somatic motoneurons in the chick
spinal cord: oligodendrocytes arise from Nkx2.2-expressing progenitors by a
Shh-dependent mechanism.

Soula C(1), Danesin C, Kan P, Grob M, Poncet C, Cochard P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, UMR 5547 CNRS/UPS, Université Paul
Sabatier, 31062 Toulouse, France. soula@cict.fr

In the vertebrate spinal cord, oligodendrocytes arise from the ventral part of
the neuroepithelium, a region also known to generate somatic motoneurons. The
emergence of oligodendrocytes, like that of motoneurons, depends on an inductive 
signal mediated by Sonic hedgehog. We have defined the precise timing of
oligodendrocyte progenitor specification in the cervico-brachial spinal cord of
the chick embryo. We show that ventral neuroepithelial explants, isolated at
various development stages, are unable to generate oligodendrocytes in culture
until E5 but become able to do so in an autonomous way from E5.5. This indicates 
that the induction of oligodendrocyte precursors is a late event that occurs
between E5 and E5.5, precisely at the time when the ventral neuroepithelium stops
producing somatic motoneurons. Analysis of the spatial restriction of
oligodendrocyte progenitors, evidenced by their expression of O4 or PDGFR(&agr;),
indicate that they always lie within the most ventral Nkx2.2-expressing domain of
the neuroepithelium, and not in the adjacent domain characterized by Pax6
expression from which somatic motoneurons emerge. We then confirm that Shh is
necessary between E5 and E5.5 to specify oligodendrocyte precursors but is no
longer required beyond this stage to maintain ongoing oligodendrocyte production.
Furthermore, Shh is sufficient to induce oligodendrocyte formation from ventral
neuroepithelial explants dissected at E5. Newly induced oligodendrocytes
expressed Nkx2.2 but not Pax6, correlating with the in vivo observation.
Altogether, our results show that, in the chick spinal cord, oligodendrocytes
originate from Nkx2.2-expressing progenitors.

PMID: 11262237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Dev Biol. 2001 Feb 15;230(2):189-203.

Pancreas development in zebrafish: early dispersed appearance of endocrine
hormone expressing cells and their convergence to form the definitive islet.

Biemar F(1), Argenton F, Schmidtke R, Epperlein S, Peers B, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie I, Abt. Entwicklungsbiologie, Universität Freiburg,
Hauptstrasse 1, Freiburg, D-79104, Germany.

To begin to understand pancreas development and the control of endocrine lineage 
formation in zebrafish, we have examined the expression pattern of several genes 
shown to act in vertebrate pancreatic development: pdx-1, insulin (W. M. Milewski
et al., 1998, Endocrinology 139, 1440-1449), glucagon, somatostatin (F. Argenton 
et al., 1999, Mech. Dev. 87, 217-221), islet-1 (Korzh et al., 1993, Development
118, 417-425), nkx2.2 (Barth and Wilson, 1995, Development 121, 1755-1768), and
pax6.2 (Nornes et al., 1998, Mech. Dev. 77, 185-196). To determine the spatial
relationship between the exocrine and the endocrine compartments, we have cloned 
the zebrafish trypsin gene, a digestive enzyme expressed in differentiated
pancreatic exocrine cells. We found expression of all these genes in the
developing pancreas throughout organogenesis. Endocrine cells first appear in a
scattered fashion in two bilateral rows close to the midline during
mid-somitogenesis and converge during late-somitogenesis to form a single islet
dorsal to the nascent duodenum. We have examined development of the endocrine
lineage in a number of previously described zebrafish mutations. Deletion of
chordamesoderm in floating head (Xnot homolog) mutants reduces islet formation to
small remnants, but does not delete the pancreas, indicating that notochord is
involved in proper pancreas development, but not required for differentiation of 
pancreatic cell fates. In the absence of knypek gene function, which is involved 
in convergence movements, the bilateral endocrine primordia do not merge.
Presence of trunk paraxial mesoderm also appears to be instrumental for
convergence since the bilateral endocrine primordia do not merge in spadetail
mutants. We discuss our findings on zebrafish pancreatogenesis in the light of
evolution of the pancreas in chordates.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11161572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2001 Jan;17(1):190-207.

Pax6 regulates the identity of embryonic diencephalic neurons.

Mastick GS(1), Andrews GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Nevada, Reno, Nevada 89557, USA.
gmastick@unr.edu

The transcription factor Pax6 is expressed in discrete domains in the developing 
brain, generally limited to progenitor populations. However, in the embryonic
mouse diencephalon, Pax6 is not only expressed in neuroepithelial progenitors,
but also at high levels in a specific set of initial neurons. These neurons first
appeared on embryonic day 9.5 (E9.5) in the presumptive ventral thalamus and were
fated to become A13 dopaminergic neurons of the medial zona incerta. To further
characterize the initial differentiation of these neurons, and the function of
Pax6 in their formation, the expression patterns of a number of transcription
factors were described. The progenitor population was defined by reciprocal
overlapping expression gradients of Pax6 and Nkx2.2, and a subset of
proliferating progenitors were labeled with an antibody against DLX transcription
factors. The initial neurons expressed combinations of transcription factors,
including Pax6, DLX, and the LIM-domain proteins islet-1, Lhx1 (Lim1), and Lhx5
(Lim-2). Bromo-deoxyuridine (BrdU) labeling was used to follow the fate of a
cohort of proliferating cells, defining a step-wise sequence of gene activation
during differentiation. Pax6 up-regulation occurred only several hours
postdifferentiation. The loss of Pax6 altered progenitor specification, and the
Lhx1 neuronal marker was lost, indicating a role for Pax6 in the specification of
forebrain neuron identity.

PMID: 11161479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Development. 2000 Dec;127(24):5533-40.

Homeobox gene Nkx6.1 lies downstream of Nkx2.2 in the major pathway of beta-cell 
formation in the pancreas.

Sander M(1), Sussel L, Conners J, Scheel D, Kalamaras J, Dela Cruz F,
Schwitzgebel V, Hayes-Jordan A, German M.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0534, USA.

Most insulin-producing beta-cells in the fetal mouse pancreas arise during the
secondary transition, a wave of differentiation starting at embryonic day 13.
Here, we show that disruption of homeobox gene Nkx6.1 in mice leads to loss of
beta-cell precursors and blocks beta-cell neogenesis specifically during the
secondary transition. In contrast, islet development in Nkx6. 1/Nkx2.2 double
mutant embryos is identical to Nkx2.2 single mutant islet development: beta-cell 
precursors survive but fail to differentiate into beta-cells throughout
development. Together, these experiments reveal two independently controlled
pathways for beta-cell differentiation, and place Nkx6.1 downstream of Nkx2.2 in 
the major pathway of beta-cell differentiation.

PMID: 11076772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Development. 2000 Dec;127(23):5167-78.

A role for Pax6 in the normal development of dorsal thalamus and its cortical
connections.

Pratt T(1), Vitalis T, Warren N, Edgar JM, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK.

The transcription factor Pax6 is widely expressed throughout the developing
nervous system, including most alar regions of the newly formed murine
diencephalon. Later in embryogenesis its diencephalic expression becomes more
restricted. It persists in the developing anterior thalamus (conventionally
termed "ventral" thalamus) and pretectum but is downregulated in the body of the 
posterior (dorsal) thalamus. At the time of this downregulation, the dorsal
thalamus forms its major axonal efferent pathway via the ventral telencephalon to
the cerebral cortex. This pathway is absent in mice lacking functional Pax6
(small eye homozygotes: Sey/Sey). We tested whether the mechanism underlying this
defect includes abnormalities of the dorsal thalamus itself. We exploited a new
transgenic mouse ubiquitously expressing green fluorescent protein tagged with
tau, in which axonal tracts are clearly visible, and co-cultured dorsal thalamic 
explants from Pax6(+/+ )or Pax6(Sey/Sey )embryos carrying the transgene with
wild-type tissues from other regions of the forebrain. Whereas Pax6(+/+ )thalamic
explants produced strong innervation of wild-type ventral telencephalic explants 
in a pattern that mimicked the thalamocortical tract in vivo, Pax6(Sey)(/Sey)
explants did not, indicating a defect in the ability of mutant dorsal thalamic
cells to respond to signals normally present in ventral telencephalon.
Pax6(Sey)(/Sey) embryos also showed early alterations in the expression of
regulatory genes in the region destined to become dorsal thalamus. Whereas in
normal mice Nkx2.2 and Lim1/Lhx1 are expressed ventral to this region, in the
mutants their expression domains are throughout it, suggesting that a primary
action of Pax6 is to generate correct dorsoventral patterning in the
diencephalon. Our results suggest that normal thalamocortical development
requires the actions of Pax6 within the dorsal thalamus itself.

PMID: 11060242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Aug 15;97(17):9443-8.

Intramolecular control of transcriptional activity by the NK2-specific domain in 
NK-2 homeodomain proteins.

Watada H(1), Mirmira RG, Kalamaras J, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute and Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco 94143-0534, USA.

The developmentally important homeodomain transcription factors of the NK-2 class
contain a highly conserved region, the NK2-specific domain (NK2-SD). The function
of this domain, however, remains unknown. The primary structure of the NK2-SD
suggests that it might function as an accessory DNA-binding domain or as a
protein-protein interaction interface. To assess the possibility that the NK2-SD 
may contribute to DNA-binding specificity, we used a PCR-based approach to
identify a consensus DNA-binding sequences for Nkx2.2, an NK-2 family member
involved in pancreas and central nervous system development. The consensus
sequence (T(C)(T)AAGT(G)(A)(G)(C)TT) is similar to the known binding sequences
for other NK-2 homeodomain proteins, but we show that the NK2-SD does not
contribute significantly to specific DNA binding to this sequence. To determine
whether the NK2-SD contributes to transactivation, we used GAL4-Nkx2. 2 fusion
constructs to map a powerful transcriptional activation domain in the C-terminal 
region beyond the conserved NK2-SD. Interestingly, this C-terminal region
functions as a transcriptional activator only in the absence of an intact NK2-SD.
The NK2-SD also can mask transactivation from the paired homeodomain
transcription factor Pax6, but it has no effect on transcription by itself. These
results demonstrate that the NK2-SD functions as an intramolecular regulator of
the C-terminal activation domain in Nkx2.2 and support a model in which
interactions through the NK2-SD regulate the ability of NK-2-class proteins to
activate specific genes during development.

PMCID: PMC16883
PMID: 10944215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Jul 25;165(1-2):41-9.

Transcription factor expression and hormone production in pancreatic AR42J cells.

Palgi J(1), Stumpf E, Otonkoski T.

Author information: 
(1)Transplantation Laboratory, Haartman Institute and the Hospital for Children
and Adolescents, University of Helsinki, PO Box 21 (Haartmaninkatu 3), FIN-00014,
Helsinki, Finland. jaan.palgi@helsinki.fi

AR42J is an exocrine pancreatic cell line that has been reported to differentiate
towards an endocrine phenotype when stimulated with various growth factors, such 
as activin A, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), betacellulin or glucagon-like
peptide 1. In our experiments, AR42J-B13 cells differentiated morphologically in 
response to the growth factor treatment as reported previously. However, they
failed to express the insulin gene. We found that the cells did not express
several transcription factors known to be found in the beta-cell, including
Nkx6.1, isl-1, Pax4 and Pax6. In addition, the mRNA level for pdx-1 and Nkx2.2
were very low in comparison to the insulinoma cell lines INS-1 and RINm5F.
However, some transcription factors typically found in beta-cells and
neuroendocrine cells were expressed also in the AR42J-B13 cells. These included
BETA2/NeuroD, HNF1alpha, C/EBPbeta and IA-1. Unlike the insulinoma cells, AR42J
cells expressed the exocrine transcription factor p48. In order to induce
endocrine differentiation, we transfected the AR42J-B13 cells with the full
length cDNAs of isl-1, Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2 and pdx-1 under the control of the CMV
promoter, both separately and in combinations. The expression of Nkx2.2 led
consistently to the appearance of pancreatic polypeptide but not insulin,
glucagon or somatostatin mRNA. The PP mRNA expression in Nkx2.2 cDNA transfected 
cells was independent of the growth factor treatment used for differentiating
AR42J cells. In conclusion, the AR42J-B13 line possesses some features of a
pancreatic neuroendocrine cell. However, we were unable to confirm the capacity
of these cells to differentiate into insulin-producing cells. Our results
indicate that Nkx2.2 plays a role in the transcriptional regulation of PP
expression.

PMID: 10940482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34224-30.

Transcriptional and translational regulation of beta-cell differentiation factor 
Nkx6.1.

Watada H(1), Mirmira RG, Leung J, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco,
California 94143-0534, USA.

In the mature pancreas, the homeodomain transcription factor Nkx6.1 is uniquely
restricted to beta-cells. Nkx6.1 also is expressed in developing beta-cells and
plays an essential role in their differentiation. Among cell lines, both beta-
and alpha-cell lines express nkx6.1 mRNA; but no protein can be detected in the
alpha-cell lines, suggesting that post-transcriptional regulation contributes to 
the restriction of Nkx6.1 to beta-cells. To investigate the regulator of Nkx6.1
expression, we outlined the structure of the mouse nkx6.1 gene, and we identified
regions that direct cell type-specific expression. The nkx6.1 gene has a long
5'-untranslated region (5'-UTR) downstream of a cluster of transcription start
sites. nkx6.1 gene sequences from -5.6 to +1.0 kilobase pairs have specific
promoter activity in beta-cell lines but not in NIH3T3 cells. This activity is
dependent on sequences located at about -800 base pairs and on the 5'-UTR.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays demonstrate that homeodomain transcription 
factors PDX1 and Nkx2.2 can bind to the sequence element located at -800 base
pairs. In addition, dicistronic assays establish that the 5'-UTR region functions
as a potent internal ribosomal entry site, providing cell type-specific
regulation of translation. These data demonstrate that complex regulation of both
Nkx6.1 transcription and translation provides the specificity of expression
required during pancreas development.

PMID: 10938085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Development. 2000 Aug;127(16):3533-42.

Expression of neurogenin3 reveals an islet cell precursor population in the
pancreas.

Schwitzgebel VM(1), Scheel DW, Conners JR, Kalamaras J, Lee JE, Anderson DJ,
Sussel L, Johnson JD, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, and Department of
Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Differentiation of early gut endoderm cells into the endocrine cells forming the 
pancreatic islets of Langerhans depends on a cascade of gene activation events
controlled by transcription factors including the basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH)
proteins. To delineate this cascade, we began by establishing the position of
neurogenin3, a bHLH factor found in the pancreas during fetal development. We
detect neurogenin3 immunoreactivity transiently in scattered ductal cells in the 
fetal mouse pancreas, peaking at embryonic day 15.5. Although not detected in
cells expressing islet hormones or the islet transcription factors Isl1, Brn4,
Pax6 or PDX1, neurogenin3 is detected along with early islet differentiation
factors Nkx6.1 and Nkx2.2, establishing that it is expressed in immature cells in
the islet lineage. Analysis of transcription factor-deficient mice demonstrates
that neurogenin3 expression is not dependent on neuroD1/BETA2, Mash1, Nkx2.2,
Nkx6.1, or Pax6. Furthermore, early expression of neurogenin3 under control of
the Pdx1 promoter is alone sufficient to drive early and ectopic differentiation 
of islet cells, a capability shared by the pancreatic bHLH factor, neuroD1/BETA2,
but not by the muscle bHLH factor, MyoD. However, the islet cells produced in
these transgenic experiments are overwhelmingly (alpha) cells, suggesting that
factors other than the bHLH factors are required to deviate from a default * cell
fate. These data support a model in which neurogenin3 acts upstream of other
islet differentiation factors, initiating the differentiation of endocrine cells,
but switching off prior to final differentiation. The ability to uniquely
identify islet cell precursors by neurogenin3 expression allows us to determine
the position of other islet transcription factors in the differentiation cascade 
and to propose a map for the islet cell differentiation pathway.

PMID: 10903178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cell. 2000 May 12;101(4):435-45.

A homeodomain protein code specifies progenitor cell identity and neuronal fate
in the ventral neural tube.

Briscoe J(1), Pierani A, Jessell TM, Ericson J.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Distinct classes of neurons are generated at defined positions in the ventral
neural tube in response to a gradient of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) activity. A set of 
homeodomain transcription factors expressed by neural progenitors act as
intermediaries in Shh-dependent neural patterning. These homeodomain factors fall
into two classes: class I proteins are repressed by Shh and class II proteins
require Shh signaling for their expression. The profile of class I and class II
protein expression defines five progenitor domains, each of which generates a
distinct class of postmitotic neurons. Cross-repressive interactions between
class I and class II proteins appear to refine and maintain these progenitor
domains. The combinatorial expression of three of these proteins--Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2,
and Irx3--specifies the identity of three classes of neurons generated in the
ventral third of the neural tube.

PMID: 10830170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mamm Genome. 2000 Jun;11(6):466-8.

Conserved linkage of NK-2 homeobox gene pairs Nkx2-2/2-4 and Nkx2-1/2-9 in
mammals.

Wang CC(1), Brodnicki T, Copeland NG, Jenkins NA, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, St. Vincent's Hospital, 384 Victoria 
St., Darlinghurst 2010, Australia.

PMID: 10818213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Apr 21;270(3):695-700.

The homeodomain of Nkx2.2 carries two cooperatively acting nuclear localization
signals.

Hessabi B(1), Schmidt I, Walther R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical School, Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University,
Greifswald, Germany. hessabi@mail.uni-greifswald.de

NK-2 family members of homeodomain proteins have been identified as important
regulators of growth and development in the ventral forebrain, heart, lung, and
thyroid. In addition, Nk2.2 expression has been detected in the pancreas, where
it is vital for the final differentiation of beta-cells. In our present paper, we
have analyzed the domains necessary for nuclear transport of Nkx2.2. With the
help of deletion mutants we identified two separate nuclear localization signals 
(NLS). Interestingly, both NLSs are situated in the homeodomain. They belong to
the monopartite class of NLS; the proximal NLS has the sequence KKRKRR and lies
at the very N-terminus of the homeodomain, while the more distal NLS RYKMKRAR is 
at the homeodomain C-terminus. Each NLS per se is sufficient for nuclear
transport of Nkx2.2 into the nucleus, although inefficiently. Both identified
NLSs act cooperatively in mediating complete nuclear transport of Nkx2.2.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10772886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Development. 2000 Apr;127(7):1349-58.

Control of hindbrain motor neuron differentiation by the homeobox gene Phox2b.

Pattyn A(1), Hirsch M, Goridis C, Brunet JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Physiologie du Développement, Developmental
Biology Institute of Marseille, CNRS/INSERM/Univ Méditerranée/AP de Marseille,
Luminy Case 907, France.

Motor neurons are a widely studied model of vertebrate neurogenesis. They can be 
subdivided in somatic, branchial and visceral motor neurons. Recent studies on
the dorsoventral patterning of the rhombencephalon have implicated the homeobox
genes Pax6 and Nkx2.2 in the early divergence of the transcriptional programme of
hindbrain somatic and visceral motor neuronal differentiation. We provide genetic
evidence that the paired-like homeodomain protein Phox2b is required for the
formation of all branchial and visceral, but not somatic, motor neurons in the
hindbrain. In mice lacking Phox2b, both the generic and subtype-specific programs
of motoneuronal differentiation are disrupted at an early stage. Most motor
neuron precursors die inside the neuroepithelium while those that emigrate to the
mantle layer fail to switch on early postmitotic markers and to downregulate
neuroepithelial markers. Thus, the loss of function of Phox2b in hindbrain motor 
neurons exemplifies a novel control point in the generation of CNS neurons.

PMID: 10704382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 15;97(4):1607-11.

neurogenin3 is required for the development of the four endocrine cell lineages
of the pancreas.

Gradwohl G(1), Dierich A, LeMeur M, Guillemot F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale/Université Louis Pasteur, F-67404 Illkirch, France.

In the mammalian pancreas, the endocrine cell types of the islets of Langerhans, 
including the alpha-, beta-, delta-, and pancreatic polypeptide cells as well as 
the exocrine cells, derive from foregut endodermal progenitors. Recent genetic
studies have identified a network of transcription factors, including Pdx1, Isl1,
Pax4, Pax6, NeuroD, Nkx2.2, and Hlxb9, regulating the development of islet cells 
at different stages, but the molecular mechanisms controlling the specification
of pancreatic endocrine precursors remain unknown. neurogenin3 (ngn3) is a member
of a family of basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors that is involved in
the determination of neural precursor cells in the neuroectoderm. ngn3 is
expressed in discrete regions of the nervous system and in scattered cells in the
embryonic pancreas. We show herein that ngn3-positive cells coexpress neither
insulin nor glucagon, suggesting that ngn3 marks early precursors of pancreatic
endocrine cells. Mice lacking ngn3 function fail to generate any pancreatic
endocrine cells and die postnatally from diabetes. Expression of Isl1, Pax4,
Pax6, and NeuroD is lost, and endocrine precursors are lacking in the mutant
pancreatic epithelium. Thus, ngn3 is required for the specification of a common
precursor for the four pancreatic endocrine cell types.

PMCID: PMC26482
PMID: 10677506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Nat Neurosci. 2000 Jan;3(1):41-6.

The seven-transmembrane receptor smoothened cell-autonomously induces multiple
ventral cell types.

Hynes M(1), Ye W, Wang K, Stone D, Murone M, Sauvage Fd, Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Genentech, Inc., South San Francisco, California
94080, USA. mah@gene.com

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) is a secreted protein that controls cell fate and
mitogenesis in the developing nervous system. Here we show that a constitutively 
active form of Smoothened (Smo-M2) mimics concentration-dependent actions of Shh 
in the developing neural tube, including activation of ventral marker genes
(HNF3beta, patched, Nkx2.2, netrin-1), suppression of dorsal markers (Pax-3,
Gli-3, Ephrin A5) and induction of ventral neurons (dopaminergic, serotonergic)
and ventrolateral motor neurons (Islet-1+, Islet-2+, HB9+) and interneurons
(Engrailed-1+, CHX10+). Furthermore, Smo-M2's patterning activities were cell
autonomous, occurring exclusively in cells expressing Smo-M2. These findings
suggest that Smo is a key signaling component in the Hh receptor and that Shh
patterns the vertebrate nervous system as a morphogen, rather than through
secondary relay signals.

PMID: 10607393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Jan;210(1):47-50.

NKX2 gene expression in neuroectoderm but not in mesendodermally derived
structures depends on sonic hedgehog in mouse embryos.

Pabst O(1), Herbrand H, Takuma N, Arnold HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Technical University of
Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7, D-38106 Braunschweig, Germany.

NKX2 genes in vertebrates encode a sub- family of homeodomain-containing
transcription factors which regulate morphogenetic events and cell
differentiation during embryogenesis. In mouse embryos several NKX2 genes are
expressed in the ventral midline domains of the neuroectoderm, while other NKX2
genes are primarily expressed in the mesendoderm and mesendodermally derived
organs, such as heart and gut. Within several patterning centers for tissue
organization sonic hedgehog (Shh) is an important signal in the formation of
ventral midline structures in vertebrate embryos. Here, we investigated the role 
of Shh in the embryonic expression of six different but closely related NKX2
genes in Shh null mutant mice. We found that expression of NKX2.1, NKX2.2, and
NKX2.9 in neural domains requires Shh signaling, whereas NKX2.3, NKX2.5 and
NKX2.6 expression in endoderm and mesoderm is independent of Shh.

PMID: 10603087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Nat Genet. 1999 Sep;23(1):71-5.

Pancreas dorsal lobe agenesis and abnormal islets of Langerhans in
Hlxb9-deficient mice.

Harrison KA(1), Thaler J, Pfaff SL, Gu H, Kehrl JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

In most mammals the pancreas develops from the foregut endoderm as ventral and
dorsal buds. These buds fuse and develop into a complex organ composed of
endocrine, exocrine and ductal components. This developmental process depends
upon an integrated network of transcription factors. Gene targeting experiments
have revealed critical roles for Pdx1, Isl1, Pax4, Pax6 and Nkx2-2 (refs
3,4,5,6,7, 8,9,10). The homeobox gene HLXB9 (encoding HB9) is prominently
expressed in adult human pancreas, although its role in pancreas development and 
function is unknown. To facilitate its study, we isolated the mouse HLXB9
orthologue, Hlxb9. During mouse development, the dorsal and ventral pancreatic
buds and mature beta-cells in the islets of Langerhans express Hlxb9. In mice
homologous for a null mutation of Hlxb9, the dorsal lobe of the pancreas fails to
develop. The remnant Hlxb9-/- pancreas has small islets of Langerhans with
reduced numbers of insulin-producing beta-cells. Hlxb9-/- beta-cells express low 
levels of the glucose transporter Glut2 and homeodomain factor Nkx 6-1. Thus,
Hlxb9 is key to normal pancreas development and function.

PMID: 10471502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1999 Jun;9(3):295-300.

Pancreas development and diabetes.

St-Onge L(1), Wehr R, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)DeveloGen AG Rudolf-Wissell-Strasse 28 D-37079, Göttingen, Germany.
St-Onge@develogen.com

The past few years have seen an increase in interest about the molecular and
genetic events regulating pancreas development. Transcription factors such as
Pdx1, p48 and Nkx2.2 have been shown to be essential for the proper
differentiation of exocrine and endocrine tissue; however, pancreas development
also involves intricate interactions between the pancreatic epithelium and its
surrounding mesenchyme. Signalling factors emanating from the notochord have been
shown to repress Sonic hedgehog expression in the endoderm whereas signals
originating from the pancreatic mesenchyme determine the proportion of exocrine
to endocrine tissue. Understanding the molecular and genetic events underlying
pancreas development also opens the door for devising new therapeutic strategies 
against pancreatic diseases such as diabetes and cancer.

PMID: 10377278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Nature. 1999 Apr 15;398(6728):622-7.

Homeobox gene Nkx2.2 and specification of neuronal identity by graded Sonic
hedgehog signalling.

Briscoe J(1), Sussel L, Serup P, Hartigan-O'Connor D, Jessell TM, Rubenstein JL, 
Ericson J.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

During vertebrate development, the specification of distinct cell types is
thought to be controlled by inductive signals acting at different concentration
thresholds. The degree of receptor activation in response to these signals is a
known determinant of cell fate, but the later steps at which graded signals are
converted into all-or-none distinctions in cell identity remain poorly resolved. 
In the ventral neural tube, motor neuron and interneuron generation depends on
the graded activity of the signalling protein Sonic hedgehog (Shh). These
neuronal subtypes derive from distinct progenitor cell populations that express
the homeodomain proteins Nkx2.2 or Pax6 in response to graded Shh signalling. In 
mice lacking Pax6, progenitor cells generate neurons characteristic of exposure
to greater Shh activity. However, Nkx2.2 expression expands dosally in Pax6
mutants, raising the possibility that Pax6 controls neuronal pattern indirectly. 
Here we provide evidence that Nkx2.2 has a primary role in ventral neuronal
patterning. In Nkx2.2 mutants, Pax6 expression is unchanged but cells undergo a
ventral-to-dorsal transformation in fate and generate motor neurons rather than
interneurons. Thus, Nkx2.2 has an essential role in interpreting graded Shh
signals and selecting neuronal identity.

PMID: 10217145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Int J Mol Med. 1999 Mar;3(3):247-61.

Development of pancreatic islets (review).

Yamaoka T(1), Itakura M.

Author information: 
(1)Otsuka Department of Clinical and Molecular Nutrition, School of Medicine, The
University of Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8503, Japan.

Recent studies have revealed that islet cells differentiate from the epithelial
cells of primitive pancreatic ducts during embryogenesis, and can regenerate in
response to the loss of islet cells even in adult pancreas. The ability of islet 
cells to regenerate raises the possibility that impaired and decreased islets of 
diabetic patients can be restored. In this review, factors regulating islet
development including differentiation factors (Shh, activin, follistatin, and TGF
alpha), transcriptional factors (PDX1, Isl1, Pax4, Pax6, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, BETA2,
and HNF), growth factors (the EGF family, HGF, IGF-I, IGF-II, Reg, INGAP, PDGF,
FGF, VEGF, and NGF), hormones (insulin, the GH family, PTHrP, TRH, and gastrin), 
and cell adhesion molecules (N-CAM and cadherins) are described after a short
introduction and an outline of pancreatic development.

PMID: 10028048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Genes Dev. 1998 Nov 15;12(22):3591-602.

Dorsoventral patterning in the Drosophila central nervous system: the
intermediate neuroblasts defective homeobox gene specifies intermediate column
identity.

Weiss JB(1), Von Ohlen T, Mellerick DM, Dressler G, Doe CQ, Scott MP.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Developmental Biology and Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California
94305-5329 USA.

One of the first steps in neurogenesis is the diversification of cells along the 
dorsoventral axis. In Drosophila the central nervous system develops from three
longitudinal columns of cells: ventral cells that express the vnd/nk2 homeobox
gene, intermediate cells, and dorsal cells that express the msh homeobox gene.
Here we describe a new Drosophila homeobox gene, intermediate neuroblasts
defective (ind), which is expressed specifically in the intermediate column
cells. ind is essential for intermediate column development: Null mutants have a 
transformation of intermediate to dorsal column neuroectoderm fate, and only 10% 
of the intermediate column neuroblasts develop. The establishment of dorsoventral
column identity involves negative regulation: Vnd represses ind in the ventral
column, whereas ind represses msh in the intermediate column. Vertebrate genes
closely related to vnd (Nkx2.1 and Nkx2.2), ind (Gsh1 and Gsh2), and msh (Msx1
and Msx3) are expressed in corresponding ventral, intermediate, and dorsal
domains during vertebrate neurogenesis, raising the possibility that dorsoventral
patterning within the central nervous system is evolutionarily conserved.

PMCID: PMC317240
PMID: 9832510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Diabetes. 1998 Aug;47(8):1356-8.

Beta-cell transcription factors and diabetes: mutations in the coding region of
the BETA2/NeuroD1 (NEUROD1) and Nkx2.2 (NKX2B) genes are not associated with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young in Japanese.

Furuta H(1), Horikawa Y, Iwasaki N, Hara M, Sussel L, Le Beau MM, Davis EM, Ogata
M, Iwamoto Y, German MS, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, the University of Chicago,
Illinois 60637, USA.

PMID: 9703340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jul 21;95(15):8654-9.

Targeted oncogenesis of hormone-negative pancreatic islet progenitor cells.

Jetton TL(1), Moates JM, Lindner J, Wright CV, Magnuson MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232-0615, USA.

Transgenic mice containing an upstream glucokinase (betaGK) promoter- simian
virus 40 T antigen (Tag) fusion gene develop neuroendocrine tumors primarily in
the pancreas, gut, and pituitary. Pancreatic tumors from a line with delayed
tumorigenesis were of two different types: insulinomas and noninsulinomas. The
noninsulinomas are often periductal in location, express none of the four major
islet peptide hormones, Glut-2, Pdx1, tyrosine hydroxylase, Pax4, Pax6, or
Nkx6.1, but do express glucokinase, Sur1, Isl1, Hnf3beta, Hnf6, Beta2/NeuroD, and
Nkx2.2. Cells from two different noninsulinoma tumors, when adapted to culture,
began to express either insulin, glucagon, or somatostatin. Given the partial
gene expression repertoire of the noninsulinoma tumors, their apparent periductal
origin, and the ability of these cells to partially cytodifferentiate in culture,
we suggest that these tumors are derived from islet progenitor cells. Thus,
betaGK-Tag transgenic mice provide a new model system for studying the events
that occur during both islet cell neogenesis and normal embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC21131
PMID: 9671733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Dev Genes Evol. 1998 Apr;208(2):100-5.

Characterization and developmental expression of AmphiNk2-2, an NK2 class
homeobox gene from Amphioxus. (Phylum Chordata; Subphylum Cephalochordata).

Holland LZ(1), Venkatesh TV, Gorlin A, Bodmer R, Holland ND.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Marine Biology, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA 
19093-0202, USA.

The genome of amphioxus includes AmphiNk2-2, the first gene of the NK2 homeobox
class to be demonstrated in any invertebrate deuterostome. AmphiNk2-2 encodes a
protein with a TN domain, homeodomain, and NK2-specific domain; on the basis of
amino acid identities in these conserved regions, AmphiNk2-2 is a homolog of
Drosophila vnd and vertebrate Nkx2-2. During amphioxus development, expression of
Amph- iNk2-2 is first detected ventrally in the endoderm of late gastrulae. In
neurulae, endodermal expression divides into three domains (the pharynx, midgut, 
and hindgut), and neural expression commences in two longitudinal bands of cells 
in the anterior neural tube. These neural tube cells occupy a ventrolateral
position on either side of the cerebral vesicle (the probable homolog of the
vertebrate diencephalic forebrain). The dynamic expression patterns of
AmphiNkx2-2 suggest successive roles, first in regionalizing the endoderm and
nervous system and later during differentiation of specific cell types in the gut
(possibly peptide endocrine cells) and brain (possibly including axon outgrowth
and guidance).

PMID: 9569351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mech Dev. 1998 Apr;73(1):85-93.

Nkx2-9 is a novel homeobox transcription factor which demarcates ventral domains 
in the developing mouse CNS.

Pabst O(1), Herbrand H, Arnold HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Technical University of
Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7, 38106, Braunschweig, Germany.

Nkx homeobox transcription factors are expressed in diverse embryonic cells and
presumably control cell-type specification and morphogenetic events. Nkx2-9 is a 
novel family member of NK2 genes which lacks the conserved TN-domain found in all
hitherto known murine Nkx2 genes. The prominent expression of Nkx2-9 in ventral
brain and neural tube structures defines a subset of neuronal cells along the
entire neuraxis. During embryonic development, Nkx2-9-expressing cells shift from
the presumptive floor plate into a more dorsolateral position of the
neuroectoderm and later become limited to the ventricular zone. Nkx2-9 expression
overlaps with that of Nkx2-2 but is generally broader. While initially Nkx2-9 is 
expressed in close proximity to sonic hedgehog, its expression domain clearly
segregates from sonic hedgehog at later developmental stages. The dynamic
expression pattern of Nkx2-9 in ventral domains of the CNS is consistent with a
possible role in the specification of a distinct subset of neurons.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 9545546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Development. 1998 Jun;125(12):2213-21.

Mice lacking the homeodomain transcription factor Nkx2.2 have diabetes due to
arrested differentiation of pancreatic beta cells.

Sussel L(1), Kalamaras J, Hartigan-O'Connor DJ, Meneses JJ, Pedersen RA,
Rubenstein JL, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

The endocrine pancreas is organized into clusters of cells called islets of
Langerhans comprising four well-defined cell types: alpha beta, delta and PP
cells. While recent genetic studies indicate that islet development depends on
the function of an integrated network of transcription factors, the specific
roles of these factors in early cell-type specification and differentiation
remain elusive. Nkx2.2 is a member of the mammalian NK2 homeobox transcription
factor family that is expressed in the ventral CNS and the pancreas. Within the
pancreas, we demonstrate that Nkx2.2 is expressed in alpha, beta and PP cells,
but not in delta cells. In addition, we show that mice homozygous for a null
mutation of Nkx2.2 develop severe hyperglycemia and die shortly after birth.
Immunohistochemical analysis reveals that the mutant embryos lack
insulin-producing beta cells and have fewer glucagon-producing alpha cells and PP
cells. Remarkably, in the mutants there remains a large population of islet cells
that do not produce any of the four endocrine hormones. These cells express some 
beta cell markers, such as islet amyloid polypeptide and Pdx1, but lack other
definitive beta cell markers including glucose transporter 2 and Nkx6.1. We
propose that Nkx2.2 is required for the final differentiation of pancreatic beta 
cells, and in its absence, beta cells are trapped in an incompletely
differentiated state.

PMID: 9584121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mech Dev. 1997 Sep;67(1):83-96.

Expression patterns of Brx1 (Rieg gene), Sonic hedgehog, Nkx2.2, Dlx1 and Arx
during zona limitans intrathalamica and embryonic ventral lateral geniculate
nuclear formation.

Kitamura K(1), Miura H, Yanazawa M, Miyashita T, Kato K.

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kasei Institute of Life Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.
kunio@libra.ls.m-kagaku.co.jp

The Brx1 homeobox gene has been isolated and shown to be expressed in the zona
limitans intrathalamica (ZLI) of the mouse embryo. Brx1 is a member of the Brx
gene family and comprises the genes for Brx1a and Brx1b, which differ in the
sequence in the region located on the 5'-terminal side of the homeobox. The
complete amino acid sequences of the open reading frame of Brx1a and Brx1b were
determined and each was found to be similar to that of Rgs, the mouse homologue
of the Rieger syndrome associated human RIEG gene (RGS), to the extent that the
sequence of Rgs has been clarified. Brx1 was strongly expressed in the mammillary
area as well as in the ZLI of the mouse embryonic brain. Homologues of Brx1a and 
Brx1b were isolated in chick in which the expression of Brx1 in the ventral
diencephalon was well conserved. The expression of Brx1 along with that of Sonic 
hedgehog (Shh), Nkx2.2, Dlx1 and Arx was examined at the time of the formation of
ZLI in mouse embryos. The expression of Shh was initially noted in the
ventricular zone of the presumptive ZLI and was then replaced by that of Brx1 at 
the time of radial migration of the neuroepithelial cells. Nkx2.2 was widely
expressed in the ventricular zone of presumptive ZLI and also as a narrow band in
the mantle zone. The expression of Dlx1 and Arx in the presumptive ventral
thalamus extended as far as ZLI and overlapped with that of Brx1. The Dlx1- and
Arx-expressing cells in ZLI, which extended towards the lateral (pial) surface of
the diencephalic wall, differed from those expressing Nkx2.2 and Brx1. The
embryonic ventral lateral geniculate nucleus present in the visual pathway was
eventually formed from these cells. Each homeobox gene was also expressed
regionally in the nucleus, suggesting that the nucleus is comprised of
subdivisions.

PMID: 9347917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cell. 1997 Jul 11;90(1):169-80.

Pax6 controls progenitor cell identity and neuronal fate in response to graded
Shh signaling.

Ericson J(1), Rashbass P, Schedl A, Brenner-Morton S, Kawakami A, van Heyningen
V, Jessell TM, Briscoe J.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Distinct classes of motor neurons and ventral interneurons are generated by the
graded signaling activity of Sonic hedgehog (Shh). Shh controls neuronal fate by 
establishing different progenitor cell populations in the ventral neural tube
that are defined by the expression of Pax6 and Nkx2.2. Pax6 establishes distinct 
ventral progenitor cell populations and controls the identity of motor neurons
and ventral interneurons, mediating graded Shh signaling in the ventral spinal
cord and hindbrain.

PMID: 9230312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


